Story_ID: 60817
Speaker 1: Today is Wednesday, August 14, year 2002.  This is Adele Hodge the interviewer for today with the HistoryMakers interview of Mr. Wendell--Wendell J. Campbell.  My camera person today is Brewster McCauley.  Mr. Campbell would you state for us your name--your whole name and spell it, the location you're in, the date?
Speaker 2: My name is Wendell Jerome Campbell.  That's W-E-N-D-E-L-L, J-E-R-O-M-E, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L.  And we're presently located in Chicago, Illinois on South Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 60818
Speaker 1: Mr. Campbell, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that's a good question.  My favorite color happens to be blue and green.
Speaker 1: And favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is macaroni and cheese (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where do you like to vacation the most?
Speaker 2: I like to take cruises, primarily; right now I love South America, and Bahia [Brazil], South America is one favorite spots.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite saying?
Speaker 2: What is my favorite saying?
Speaker 1: Mm, mm.
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is that you're as good as you want to be.  And nothing is impossible if you're determined that you want to do that.
Story_ID: 60819
Speaker 1: And okay we're gonna talk first about your mother [Selma Campbell] and her side of the family and then we'll talk about your dad [Herman Campbell].  Can you give me your mother's full name and--and I should add to that, whenever you're talking of a period, would you give us an idea of what year it was just for when time removed, the story will unfold in the right periods.
Speaker 2: Well I was  my cousins.  I spent a lot of time in the summers in that building 'cause I was sort of mischief when I was young and they would always send me over to Chicago when my father had things to do.  And everybody else in Chicago would come out and stay out in Indiana while I was there (laugher).  So it was--I had a lot of memories of things that we did in the building.
Speaker 1: Now your mother, you were very young when she died, but what do you remember most--what story stands out for you in your relationship to your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Selma and at the time when I was growing up, and as I said that was very early years and I was beginning to develop a lot of habits, and I took after a lot of things that my mother would say to me.  And she was a pretty good disciplinarian and she would make sure that we would mind.  And the family, as a unit, was always a very strong element and still is today in the family.  A lot of that I owe to my mother and also to my grandmother who raised us mostly.
Story_ID: 60820
Speaker 1: And your mother's full name was Selma--
Speaker 2: Selma Smith.  She married my father, Herman William Campbell and they--I started out living in a rooming house that my grandmother had in East Chicago, Indiana.  And at the time the city was in part of maturing and developing, where the steel mills were becoming very affluent and they were hiring many people from the South and many people worked in the steel mill would come from the South and live in my grandmother's rooming house while they worked in the mills.  And they had to be located on a street, the name has been changed, but at that time it was Grapevine Street, now it's Grand Boulevard.  And it was an area in town where black folks didn't usually--communicate or live.  And there are a lot of interesting stories which would be told around the kitchen table what had happen in that rooming house while my grandmother was running it.  And I helped develop a lot of my attitudes in terms how I grew up and things that I remembered.
Speaker 1: The one story that kinda--one of the story--one of the, probably several stories that stick out for you, what would that be?
Speaker 2: One of them was that there was a series of riots that were surrounding the house mainly 'cause black folks were living there and my mother and grandmother happen to know the Governor of the State of Indiana.  And they called the governor telling him of the fears that they have in regards to the house.  And he call the Mayor of East Chicago and told the mayor that my grandma and him was very close friends of his and he was expecting the mayor to their safety that he was going to send out the National Guard down to East Chicago--up to East Chicago, Indiana if he had to protect their liveliness.  And that gave me a lot of respect in terms of the law.
Story_ID: 60821
Speaker 1: Your--both your mother [Selma Campbell] and your father [Herman Campbell] came from families that were well set.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother originated in Cincinnati, Ohio, her family, my grandmother and my great-great grandmother was the cook for the--President [Howard] Taft.  And anytime anybody came to visit the president, she would always bring out her rolls and that's a family tradition is gran--we call gran rolls and gran was always remember by gran was that she always could be responsible for making rolls for the various women club meetings at that time and they would ask her for the recipe and grand would always leave out one ingredient so the rolls would never be quite like gran's rolls (Laughter.  And I told her one day, she was giving the recipe to one lady, and I said Gran you leaving--she said mind your own business (laughter).  And so I found out later why she would always leave out that ingredient so that they never tasted like gran's rolls.
Speaker 1: So your great-great grandmother worked in the White House?
Speaker 2: She worked in President Taft's home in Ohio.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And not in the White House.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But when he would have visitors come to visit him in his home in Ohio, she would help prepare the dinner for them.
Speaker 1: I knew she passed on some terrific stories to you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 60822
Speaker 1: Do you know how your mom [Selma Campbell] and dad [Herman Campbell] met?
Speaker 2: No I don't.
Speaker 1: Give me your dad's name and tell me where he's from?
Speaker 2: My father was a very quiet man.  His name Herman William Campbell and he came from Memphis, Tennessee and they met in East Chicago [Indiana].  He was one of the roomers at the rooming house when they first met.  And he being a very quiet man, I know very little about his side of the family, and I know that a lot of the things that I heard from other people who happen to know him.  I myself, I worked with my father from the time I was about six or seven years old.  He was a contractor and he would give me a couple days summer vacation to find something to do and if not he would tap me on the shoulder by 6:30 in the morning and said let's go and I would have to spend the summer working with him.  And it gave me a chance to really understand construction and our yard was basically almost like a lumberyard.  And during the depression days, the bank would foreclose on people properties and they would hire my father to keep the properties together until they were able to dispose of them.  And that's how we were able obtain the house that I spent most of my youth in, in East Chicago.  There was a house that the bank had given my father and through a payment.  And the basement was a workshop, the yard was a lumberyard and not only myself, but all the members of my family, my brothers and sisters, learned how to use the tools because they're all accessible and available to us.
Speaker 1: How did your father learn the contracting business?
Speaker 2: He learned it down South.  And I never knew exactly where, but when he came up (unclear) today it was a home improvement contractor.  These houses you had to learn how to do it everything.  You had to be a plumber, electrician, a carpenter, a plasterer, everything.  And he knew all the trades just to put the house and hold the house together until they get back on the market to sell.  And I remember how he would teach me was mainly he would say, experience is the best teacher.  And when he taught me how to paint, he would tell me to paint the closets and I, being typical, I would go in and I would paint real fast just to get the job over with so I could go on to the next thing.  And he wouldn't say anything until I was finish painting the closet then he would say, clean up the paint on the floor.  And I would have to get a scrub brush and turpentine and everything else and rag to try to clean that floor up.  So the next time I painted a closet, I was a little more careful 'cause I knew I had to clean up after I got through painting.  And so after a while I got to the point where I didn't spill any paint (laughter).  I knew I had graduated on to something else to do.
Story_ID: 60823
Speaker 1: How many siblings did your dad [Herman Campbell] have?
Speaker 2: There were three boys and three girls.  And I was--my oldest brother was the oldest, Herman and he graduated from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in chemistry, he was a chemist.  And while he was growing up he took part of the basement and made it a shop, a lab and I was one of his main guinea pigs on all of his experiments.  He would try out on me.  And next was my sister Dorothy who ended up teacher in Gary, Indiana and then she became in charge of the Gifted and Talented Student Program at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] and later at Michigan State [East Lansing, Michigan].  And she would go out and find talented black kids or minority kids and help find them jobs after they finished their college programs.  And my sister--my brother Norman, he was the next and he was a, I would say he was the smartest in the family, but he went to work in the steel mills and he ran the overhead cranes that would unload a lot of the ships but bring oil down from Minnesota, stuff like that.  And he spent his whole life working in the steel mill in different capacities.  And then there was me.  And then there was my sister Jean who spent sixteen years over in Ethiopia.  She married a gentleman who was a pilot for the Ethiopian airline while she was teaching in St. Louis [Missouri].  And they married and she went back to Ethiopia with him and had three kids, all girls.  And later years when Haile Selassie was overthrown they walked about twenty-five miles to get out of Ethiopia so they could come to the United States to be raised.  Being of--they were born American citizens, they were born in Ethiopia and they were also Ethiopian citizens and they didn't allow them--they would not allow them to leave the country.  And so she is now back retired here in Indiana.  And then there my last sister, the youngest one June, who happens to be the one who's our family historian who collects a lot of the artifacts from the family and also the custodian of gran's rolls recipe (laughter).  So she is now forming a corporation where she is the president of the whole purpose is to make grand rolls so that's what she does now.  So that's the whole family there.
Story_ID: 60824
Speaker 1: How many sisters and brothers did your father [Herman Campbell] have?
Speaker 2: My father, I don't know.  He was a very quiet man and he didn't talk too much about--I know of two.  He had one was--lived in Pontiac, Michigan and the other one lived in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Two brothers?
Speaker 2: He had two brothers also who lived in--one in Pontiac and other one in Missouri.
Speaker 1: And how many--I saw the picture of your grandmother--
Speaker 2: Mm, mm.
Speaker 1: --and your--
Speaker 2: Mm, mm.
Speaker 1: --and your she--there were four on your mother's [Selma Campbell] family.
Speaker 2: My mother had three sisters and a brother.  And all of them now have deceased.  And my mother was one of the younger--she was the second oldest.  My uncle, Uncle Will was the youngest.
Speaker 1: So she was very young, your mother was very young when the accident?
Speaker 2: Thirty-six.
Speaker 1: Your mother--your mother's family is--are they from Ohio too?
Speaker 2: My mother's family is from Ohio and my father's family primarily was from Memphis, Tennessee.
Story_ID: 60825
Speaker 1: So your grandmother raised, helped raise these six kids.
Speaker 2: Six kids in East Chicago [Indiana] and five in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause she also assisted my Aunt Claire who was the, the wife of the Theophilis, Dr. Langston, Theophilis Langston, who was the dentist there on King Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me a little bit about your grandmother and what kinds of feelings and developments stand out to you in growing up.
Speaker 2: Gran was a woman who did not believe in becoming old and she had been married three times in her lifetime.  And Gran would leave our home and go uptown shopping, as we called the downtown area, and no one knew who Gran would end up bringing back home with her.  But she would never carry the groceries herself.  She would always assign that responsibility to whoever she met on the street.  "You, here carry my groceries home", and they all did.  And Gran loved to play, at that time, the most of the poor played policy, that was the game where you would put in your numbers and had your number book and everything.  Grand had her favorite numbers that she would play all the time; she would put a nickel in.  And if the numbers came out, whether Gran played or not, they would pay Gran (laughter) 'because she told them that everybody knew that was her number, they knew that she played it religiously and it wasn't her fault if the runners didn't come back and collect her money (laughter) and they would pay her.  And we always got a big kick out of that.
Story_ID: 60826
Speaker 1: So what was it--I know you were very young, but what was life like in the immediate period after your mom [Selma Campbell]--
Speaker 2: Life was--actually we were growing up and we were developing ideas and we were always raised to be very proud of ourselves and that we could do anything.  And I didn't really run into discrimination until I was about eleven when I happen to go to one of the local schools--not school, but theaters and at that time we ran in sort of like little packs, the kids and they were all different colors and we went to the school theater and the usher came over to me and told me, he says, now you know you're not supposed to be seated in the center of this theater, you're black and you're supposed to be over on the right hand side.  And I got up to move over to the right hand side and the whole pack got up and moved right along with me, 'cause they--they kept asking me why was I moving?  I don't know, he said that I was black; I wasn't supposed to be sitting over here.  So when I went home that evening and talked my grandmother and my father [Herman Campbell] about it, they explained to me about segregation.
Story_ID: 60827
Speaker 1: And I had said that--I never forgot that and later on in--and years later when I was in high school and I was president of the local chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I decided that I would sue that theater and I did and I closed all the theaters in East Chicago [Indiana] for discrimination 'cause I found there was a law in the state chapter that said it was illegal for anybody to discriminate against a person because of their color.  So I went to, being in East Chicago was a union town; I went to the union and told them what I was planning to do.  And they sent me some of their attorneys to work with me and some of the local black attorneys agreed to work with me too.  And they told me what I had to do.  And one thing I had to do was to be put out of the theater.  And to them I sued the people who put me out the theater and so forth and naturally I proceeded to do.  Then I had my chapter, the Youth Council, turnaround and picket the theaters and taught us how to picket, how to stay away from the doors so that we weren't blocking the doors.  And when the police came to arrest us, they found out that we weren't violating any laws.  And so they told the theater chain that they couldn't do anything.  And this went on around from the 8th of November till about the 2nd of February the following year, every night we were out there walking.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: This was back about 1947.  And I remember very clearly two major incidences that happen to me during that time.  One was the theaters decided that they were going to negotiate with me (laughter), so they called me and they plan to, to end discrimination in the theater.  And I asked them how they were proposing to do that?  They said well for one thing we will hire some black kids to be ushers in the theater and I said, oh.  And we would print a sign saying that there will be no discrimination in the theater.  I said that sounds good.  (unclear)  I said well what are these kids suppose to do?  And they said when people come to the theater, they would usher the black kids and people to the right hand side theater and the white they'd let sit anywhere in the theater.  I said well that's the same thing you're doing before.  And as long as there's a seat in this theater that I can't sit in, we will continue to picket.  And we did until we finally won our case.  And we had ran into all different kinds of experiences achieving that.  One of them was that second incident where the Catholic Church came to me and they told me that they were interested in working with us on the thing.  And they proposed that they had a campaign on anti-Catholic pictures and if we would support them on that, they would support us in regards too.  And I told 'em, I said look, I'm not asking you to support me because you don't believe in what we're doing and you just want to use us to further your campaign.  If the black kids and people want to go to the theater in spite of the fact that pictures are anti-Catholic, I have no control over that.  In meanwhile I expect you to support us because you believe in what we're doing.  If you don't, then we don't need you.  And for the next six months I was (laughter) bombarded with literature and everything else to join the Catholic church.  I always felt that that was a way educating me through the various things in life that I had to look forward to.  And so, that's part of my youth.
Speaker 2: So that first time when you were like 10 or 11--
Speaker 1: Mm, mm.
Speaker 2: -- and then later you were like in high school?
Speaker 1: And then later I was just out of high school.  What had happened was that the war came and right out of high school I was drafted into the Army.  And when I came home from the Army, is when I decided to go to Indiana University which had a branch up there in East Chicago [Indiana] which I enrolled in.  And as part of my activities after, after school I would participate in the NAACP.  I became the head of the Youth Council College Chapter for the Midwest.  So that was one of the projects that we, we used.
Story_ID: 60828
Speaker 1: So actually your experience in high school, you were really primed by the time the civil rights of the '60s [1960s] came along?
Speaker 2: Yes, see 'cause in high school I graduated from high school in '45 [1945].  And when I was in high school, actually in East Chicago [Indiana] there was--a lot of the segregation, discrimination that was a part of the city policy which was wrong.  And a lot of it started in the high schools.  I found out when I was--before I was eleven, kids did not have any prejudice they really didn't care what color you were.  And it wasn't until you start getting--reaching to the age where you're starting to develop that people became a lot more sensitive on who their daughters and sons fraternizing with.  And I remember going to a party at the one of the young lady's houses that was in my classroom invited me and I didn't think anything about going to the party until her father came up to me and told me I had to leave.  And I never forgot that.  And when I got in the school the next day several of the kids, my classmates asked her why did I leave so early and that's when I heard her tell them, well my father put him out because he was black.  And at that time the school was in process of--they had a special social committee for black kids.  We couldn't go to the local proms, we couldn't go to--we could participate in sports as far as football and track and basketball, but we couldn't go to the dances or the parties afterwards because we were black.  And--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --and so actually what I did when I found out that I couldn't even swim in the local swimming pool because I was black.  And so we said we were going to close the school and so told me, they brought me and they told me that they changed the rules and that black kids could swim on Thursday.  And I said why Thursday?  And I found out later they cleaned the pool Thursday night.  And the white kids can swim on every other day, but Thursday until they cleaned the pool.  And so I said I don't swim in dirty water, so I refused.  And after I graduated from high school I used the NAACP as a tool by which we were able to close all the swimming pools in town as well as the high school.  So now the pools are integrated.
Story_ID: 64087
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to three or four elementary schools there in East Chicago [Indiana].  The first one was Field Elementary School which was located on Block Pennsylvania [sic, Block Avenue].  The second one was [Abraham] Lincoln [Elementary School], then I went to [James Whitcomb] Riley [Elementary School] and finally to [Benjamin] Franklin [Elementary] School which I had left there when I was in the seventh grade to go to [unclear] High School, elementary school where I spent most the rest of my time in school.  One of the things I laugh about now is the experience I gained from my father [Herman Campbell] in terms of construction was that when I got to high school, I knew--a lot of time I said than more of the teachers that taught the shops.  And that time was right during the war [World War II] and they would have problems with substitute teachers so they would come to my class and get me and I would teach the class.  I--rather it was the shop, rather it was woodshop or mechanical drawing and so forth.  And the teachers used to always kid me because they would call me Professor Campbell because they would pay me as a substitute teacher during those times, but I wasn't getting my experience in school as I thought I should because I was always being pulled out.
Story_ID: 64088
Speaker 1: So when I went to the [U.S.] Army later on I was--insisted that I get the chance to practice military instead of just being administrative officer, which I was.  So my youth brought back a lot of experiences to me which I used in later life and still am.  And it goes back to after I came out of Washington and I went to the service, and I came out of the service--I came home to Chicago [Illinois] and went to Illinois School of Technology [Chicago, Illinois] to major into architecture and so on.  And my GI Bill had expired.  I went to one architect office after the other trying to get a job as a draftsman and nobody wanted to hire me, mainly because I was black.  And I went back to school one day and they were all asking me where I was working at and I told them I couldn't get a job 'cause nobody wanted to hire me.  They asked me what did I know about this firm, a couple of them had worked there.  And I said yeah I went there and they told me the same thing.  So unbeknown to me about six of them went the next day to that firm, they were all white, and I got a call and it was the president of the architectural firm and he asked me to come down and see him again.  And I went down and he told me that six of my classmates had been down there and they made him feel so bad that he was going to hire me right then and for me to go to the library and just study at the library until they had a position for me.  He said right now they didn't have a position so he wasn't telling me no lie when I came down to be interviewed and that lasted about one day.  I went to the library the next day when I came home from the library I got a call that he had called and wanted me to come to work the next day which I did.  And I worked there as an architect, not a architect, but as an office boy.  And they were going to pay me, a ridiculous small amount now, $1.25 an hour.  And they told me that at the end of school year when next semester started, they would pay my tuition to go back to IIT and study.  And so the year ended and I went back to I--they asked for tuition to go to IIT and they told me at IIT that that was a lot of money and that if I would work another year they would maybe have enough money to send me then.  That's when I decided to leave.  I went back and I changed everyone of the files in the office, changed the labels and everything and (laughter) left.  And I stayed away from there until I went and got a job at the post office working in the evening from 6:00 to 10:00.  And I, I went back there over the Christmas holidays and the owner of the firm grabbed me and pulled me into his office and said Wendell we need you, we need you bad.  I said you needed me before but you didn't appreciate me.  And he said look back there in that backroom and straighten up that mess 'cause nobody can find anything (laughter).  And he said we will definitely pay your tuition and I said I have a job.  And he said where is that and I told him it was at the post office.  He said you can't learn architecture at the post office you have to be in an architect's office.  And he said you come back here and you work and we'll do right by you, I'll guarantee you.  And they did.  I stayed and there and worked there in the evenings from 5:30 to 9:30 while I was at IIT the rest of the time, I was IIT.
Story_ID: 64089
Speaker 1: And when I graduated from IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], I got a call from my father [Herman Campbell] back in East Chicago [Indiana] and his property that was a house that we grew up in was in the middle of urban renewal area that they were talking about clearing and they had asked my father to come in and to talk about them purchasing his house.  And he didn't understand a lot of the terminology and he knew I was majoring in planning as well as architectural, would I come out there and talk to them.  And I did and I either asked the right questions or the wrong questions 'cause the next day they called me and offered me a job at the foundation [Purdue Calumet Development Foundation] working with them with urban renewal.  And I accepted and I took that job for ten years where I drew up urban renewal plans for the area and one of the things, again coming back from my youth, I inserted in there people--a phrase in the urban renewal plan--the people that were being displaced for urban renewal action, had the right to get back on their own property and all they had to do was just match the minimum price that was appraised and they could get it.  And so then I would talk people into going in and come in with a bid on the thing and I would work in the evenings and help them develop plan to coincided that would be acceptable.  And they would do this and finally the--my boss told me one day, you feel so strong about that you should get on the other side of the table and open up your own office.  And that's what I did, that's how I formed Wendell Campbell Associates in 1966.  And the first job that I received was from my former bosses who paid me in one month but they had paid me before in a year (laughter) and so the firm started with three people, myself and my boss' secretary and another gentlemen who's still with me and has now about thirty, thirty people.  And we do all kinds of architectural projects across the world.
Story_ID: 64090
Speaker 1: Who was your most influential teacher in elementary school and then in high school?
Speaker 2: In elementary schools, woman name Miss Walsh and we would have as a--as a class picnic we would go to the Indiana Sand Dunes and she would come there and have riding habits and we would climb up the sand dunes.  The three of us sneaking up behind her and pushing her down the dunes, she go tumbling into the sand and she knew we were back there (laughter) she knew what we were up to but she always went along with the program.  I remember that time it cost us--we had to pay $2.00 for the bus, to get the bus and stuff from East Chicago [Indiana] and everything to charter the bus and I didn't have the money and she lent me the money to go, so she was the one.  In high school it was Mr. Falver (ph.) and Dr. Mince (ph.).  Dr. Mince was a person who made sure all the kids called him Dr. Mince, instead of just Mr. Mince.  And he taught history and so forth and I ran into him after I graduated years later and he was over here in Chicago [Illinois] walking down Wabash.  And I said, oh I Mr. Mince and he said Dr. Mince to you (laughter).  And he remembered me.
Story_ID: 64091
Speaker 1: What was it like for you at ITT [sic, IIT, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: IIT?
Speaker 1: IIT.
Speaker 2: Institute of Technology?
Speaker 1: Mm, mm.
Speaker 2: Well that's an interesting story.  When I first went to at IIT I had already had taken courses at Indiana University and I took the exam and they told me that I flunked the exam and they would not be able to admit me.  And I happened to be talking about this to my aunt who happened to a member at Ada S. McKinley and had worked with several of the wives and some of the professors at IIT.  And the next thing again I knew she was telling me she had talked to the dean of students and they were going to give me another exam.  And I went in and took it and I passed.  And she said--they said the reason they didn't believe with my credits that I had from the high school and stuff 'cause I took the vocational course and college prepared I would have enough experience to do the scoring that I did on the first one, so they thought I must have cheated some kind of way.  So when they--I took it again the second time and passed, they gave me entrance and I remember the first week that I went to IIT, they had orientation week, and they would put all--they had a huge model of the community and at that time IIT was trying to decide whether to stay there where they were located or move the university out to the suburbs because most of the area was becoming deteriorated and surrounded by blacks and so on.  And they realized it would be very expensive to do that.  So what they did, being a private institution, they couldn't come up with eminent domain and so on.  What they did was to work with New York Life Insurance Company, Michael Reese Hospital, Mercy [Hospital] and so forth and they worked with organization called the Chicago Land Clearance Commission which was a quasi-public community organization that was geared towards planning and development.  And they came up with a way of creating an urban renewal area in that particular locale.  And they put us on a bus and I was the only black on the bus and we toured the area and we went through Mid-Town, during that time Lake Meadows was just starting to be constructed.  And went by Mercy Hospital and went by Michael Reese Hospital and Michael Reese was at the front of a red light district and they said they used to--prostitutes used to hang out on front steps of the hospital and so on.  And all I could see was black people.  And I said well, they had this model showed what the area was going to be like for future after they did all the redevelopment there.  And I said what you going to do with all these black people?  And they said they're gonna be absorbed in the rest of the community.  That was their solution at that time.  And I said the problem with black people is that I don't see none in the planning process.  And there any future for us, we have to become part of the plan, we have to get over this letting other people plan our lives for us.  And I lived long enough to see that whole area change.  And right now even high rises, which were public housing were really to house black folks is now being torn down and redoing because they realize you cannot put all the people in a high rise building and expect the--have the kids grow up on the ground level without proper supervision.  And so now that's being changed and a lot of--my firm philosophy is now are trying work with organizations and people to make life a better community for them.
Story_ID: 64092
Speaker 1: So in each case you were very fully developed by time you came of age, you know, I mean, got to be an adult, you had already had so many experiences way beyond your actual years.  So you have kind of professionally lived two life times.
Speaker 2: I (laughter) I don't know.  To me there's certain things that I wanted to do and there's certain things that I thought I should be given the right to do.  And if they weren't available to me then I had to find a way to make them available to me and that's what I did.  One of the things was at the time I grew up the world was changing.  I've seen world war and I've spent a year in Japan and I saw that everything was being changed and I wrote my thesis at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] when I graduated was that war was a means of advancement and how black folks were able to advance because of the sacrifices and the things that they made during World War II.  A lot of them migrated up from the South as a result of working in the steel mills and stuff like that and some of 'em had to work day and night to make a livelihood.  And they would stand and have their families come up to work in the steel mills and so on.  But they were forced to live in segregated areas within the cities and it wasn't until the [U.S.] Supreme Court declared restricted covenants illegal in the early '50s [1950s], the blacks were then able to get out of the ghettos and move all around the areas of the city and that's what happening now and it's been happening.  And it's a slow process.
Story_ID: 64093
Speaker 1: Now as you--you were a young architect going out into the world working for the foundation and really using all that you were really, I mean, to advance the cause of African Americans and so on.  What other architects--you had joined--what year did you join the AIA [American Institute of Architects]?
Speaker 2: I joined the AIA in about 19--, about 1968.
Speaker 1: How many black architects were--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) it wasn't too many.  When I first became an architect I didn't know of any blacks that were architects.  I had heard of Paul Williams out in California and in order to become a member of the AIA you have to be recommended and endorsed by two other members of the AIA, the American Institute of Architects, and since I didn't know any, I didn't know how to get into the AIA and I happened to talk to a couple of fellas in East Chicago [Indiana] that were architects that were white that agreed to sponsor me.  But I remember the first contract that I wanted to do was a church over here and the church was--I don't want to mention their name, 'cause I'm the architect for life now (laughter), but the church was in the process of--it was a starter church, they started in a school and they had just finally had enough members now to build their own church and they were being a part of the national organization, they were getting advice from the national group.  They told--checklist of things they needed to have.  Now they had to find the site and so on.  They also had to select the architect and he suggested they select the architect who had done a lot of churches, be a member of the AIA, a whole lot of things that I wasn't and couldn't be.  And so (laughter) what happened was that it ended up coming to a vote and it was nailed down to two firms, myself [Wendell Campbell Associates] and a firm from Evanston [Illinois] who happened to be white, member of the AIA and all that good stuff.  And it became such a heated thing that they had a body count.  All in favor of me get on one side of the church and all in favor of this other architect and they literally went and counted bodies, one by one.  I lost by two votes.  And I went back to my office and they asked me how everything was and I said I lost by two votes.  But it became such a heated thing that several people left the church.  And later on they--some of them called me and told me why and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 64094
Speaker 1: And the very next day, I had a group come in to see me from East Chicago [Indiana] and they wanted to do a church and they told me and I said, I don't know, this is a bad day to come and see me.  And they said, no we already decided that you're our architect and we want you to design this church.  And I designed it and I won a National Award for it, okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Which church was it?
Speaker 1: St. Mark A.M.E. Zion Church in East Chicago.  And the thing was it was easy for them to select me 'cause a lot of them knew me and knew me all my life, you know, and stuff like that.  And actually the property that the church was going to be located on was on a piece of property that my former bosses owned.  And they were a little concerned about what was going to happen to this so they had Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana], some of the professors at Purdue University look over my shoulders while I was designing this thing to make sure I wasn't going to create a nightmare.  And when it became a national symbol, I went up to them and I told them, after all the trouble you gave me, what are you going to do to protect the value of that church?  So they had let me take an auction to all the land around the church, to design a development for it.  And they knew what I do with developments anyhow 'cause I used to work for one for ten years (laughter).  And so that property in Atlanta [Georgia] is still there and it's a landmark in the City of East Chicago.
Story_ID: 64095
Speaker 1: And I came back to--years later I was approached by this first church and they asked me that they'd like to me--make a presentation to them 'cause they were talking about expanding the church and everything and they wanted me to come and make this presentation.  And I drove up there and I sit out in front of the house that the presentation was supposed to be made at for about an half hour before my time and I was trying to consider whether or not I wanted to really go in there and make that presentation to them and go through all that again what I went through the first time.  And when I walked in at 8:00, I'll never forget that, my presentation was supposed to be at 8:00, I rung that bell at 8:00 and they were all sitting around the dining room table and I walked in and I introduced myself, "my name is Wendell Campbell, I'm here to make my presentation for the church".  And I saw that everyone of them had a pad in front of them and they had their pencils and everything and I remember the whole procedure that was originally done.  And I said am I'm a member of the AIA? Yes I'm a member of the AIA. Had I done a church before? Yes I done this church, I won national.  I went down all the questions that I remembered them asking me years before.  And I got through and I said now thank you for the time and everything else and I walked out.  And I felt bad about it.  The next morning when the fellows in the office asked me did we get the job?  I said nah I don't think so 'cause I gave a terrible presentation last night.  I said I was arrogant, I was cons--I was rude and I said I even left there without giving them a chance to say anything and the phone rang.  And I answered the phone and it was the chairman of the building committee.  He said, Mr. Campbell I'm calling to congratulate you; we decided to award it to you.  I said how can you do that?  He said what you mean?  I said I was rude; I didn't give you a chance to ask any questions.  He said 'cause you answered all the questions (laughter).  So I went on and I designed the church for 'em.  And during construction, I had to change the design about three times because they were just getting more and more members.  And by the time I first started working with the design they told me the maximum membership they had was 600 members.  And by the time I finished construction, there was over 1800 members in the church.  And so at dedication, Pastor Wright told me (laughter) told me, he said I don't know how long this is going to last us Mr. Campbell, he said, but you did a very good job and everything else.  Now I got called a few years later where they have outgrown the church and now he wanted a sanctuary for 2400.  And now they're up to three services a Sunday and they have over 7,000 members to the church.  And I've built for them now two senior citizens' buildings as well.  And I took the original church that I did and converted it into a school and so now they call me their architect for life so anytime they want anything done, they, they call me.
Story_ID: 64096
Speaker 1: Now tell me when did raising a family enter into all of this?
Speaker 2: Raising a family.  Yea, actually as you can guess tell you how much I was making when I was in school and so I couldn't afford to have a family by then.  I was dating this young lady who happened to be teacher.  At the time was right after the war [World War II] they were shortage of teachers so--most of Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] students after they gotten into their senior year so they could go out and practice teaching and they would give them credit for that.  And my wife was a member of one of the local sororities and she was one of the teachers.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: June, it was June Crusor and she was from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Would you spell her last name?
Speaker 2: C-R-U-S-O-R.  And so I pledged the fraternity Kappa Psi Fraternity and I was in the pledge club, we had a policy, we met every Sunday.  And after pledge club meeting we would go out and visit one of the local young ladies or something.  And we all love to sing and stuff like that.  And so of them said, let's go out and visit this young lady who's a, a AKA and she got nice--she lives in a nice house and a nice section of town and everything.  And I said, well you guys seem like you putin out a whole lot for her and they said come on, come on.  One of them had dated her or something.  We go out there and yea they start serenading her before they get to the house and all that kind of stuff and she comes in and she said, aww come on in, she was going through all of these (unclear) (laugher).  So anyhow I told them, I chastised them all and I said, look you guys made a fool of yourselves and everything like that going out there.  So anyhow they made me a bet that I couldn't take her out.  So I said ahh.  So I called her and we went out on a date and one thing lead to the other and the next thing I know is that we're getting married.  Now I was, at that time, didn't have much money at all, and my clothes were oversized (laughter) and everything.  Her brothers used to call me the coat 'cause they said I looked like I was a lost in this coat (laughter) here comes the coat, you know.  And so we ended up getting married.
Speaker 1: What day?
Speaker 2: November the 6th, 1954.
Story_ID: 64097
Speaker 1: And since then we have two girls, Susan and Leslie.  And both of them work for me now.  And they're--Susan--both of them are expecting now too (laughter) so--
Speaker 2: These will be your first grandbabies?
Speaker 1: These will be my third and fourth one.  I mean no, I'm sorry, they would shot me, second and third one.  'Cause I have one, Leslie has a little girl that's six years old.  So I tell everybody I have four wives.  So they all try to run me (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's good.
Speaker 1: And so now Susan is expecting any day and Leslie is expecting around the 15th of November.
Speaker 2: Susan is the partner [at Wendell Campbell's firm]?  You've got two--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Campbell Tiu Campbell [formerly Wendell Campbell Associates], Susan is the other Campbell.  And Domingo is the Tiu.  A lot of people thinks it's from me to my daughter Susan, but Domingo been with me for thirty-two years and he came over from Thailand and went to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] and came work for me right after he graduated, got his Master's from IIT and been there ever since.
Speaker 2: And what does your other daughter, what does she--Susan is the architect, what does your other daughter do?
Speaker 1: She does the marketing and Leslie had her degree from Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] in international relationship.  And she worked for The Treasurer's office for a while and she started working with us in marketing.  Now she's back with us working marketing.
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: And Susan she had a bachelor's degree from Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts] in Economics then she came and start working for us.  And the guys gave her a little rough time and so she went and got her master's degree in planning from the University of Illinois.  And I asked her, I said Susan, I didn't even know you were even interested in working with the firm.  And she said well you told me to send out these resumes and advertisements in the paper for somebody in planning and after I got all these interviews back in I realized I did more than they did about the job after working around here so I decided to apply for the job.  So the guys kept teasing her told her she wasn't an architect she was just a planner.  So she went over to IIT and got her master's degree in architectural from IIT.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: So that's she, so I keep telling her, so well you know people say this my daughters but they're well qualified on the paper and all this education I might as well take advantage.
Story_ID: 60840
Speaker 1: This is left to right.
Speaker 2: Left to right is my son-in-law, he's from California.
Speaker 1: I shouldn't have turned it.
Speaker 2: My son-in-law Don, myself, my sister Dorothy and my wife June [Campbell].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: These pictures that you're showing now are from my nephew's recent wedding and Bill Campbell.
Speaker 1: Can you go over those people again?
Speaker 2: The lower person next to me here is my son-in-law Don, myself, my sister Dorothy LaShay and my wife June.
Speaker 1: This picture here is also my son-in-law Don, myself, my sister Dorothy LaShay, my wife June and Dorothy's daughter, Jan Monique LaShay.
Speaker 2: And this picture is again, it seems like Don and I are always in the lower right hand corner.  Don, myself, my sister Dorothy, my daughter Susan, and my sister June Lois Campbell.
Speaker 1: This one is years early, you can tell by I have less gray hair (laughter).  Bill Campbell, my nephew, June Campbell, my sister, and myself at my house.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the--my generation of Campbells.  My sister Jean who spent sixteen years in Ethiopia, my sister Dorothy who just recently retired from Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], myself, my brother Norman who is now retired from MS Steel and my sister--this is Jean and this is June, I'm sorry.  Jean was the one that was in Ethiopia and June is the one who is the family historian.  Those are my brothers and sisters, they're still alive.
Speaker 1: This is my little wife number four.  This is my granddaughter--Leslie's daughter, Maya and myself and at my nephew Bill's wedding.  My daughter Leslie and my two son-in-laws, John.  And this one here is Sheila's husband.
Speaker 2: Leslie, my daughter, my sister Dorothy and David who is Leslie's husband's brother.  I don't know why I have so many pictures of Don and I (laughter) and Dorothy and June.
Speaker 1: And ole gray-haired me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We are all at, that's an interesting story.
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: My nephew Bill met his wife at Renaissance Hotel at a special meeting which was prepared by the chef there at the hotel and when they announced this a few weeks ago that they wanted to have a brunch and they wanted everybody come to the brunch, we didn't know at the time that it was really their wedding.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And the whole wedding was planned by the chef.  And they had this special table where they first met and everything, and all the food and everything he prepared especially for the reception.  And it was very surprising.  I told him he was very lucky that we all showed up.  This is a picture of myself looking out over a spot in, I believe that's outside of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil South America.
Speaker 2: And my sister--
Speaker 1: Can you go in a little tighter on Selma and Herman and then widen out?
Speaker 2: This is the Campbell-Smith family tree (laughter).  This shows how everybody originated from Mary Goodloe and Henry Smith which was my aunt--my grandmother who we called gran and my grandfather Henry Smith.  Somewhere on there--I'm looking for myself.  I should be on this side.
Speaker 1: On this side?
Speaker 2: Mm, mm.  And this is Langston and this is Bunzett (ph).  Oh here I am.  This is Selma here and Robert, June, Norman and I'm somewhere down here.  There I am (laugher).  Yeah, my family tree.  And there's Susan and Leslie, right.
Speaker 1: Could you a wide shot?  Just one more shot.  Can you start close as you can and then just start pan and widen, you know, and go up.  June did a great job.
Speaker 2: Yeah she did.  June has been working on and off for about, it has to be at least seven or eight years off and on.  She's going out taking courses and now she's talking about teaching some (laughter).
Story_ID: 60841
Speaker 1: These images are of properties designed by architect William Jerom--Wendell--sorry, Wendell J. Campbell.  This is the School of Social Science [sic, Service] Administration in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: The project scope designed a mixed use education and community services addition to the Mies van der Rohe Design Graduate School of Social Work.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay this is--I'm reading the project scope here for the Chicago Military Academy which was the first building shown in this series of images of Wendell J. Campbell's architectural work.  Project scope for the Military Academy.  Planning and Architectural Services for the restoration of the former Eighth Regiment Armory.  The first U.S. Armory built for an African American Regiment of the Illinois National Guard.  The second picture was the North--NIU Center for Black Studies in DeKalb, Illinois.  A new center for the African American Program at Northern Illinois University was constructed on a site surrounded by two traditional Victorian wood frame and brick houses.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the Trinity United Church of Christ in Chicago.  The project scope for this, design a larger sanctuary and fellowship hall to accommodate a growing congregation and its ministries.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the Genesis Convention Center in Gary, Indiana and the project scope is the Multi-Purpose Year-Round 120,180 square foot public assembly facility to serve as a magnet in attracting redevelopment of the central business district of Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: This architectural work is done by Wendell J. Campbell.
Speaker 2: This is the DuSable Museum of African American History in Chicago, Illinois done by Wendell J. Campbell.  The project scope is development new spaces for a growing collection of art, artifacts and an associated staff to make us[e] of a former Chicago Park District/Police Department facility.
Story_ID: 60842
Speaker 1: My name is India Poole, and today is August the 14, 2002.  This is the South Side YMCA in Chicago, Illinois.  And the project scope is to design of facility compromising ten major components: sports gymnasium and running track, auditorium and instruction pool, exercise room, fitness center, day care center, multi-purpose room, member's lounge, equipment and storage, administration support areas.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Design a facility comprising ten major components: Sports Gymnasium and Running Track, Auditorium and Instruction Pool, Exercise Room, Fitness Center, Day Care Center, Multi-Purpose Center, Member's Lounge, Equipment and Storage and Administration and Support Areas.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Comiskey Park Theater in Chicago, Illinois designed by Wendell J. Campbell.  Project Scope:  To open up Comiskey Park, home of the Chicago White Sox, professional baseball team to non-baseball fans design of a new 8,500 square foot conference center at Comiskey Park which includes an auditorium, three conference rooms, a warming kitchen, an audio-video tech room and additional restrooms.
Speaker 2: This is St. Timothy's Community Church in Gary, Indiana done by Wendell J. Campbell.  Project Scope:  Community Church to meet the needs of a large congregation which includes members traveling from some distance.
Speaker 1: Malibu East Condominiums in Chicago, Illinois.  To design a premiere high rise apartment building as rental housing with the intent of conversion to condominiums.  This by Wendell J. Campbell.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is the Chatham Townhouse Condominiums in Chicago, Illinois.  This project scoop for this is--this is the Chatham Townhouse Condominiums in Chicago, Illinois.  The project scope is the Chatham Townhouse--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --Chatham Townhouse Condominiums consists of fifty bi-levels townhouses for upper middle income families located in a solid residential section of Chatham.  This residential development incorporated the interests expressed by Chatham's residents in terms of the standards established for the architectural program.  The client, Travis Realty Company, the architect, Wendell J. Campbell.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Metcalfe Federal Building in Chicago, Illinois.  Planning a designed for a new state of the art 8,000 square foot federal office building to house four primary agencies.  Environmental Protection Agency, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Department of Agricultural and Social Security Administration.  And the client is General Service Administration and Stein Development Company.  And the architect is Wendell J. Campbell.
Speaker 2: Fisher Homes Master Plan in New Orleans, Louisiana.  Master site plan for the redevelopment of 100 unit public housing project on 48.7 acres of land in the Algiers Community of New Orleans, Louisiana.  Manage a team of planning, design and finance professionals collaborating on the project.  The client is the Housing Authority of New Orleans and the architect is Wendell J. Campbell.
Story_ID: 62208
Speaker 1: This is the Martin Luther King Drive Gateway in Chicago [Illinois].  The Project Scope:  Coordinate community participations, streetscape design, art work selections and site--sitting for a neighborhood gateway expanding two miles on Martin Luther King Drive, a major boulevard on Chicago's South Side.  The client, City of Chicago Department of Transportation.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Redevelopment Area Plans in Chicago, Illinois.  Planning service for the preparation of redevelopment plans and redevelopment area designation reports for communities throughout the City of Chicago.  The client is the City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development.  And the architect is Wendell J. Campbell.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The 71st Street Redevelopment Area Plan and Designation Report in Chicago, Illinois.  Urban Planning Service for preparation of a redevelopment plan and designation report to establish 71st Street as a redevelopment project area.  The client is the City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Roseland Michigan Avenue Corridor Plan in Chicago, Illinois.  Two Phase Redevelopment Strategy for the Michigan Avenue Corridor from 100th to 121st Street.  Utilize sight planning in the city's development tools to provide strategies for the improvement of a Urban Corridor in Chicago Historical Roseland Neighborhood.  The client is the City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Sixty-Ninth Street Revitalization Plan in Chicago, Illinois.  This is what it looks like now and this what it's going to look like.  Development of a Revitalization Plan for the 69th Street Corridor between Halsted Street and Ashland Avenue, creates strategies for redevelopment in the South Side Englewood Community, a neighborhood suffering from a severe blight and residential and commercial abandonment.  The client is the Englewood Community Health Organization and the architect is Wendell J. Campbell.
Story_ID: 62209
Speaker 1: Sunday, October 8, 1995, Time uncovers discrimination.  This is Wendell J. Campbell when he was in high school with two classmates, Dan Gibbs and Madeen (ph) Scott.  SCOCA members, Madeen Scott, Dan Gibbs and Wendell Campbell, the SCOCA organized programs for black students of Washington High School.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The "Times" Newspaper in Indiana.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Robert R. Taylor, 1868 to 1943.  First black graduate of agriculture from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1892.
Speaker 2: Susan Grant, born in 1961.  The first black woman licensed in the State of Illinois in 1991.
Speaker 1: Wendell J. Campbell, born in 1927.  The founder and CEO of the Chicago-based firm, Wendell Campbell Associates, Inc.
Speaker 2: Susan M. Campbell, born in 1959.  Vice President and Urban Planner at Wendell Campbell Associates, Inc.
Story_ID: 62210
Speaker 1: When we were talking last week, we talked about your family and growing up and I hadn't realized you were so, very, very active before The Civil Rights Movement, so to speak.  What we didn't get to talk about was your professional career and how all those earlier experiences really translated into how you execute your architectural work and the concepts behind your design, ideas and things.  So let me ask you, you open Wendell Campbell and Associates [sic, Wendell Campbell Associates] after working ten years at the [Purdue Calumet Development] Foundation.
Speaker 2: Mm,mm.
Speaker 1: You started getting, actually, very good projects, city, state and even some federal jobs.  Would you like to trace your professional career from when you launched Wendell Campbell and Associates?
Speaker 2: I really would like to go back before that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Because there's a lot of bearing on my life and how I planned my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That my father [Herman Campbell] was a contractor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And his father was a contractor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I came from a family of contractors or builders.  And from the time I was seven years old, I worked with my father in the evenings and after school and on weekends and summer vacation learning the trades and helping him.  And when I got to high school I was already well versed in construction so forth and I became, it was right during the middle of World War II, and there was a shortage of teachers so they made me a substitute teacher and I taught a lot of mechanical drawing in the woodshops and so on whenever the instructors were sick, I was the instructor.  And when I graduated from high school, I was immediately drafted into the service as a combat engineer and I went--spent one year over in Japan as personnel sergeant major for a construction management company that was part of the [U.S] Army.  It was combat engineer, battalion 14, 92nd combat engineers.  And we were charged with the responsibility of building an airport for the military personnel coming from the United States to Japan.  They could fly over the North Pole which cut out a lot of hours from flight time.  And after serving a year and a half there, I came back to East Chicago [Indiana] and there I attended Indiana University which did not have an architectural department so I wanted to go to architectural school and I was--I enrolled later in the Illinois Institute of Technology [IIT] over in Chicago [Illinois] which had the-- [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe was the head of the Department of Architecture and I studied architecture and urban planning under his tutorage.  And I told about my later going to Purdue Calumet Development Foundation as their architect planner and I spent ten years there before forming my own firm of Wendell Campbell Associates which concentrated on both urban renewal as well as architectural design using the planning process to create architectural opportunities.  And we were quite well in doing this.  We started out as three employees and we ended up--by the time we merged with Housner (ph.) and Manzite (ph.) into a thirty man firm which we did all kinds of projects both housing, urban renewal, area redevelopment, hospitals, nurseries, day care centers, the works.  And it was a case being what I called environmental architect which would design anything that the environment required to make a perfect community.  So that basically--we now have been practicing since 1966 back in about the middle '70s [1970s].  I changed the firm from Wendell Campbell Associates to Campbell Tiu Campbell.  And we have, right now, approximately about thirty people working for that firm.  A lot of people ask me why did I change the name and I said I always wanted a firm that was going to outlive me.  So I changed the name so that we can start developing other people so if something happens to me or when something happens to me, the firm will continue.
Story_ID: 62211
Speaker 1: What was it like being instructed by or working with [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe?
Speaker 2: Mies van der Rohe was very busy at the time that I was there in developing his own private practice.  And there was a gentleman that came over from the Bauhaus school with him as one of the professors and that was [Ludwig] Hilberseimer and he was the planner of the three, there was three, Hilberseimer, Mocassin (ph) and Mies van der Rohe and all of them came over right immediately following World War II.  And they were the instruments which created the Illinois Institute of Technology Architectural Department.  He was--Mies would concentrate with mostly the graduate students, Hilberseimer concentrated with the whole school and I spent quite bit of my time working under him.
Speaker 1: Your, your, your designs have that clean and un-cluttered look.  They are always in style, really very classy.
Speaker 2: Oh thank you.
Speaker 1: All your buildings are.  I mean I noticed that in the booklet here--I guess some of that comes from your instructors, but a lot of it comes from your taste, your concept.  Talk to us about your design concept.
Speaker 2: I actually--as one the things, two things that I learned from IIT, one was Mies would always say, less is more and the other is that the most things that--the best thing you can get out of going to a college department and degree is the ability how to learn how to think, how to approach a problem, how to solve it and carry it through to a reasonable solution.  And I'm very proud of the fact that I think that I was more impressed his ability to teach you how to think then me to try to imitate Mies.  We had a lot of the students that would go around try to walk like him and talk like him and dress like him.  I said I wasn't interested in being a little Mies.  I wanted to be the best that I could be as an individual.  So a lot of times most of the problem that I had were problems that confronted me or confronted the community which I was practicing in and how to make that a better community.  And I always felt that the combination of both architecture and sociology that people didn't necessary buy houses, but they selected communities in which to live.  They had to have good schools, had a good shopping area, you had to be able to have adequate transportation and all of these were part of the basic thing, the house was just one basic unit in an entire environment and my thing was trying to deal with the whole environment which included the house as the nucleus.
Speaker 1: And that whole concept, the wholeness concept gives you more control 'cause you can think about the next--so it's easier--doesn't it get easier to develop if you're thinking project wise?  Even though you might have two buildings for the first phase, but if you know how all these things are going to fit into each other.  You did something like that for [Purdue Calumet Development] Foundation didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much.  Actually what I did when I was at the Foundation is go out and surveyed large tracks of land blocks, visited almost all the houses in that block, going from the basement all the way up through to the attic to really get a feel of that house and determine whether or not the house could be conserved, rehabilitated or should be demolished and a new structure in its place, all the time dealing with people who occupied those houses.  And after I left the Foundation, I of course, concentrated on large organizations, groups of people which usually the church was a foundation for and help them to create their own environment using the various tools that were available through urban renewal and so on to make that task easier.
Story_ID: 62212
Speaker 1: How--you have been very successful as an architect, as a businessman, as a citizen, how did you make that transition?  I know a lot--a lot of what you are as a architect came from what you are as a man and your activist side too.  So you just kinda took that--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --took it in a creative way?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: But you know it's very, very--how does an independent architect, especially an African American architect, maintain the firm long enough and strong enough to get those kinds of projects that really paid the bread and butter project?  You've got a quite of few of those.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you make that happen?
Speaker 2: Well it goes back again to I was taught by my grandmother and my father [Herman Campbell] and so on that a lot of what I did accomplish in life would depend on me, that I was just as good as anyone else all I had to have is the opportunity to prove it and once given that opportunity, I was, to the best of my ability, supposed to achieve it.  And when I was out there, with the at the [Purdue Calumet Development] Foundation, I worked with a lot of people who wanted to stay in East Chicago [Indiana], wanted to build their own houses and so on.  And a lot of my youth, like I said, I did the first public housing project in East Chicago, senior citizen building where most of the people that occupied that building used to give me nickels and dimes when I was a kid.  And so I didn't look at it in terms of statistically, but doing it for individuals who were very good to me.  And so what I did is design a building that accomplished a lot of the things that I knew that they wanted.  Like for instance the--when we won an award for the building too, was a ten story apartment building, 108 units and every other floor had a laundry, a laundromat.  At the end of each hallway was a smoking lounge where the older gentlemen could sit and talk and, and a lot of times talk about their wives that didn't allow them in the apartments to smoke so they came out into the halls to do that.  The women on the other hand, they like to go down to the beauty salon and get their--like my grandma, she would always like to get a blue rinse (laughter) for her hair and things like that and they would a lot of the days just beautifying themselves and talking and that was a case where they can discuss a lot of things of the world.  And so what I tried to do in the building, add all these features into the building including the pharmacy on the first floor, a small clinic where they can talk to their doctors and stuff like that and get the prescriptions filled and, and get a rinse (laughter).  And so the building has always been full.  The rents were always reasonable because at that time the rents were something like around $40 a month which is (laughter) unheard of.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So everybody would always know, they all knew me by my first name, here comes Wendell (laughter).  And so I had a lot of supervisors watching the constructions and everything.  I was like what's going on and I just did this for the rest of my life is using people to accomplish a lot of the things that I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 62213
Speaker 1: So that brings a degree of satisfaction you cannot really buy, you can't study up on it.  You--it just has to come the way you got it from living day to day.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually in East Chicago [Indiana], and I keep going back to East Chicago because that was my roots that--people expected a lot from me than I thought that I give and I was surprised to find out that I could do some of the things that they already knew I could do.  Like for instance, when I organized the other students my age, the children my age go out to picket various theatres and stop the discrimination in theatres and so forth.  Then weekends anytime anyone had a problem they would come by my house and get me to take them to somewhere else.  Like for instance, when we stopped the discrimination practice at the Indiana Dunes where the kids could not change in the beach houses, they had to change in the bushes.  And I said, well you know the state law says that you should be able to change your clothes just like anybody else.  And we stood in line and got up to the front and they wouldn't let us in.  We said nobody else is going to go past us so they called the police and the police said, well we can't do anything because the state law says that they should be able to go inside and change clothes.  So we would wait until everybody else gave up and they would let us in and we put our clothes in and then we came back again and we couldn't get in and we just stand in line until we could and we closed it.  So finally they started adopting a policy that everybody changed their clothes there.  But those kinds of things were conditions I ran in most of my life.  And my case was not to accept them and if that was something that I felt was wrong regardless, I would protest and it seemed to be a very successful way to accomplish a lot of my goals.
Story_ID: 62214
Speaker 1: Well you certainly did accomplish that.  When you started working for city and government during--city and government projects, how did that--how did you make that transition?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: It's expensive don't you have to work up a whole plan before--just for them to say yes or no?  Isn't that expensive to front the money to do all the work and then--
Speaker 2: Well usually most of those things a lot of them, there are federal grants, they're available.  This is the case and this is one of the things that I learned working with the [Purdue Calumet Development] Foundation is how to apply for applications for grants and so forth.  How to get other people to apply for grants which would enable them to then hire an architect.  The problem that a lot of them had was they didn't know any architects.  And others would do the projects for them.  I said I would rather work with you than have you working to do something for me which I don't get a chance to benefit from the spoils of it.  So in my case, a lot of times it was the case of going out and finding an institution or something that was willing to sponsor a program that would enable us to re-plan and redesign and reconstruct the environment.
Story_ID: 62215
Speaker 1: One of the big things that construction runs into is that whole bond thing.  What has been your experience over the years with the bonding?
Speaker 2: Bonding?  Well, it all depends what position you're in.  When I was, again back in East Chicago [Indiana], when I was doing some of the housing, and I knew what the requirements were for those houses were and a lot of the original developers that were doing this, were just interested in just putting 'em up.  And I start protesting that they weren't being built-- constructed right.  And according to the law, they required, such as federal funds, that there could be not discrimination in the terms of hiring of people to work on the jobs.  The union, in a lot of cases, didn't have black union members and so they ignored the law and I said, alright if I'm the architect on that project, I'm going to enforce the law.  My first paid request, I would tell you that you're violating the law because you're not employing so many blacks, carpenters, plumbers, electricians, so forth.  And I will give you a whole month to find them and if you can't find them, the next paid request, I'm not going to approve payment and so you don't get paid until you comply with the law.  And if somebody can overrule me fine, but they're gonna have to put down why they overruled me.  And it turned out the union then hired a few competent blacks and wanted to move them to every project that I was working on (laughter) so that they would have some--and in some cases what the union did was hire me to build, design their own homes so they would pay the initial price.  And they would bring in students and I tutored to train them as apprentices to work on the project so they could meet the requirements and quotas, so that was--worked out fairly successful for a while.
Speaker 1: So you really--every step of the way, you used your experience knowledge and know-how and gumption, as old folks say, to really move the black experience along.
Speaker 2: It was my experience, because I wanted to accomplish a lot of things too (laughter).  And so when I graduated from IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], one of the first jobs that I went to they told me that I could not--I was in the wrong profession that I shouldn't be in architectural profession 'cause it was hard to find a job in that profession and the counselors tried to advise me to go out of school and change my field.  And I told them I wasn't there for counseling, I was there for employment and if he couldn't help me being employed, he was wasting my time and I was wasting his.  So then he start sending me to different locations like the steel mills and so on.  I found out later that he was just doing that to see if they have policies of hiring and then he would send other people there.  So I told him that I didn't want to do that anymore unless they were going to hire me, don't send me, so.
Speaker 1: (unclear) right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it a lot of people thought I'm lucky (laughter), but I don't.  I think you have to create solutions to the problems.  And the things was not that just because I'm black that I'm not doing this or that, but that I'm able to do it as well as anyone else is able to do.  And so what I've enjoyed a lot in my life is finding younger people and helping and giving them the encouragement and the opportunities to express their abilities.
Story_ID: 62216
Speaker 1: Okay, and younger people, let's talk about the younger people, your daughters.  You have two daughters and one is an architect now.
Speaker 2: Mm,mm.
Speaker 1: But she came about it--re-tell us that story again.
Speaker 2: Susan--went to private school all the way from grammar school--kindergarten all the way up through high school and won a degree to Tufts University out in Medford, Massachusetts and she majored in economics. And came back after graduation and she was looking for a job and so on and I suggested why didn't she come down and work in our office for a while because we needed somebody to do a lot of our management and stuff like that--time being.  So she did it on temporary basis, so she said.  So one day I told her that we were in need of someone to do a lot of our research and planning and to put an ad in the paper and see if she could find somebody that'd be willing to work for us.  And I received back a stack of applications about that high from the newspaper advertisement.  And her application was right on the top of the pile.  And I said Susan, I didn't even know you were interested working for us permanently.  And she said after filling out the application for the advertisement, I found out after reading a lot of the responses that I knew much about the planning as the people that were applying so I applied for the job (laughter).  So we hired her and the guys were kidding her and telling her she wasn't an architect.  So she came to me one day to me and she said daddy, I went over to the University of Illinois and I talked to them over there and they have a program in urban planning.  And they told me they would give me credit for a lot of courses that I took at Tufts and if I worked there part-time, I went to school part-time, that I could get a degree, a master in planning.  And I told her well we had a program where we paid the tuition and so forth for students that wanted to go to school.  And so we approved her doing that, so she did that.  She got her master's in planning.  And came back and worked with the firm permanently for a while.  And the guys still told her she wasn't an architect (laughter) she was just a planner, 'cause it would make her very upset.  And she come back and said, daddy, I went over to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] just where you went to school and they told me that if I dp the same thing like I did at the University of Illinois, that I can get a master's degree in architecture and I wanna do that.  So we arranged a program again and she went over there and she got her degree in that and came back and now she's head of our department.  She's the vice president of the firm [Wendell Tiu Wendell], she's the head of the planning department and does a lot of the architectural design as well.
Speaker 1: That is really a wonderful story especially when I thinking back from your grandfather and father and you and now your daughter, it's just so in her pores (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two nephews who are architects, registered architects--one in New York and one here in Chicago.  One was born on my birthday (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 2: And so we're proud of the fact that I have over twenty-six that have been in the firm that are now--have their own firms across the country.
Speaker 1: Oh that's good.
Speaker 2: They call me from time to time getting advice.  Another one called me today, a young lady wanted some advice.
Story_ID: 62217
Speaker 1: I guess like I mentioned earlier, so your sense of stability that's really important here.  Maintaining that over--that consistency over the years is that's quite an accomplishment actually.
Speaker 2: Well again, right back to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], you get out of life what you put into it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I said if you do a job well it brings you two more.  It's been a good formula for us.  We do each job with the anticipation that it's going to bring us additional work.  And a lot of times, a lot of the clients that we have refer other people to us.  I would say that a quite of few of our jobs, our repeat jobs are jobs that other clients have referred people to us and they would call us and tell us that such and such referred and I may go anywhere in the country and tell them I'm from Chicago [Illinois] and what I do and they start mentioning some of the churches and stuff like that and I--yes, yes, I did that one.  And that just starts a whole new point of interest.
Story_ID: 62218
Speaker 1: Let, let me ask you about politics and working for local as well as state and federal government.  When did you do your first project for the City of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: First project that I did for City of Chicago was Farragut High School [now Farragut Career Academy] and that was back in 19, about 1967, '68 [1968] and before that--
Speaker 1: You built it or remodeled it?
Speaker 2: I did both.  I had a two-part contract.  One part was doing auditorium, gym, cafeteria and library, which was a new branch of the Farragut High School and then they gave me a contract to bring the older part of Farragut High School up to meet the same quality as the new wing that I had designed and built.  So that was a interesting project there that was done in the time where the city in the process of upgrading most of the schools in the City of Chicago because--
Speaker 1: What period was that year?
Speaker 2: That was back around in the mid '60s [1960s] early '60s mid '60s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I created the Public Building Commission [PBC] which was the vehicle which had the powers to acquire properties and rehab them under federal guidelines and local guidelines that led to where we've had almost continuously had been employed by PBC on some project from that time until today.  I'm just coming from a meeting (laughter) project that we're working on now.
Speaker 1: And you did the King Drive Gateway?
Speaker 2: I did the gateway to South Side of Chicago which starts at 22nd Street by Martin Luther King [Drive] and McCormick Place. It's the vehicle--we did one of the buildings on McCormick Place, the energy building.  And we were also part of the team that designed and drew up the plans for phase 3.  Now we're being hired to be the master architectural team on phase 4 which is going to be another additional added on to McCormick Place.  But the gateway that you're talking about starts at 22nd and goes all the way to 35th.  It's the beautification of King Drive with planters in the street as well as plaques in the sidewalk along the walk up the history the blacks that made towards the development of Chicago.
Story_ID: 62219
Speaker 1: Then--how did--tell me about your participation in that era when Harold Washington was coming into being.
Speaker 2: Well actually I went through a series of mayors in Chicago [Illinois] before Harold Washington came.  I--starting with Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, Sr. and Jane Byrne [Jane Margaret Byrne] and a lot and actually I would always have a project in a black community primarily to construct, design and construct.  And when Harold Washington became mayor, I had several contracts with the city already and I worked very closely with him.  One of the projects that we were working on was the Harold Washington Library which was later named Harold Washington Library after his death.  We're doing a lot of work at O'Hare [International Airport] and [Chicago] Midway [International Airport].  And we did the cargo facility--crash (unclear) number one and cargo facility for United Airlines there in some of the buildings that we did at O'Hare.  One of the things that I remember about, after Harold died, it was a question of finalizing, finishing up a lot of work that we started during his administration.  There was quite a turmoil about who was going to be his replacement for mayor and so on.  And we were approached by several of them for support and we ended up doing a lot of work for the city doing that because there's a lot of work that had to be done.  And we were quite familiar with it the way the politics worked in the City of Chicago as well as East Chicago [Indiana] and Gary [Indiana] and other cities that we worked in.
Story_ID: 62220
Speaker 1: One of the main ones that we worked in was like in Gary [Indiana] where Gary's first black mayor was Mayor [Richard G.] Hatcher and we had several--we had no office in Gary, and we had no office in East Chicago and people would take off from work to go and campaign for Mayor Hatcher and so on and as a result we became very familiar with Mayor Hatcher.  And I remember, I was--my secretary came to me one day and told that there was a group of young men, they were here to see me.  And I went out and they were all around fourteen, thirteen, fourteen years old.  And I asked, could I help them and they said yes, we're here to hire an architect (laughter).  I said, is that right?  And they said yes, we want to hire an architect to design us a community center.  And I said what you're gonna do a community center.  And they said, well we can be constructive or destructive and we chose to be constructive and we have our plans and everything like that we want to do.  So I said I'm an architect but I don't work free.  So they said, well how much would you charge us to design a community center (laughter).  So I looked at them and I said, well how much money do you got?  And they looked and said, what do you mean.  I said, how much money do you have on you?  They came back and said we have $3.56.  I said you've hired yourself an architect.  So they sit down and one little boy kept looking at me, he said now that you've got our money what you gonna do for it?  (Laughter)  We sat down and we designed the building for them and we built the model and everything.  And I told him for these $3.50, I am not going to go the mayor and make no presentation 'cause you're gonna have to do it yourself.  I said, I'll go with you and I'll set up the appointment everything but I'm not gonna do it.  And they said, we're not asking you to do it.  So they got all dressed, and that's the first time I saw them all in suits and everything.  Went down to City Hall and met with Mayor Hatcher and he sat up there and he looked at what they were presenting and everything.  And he said, you're doing one thing that most people that come to see me don't do.  And he said, that is you come with complete drawings and a model and a vision of you want.  And he said, now that makes my job a lot easier 'cause all I gotta do is try to find a program and the money to build this.  And he ended up hiring us to design a couple of community centers in Gary and that started us working a lot in Gary and we did--since then we did fire stations, and schools and the Genesis Convention Center. Now there's a lot of discussions about the Civil Rights Hall of Fame which we did the preliminaries for.  So I always now--wonder what happened to those young men 'cause I know they're now older--they're probably all mature now and it'd be nice to find out what they're doing.
Story_ID: 62221
Speaker 1: So during the [Mayor Harold] Washington period you weren't very political and--so your professional life was not--
Speaker 2: I'll say-- oh I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No go ahead.
Speaker 2: I actually--architectural is a business as well as a profession, but it's not one that have to be political.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And actually, usually--if I'm hired to do a school, I am not hired to do it for the Democrats or for the Republicans, but for the children and so on.  Most of the communities, we use the higher politicians supposed to represent our needs and our desires and our wishes and if they're a good politician they're our--they will reflect these in what they campaign for.  If they don't, then they just using the people just to accomplish their own individual gains.
Speaker 1: But there again, that kind of philosophy is also part of that consistency.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I remember in East Chicago [Indiana], go back to East Chicago again (laughter), and it was during the campaign and I went to a public meeting and they had a candidate that was running for mayor.  And he was talking about if he was elected what he would do and so on and so on and so on.  He asked if there's any questions and I raised my hand and he said yes, can I help you?  And I said yes, I have a dilemma, I'm trying to decide now whether to bring suit against this City of East Chicago.  And he said for what reason?  I said for giving me a bad education.  And he said, how is that?  And I said if I could go all the way through the school system and graduate with honors and go to some of the best universities in the country and graduate with honors and come back to my hometown and I cannot get a job to design a school, then it must have been something wrong with the education that I received here.  I wanna bring suit, the city had given me a bad education and everybody started applauding.  And he won the election and he called me and told me you got a school to do.  And that's how I started doing schools out there.  Right now I'm working out there in East Chicago, one job leads to the next.  Right now I'm doing a firehouse out there and he's still mayor (laughter) at twenty-five years, he's still mayor.
Story_ID: 62222
Speaker 1: You just have some fabulous stories of the things you accomplished just being yourself, consistently being yourself.  What do you consider your greatest accomplishment career-wise?
Speaker 2: Working with people and I guess one of the things when I first when--I graduated, not graduated, when I first opened up my practice, I wanted to be a member of the American Institute Architects [AIA]. And to be a member of the American Institute Architects, you had to be recommended by two members for a membership and you had to go through a series of things which I didn't know many architects at that time, any black ones.  And I talked with a couple of architects that I knew and they told me they would endorse me.  I went to the convention in New York and there was about four or five black architects over 1,000-some people at the convention and they act like they were afraid of one another.  They didn't want to associate; they didn't want to be looking at each other because it would look like they would be clan-ish.  And I said, well now that's ridiculous, I come all the way here to meet architects and they're afraid to say anything.  I went back and I said what we need to do is develop a association or something that we can communicate 'cause there's a lot of information we can share with one another.  And after talking in Chicago [Illinois], I found there were several in Chicago that I hadn't known that was sharing the same thing.  And we had a little organization that we developed and I went the next year back to the convention in Detroit [Michigan], it was this year, and met some more blacks and we agreed to just play hooky from the convention in the afternoon and go visit some of the local architects.  And we did and we shared community, our concerns and questions and how you do this and that.  And they open up their books and showed how they did it and we were able to gain a lot of information just by talking with one another.  And we said we need to do this on a national level.  So they appointed me as their ad-hoc chairman and I sent out communication to all the blacks that everybody knew that were in architecture and inviting them to Chicago.  And we had our convention there and we organized a national organization of minority architects [National Organization of Minority Architects, NOMA].  And they appointed me or elected me as their president and I served in that capacity for about three or four years before I said it's time for somebody else to do it.
Speaker 1: And is there still a small fraction of--
Speaker 2: Oh there's still--
Speaker 1: --African American?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's still going--they're having--that was back in 1972, they're having their convention, they meet every year around October and this year they're meeting in New Orleans [Louisiana] and leaving there and going to Nassau [Bahamas], they finally turning to their roots.  And they had a few years back decided what they would do was to create a council (unclear) so that every black community have in Africa somewhere had this council of elders and so on that would advise the younger ones.  So they created what they called a National Organization Minority Architects Council.  And one of the rules was that in order to be a member of the council you had to be selected out of--by the membership of the council and since there was no council, they had to abide a proclamation put somebody in so they selected me as the first member of the council.  So I could choose anybody I wanted (laugher) so I chose all the past presidents and the founders of NOMA as a member of the council and we've been meeting every year since then.  Any time they have financial problems or some other problem we get together and solve it.
Story_ID: 62223
Speaker 1: In addition to yourself, who are some of the nationally known African Americans architects?
Speaker 2: Well there's several, we have John Chase [HM] who is down in Houston, Texas who at the time was he was one of the first black that was licensed architect for the State of Texas and he had separate or equal in terms of schools.  And he did a lot of work for Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] as separate or equal.  You have, let's see, you have Orson [unclear], you got Marshall Purnell and Paul Devrouax, Devrouax+Parnell [Architects].  They're doing a lot of buildings right now renovating around the state capital so forth.  And I'm sure that Paul is probably on the Board of Howard University School of Architecture [Washington, D.C.].  Harold Williams in Los Angeles, California who worked under Paul Williams who was one of the well-known black architects for years out of California.
Speaker 1: Were they related?
Speaker 2: They weren't related.  He happened to go to school in Miami University in Ohio [Oxford, Ohio] and he heard about this black architect in California that was building for the stars, the movie stars, and he said he wanted to work for him so he just took a train and went all the way out to California, walked in, introduced himself and Paul Williams hired him (laughter).  And that's where he just did all his professional life out in California.  Those are a few but in every city there's two or three that I know across the country that have made contributions.
Story_ID: 62224
Speaker 1: How was the--the transition from analog to digital? The whole electronic thing, how did that take place in your operation?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I felt that one of the things that had to be done was that architecture was changing when I first went to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], you could tell the architectural engineering students by slide rulers that they had on their belts.  And that was a symbol that you were a engineering or architect student 'cause you knew how to work the slide rule.  Then they went down from slide rulers to electronic calculators which were the big adding machines, electronic adding machines and then to the computers.  And I had a meeting in my office back in, well I guess it was about '72 [1972], '73 [1973], no it was '75 [1975], and I them that if we were going to survive as an architectural firm we had to develop the technology and know-how along that way.  And the computer, I said we need a computer or a series of computers and at that time, computer cost me, the first one I bought, cost me $24,000.  That same computer I can buy it today for $450 (laughter).  And the price went down so drastically, but what has happened is that in the last few years, young ones all coming out of school all know how to use the computer to draft, draw and so forth, CAD systems and so on.  And but they lack a lot of the skills and the knowledge that the older ones have in terms of how to put a building together.  So I always say a computer doesn't think, you have to think, junk in, junk out.  And so I find it very interesting to the see how the older ones develop a marriage arrangement with the younger ones 'cause each one have something to give--teach the other.  And it becomes a very good team in terms of development.  Now an office, every desk has a computer.  And we use to use the drawing board, now the drawing boards are reference tables that lay out the drawings and stuff like that and now all the computers are connected so that you can transfer information from one to the other.  And we have even our printers, we can just send a disk to the printers, our electronic file and get back a drawing full size to them.  That created whole new opportunity for printers to be able to take these documents from one firm to another and put them all together.  So it's--I've been fortunate to live through and see the tremendous change in terms of our expression and right now what we use all the time is every time a client comes to us with a project we put together a power point presentation showing how the building that he'd like to see can be actually constructed right to the environment in which he lives. We'll go out and photograph the whole area where this building is supposed to be and when we design the building we superimpose it right into the area and they can see it.  A picture is worth a 1,000 words.  So usually when I show it, they usually stand up and applaud 'cause they recognize different houses and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 62225
Speaker 1: The computer too--got speeded up your work?
Speaker 2: It did to a certain extent.  It speeded it up but also created some other problems for me.  Because you have to have a computer to actually see the results or you can print it out, plot her and stuff like that.  But to really, to take advantage of it, we doing right now what we call, it goes back again to what we're talking about, a Smart Home.  And actually I'm approached by a lot of church--we'd like to rebuild our area and stuff like that.  We'd like to form a non-profit organization to do this but we need help.  And some of the help that they needed was, for instances, Chicago [Illinois] you have a lot of the aldermen who control the properties that the city condemns in their particular ward.  And they determine what happens with these.  So what we did is took the camera and went out and we selected an area, we organized the churches in that area to a non-profit organization, and said we're gonna show you how to build Smart Homes.  And Smart Homes is a housing program that the city has that is federally funded to make housing affordable housing and if you can build a house that is affordable to the people living there, then the government will give you grants and different kinds of programs to make this happen.  And also the city, its Department of Housing [and Economic] Development, is the local entity in which you go through and that's usually influenced by the alderman, okay, who has a say in terms what the city does with all this property in their area which is now back into city jurisdiction, which is not paying taxes, but creating a lot of liabilities for the city.  And so, make a long story short, what we did was said you need a development plan for the alderman of your ward so we have contracts with the city so we know most of the wards and most of it's on our computer.  And we can bring up a section of the alderman's ward with all the housing on it and stuff like that and what properties the city owns and what the properties are not.  And we create this, we put the alderman's name on it and everything and we invite the alderman to come in and view the presentation or even go out with us.  And we go out and tour that area and photograph everything we see.  Then we come back and in Chicago you can tell probably it's a city home 'cause they have these steel pipes all around the property to keep people from driving up there and dumping on them.  And so we can take the pictures and we know which houses they are.  We know the smallest lot in the City of Chicago and the lot that is 25 x 123 feet--25 foot wide 123 foot deep.  And the only thing you can build on that lot is a single family home according to the zoning code of City of Chicago.  So we said, alright let's take these lots and design a house that could fit on these lots so they could be affordable.  So what we did is design three--three bedroom home that fits on a lot that's 25 x 123 feet and provide a proper side yards and parking and all the other requirements the city had.  And we went to the churches and we said we're going to build these Smart Homes.  And they said, why you call them Smart Homes?  I said, 'cause now every house, every program we have, we're in a computer run city and society so what we have to do is look at the way people live and the average person, for a lot of the inner city people, lived where the living room was the main house unit, the main room in the house.  And there you'll meet your company and all rest of the--.
Story_ID: 62226
Speaker 1: But that's not true of the inner city.  Inner city, the main room is the kitchen and that's where the meals are prepared, where the kids do their homework, they get their assignments, everything else.  You talk about who's coming.  You use the living room or you have your collectors for the bills for the stuff like that.  People you don't want to see the rest of the house.  You enter into the living room and you push them right back out after they're through.  So they really haven't became part of the family.  So I said, alright, let's design a house that centers around the kitchen.  And we put into that kitchen component also a computer and that computer can control who's coming to the door, you can monitor it, so it has a screen, you can answer the door from there, somebody sick in the bedroom, you can plug in to an outlet you have in there to a TV monitor or screen so you can supervise what's going on in that room and everything.  So the whole (unclear) about seven different things that they can do with that computer there.  And I said alright--they had Seaman (ph.) which is one the biggest suppliers of computer equipment in the country happen to come to Chicago [Illinois] and some of the ministers brought them to my office and told 'em, show them the Smart Home.  And they became so excited about it--that they were gonna open up a office across the street from my office just to house the components so that when somebody build one of these, they didn't have to wait six months for the equipment stuff like that.  So actually I talked with the city and got them to agree to pay a grant for a computer for each house so the kids can do their homework, they can get their assignments over the computer, they can call down from the libraries, everything.  And I said the reason we need these in homes was because basically the way the computer program has been generated here with America Online [AOL] and so on, first thing that you need is a credit card 'cause without a credit card you can't get access and most of the people in the inner city didn't have credit cards, so they were, again left out, again from the system.  They couldn't access all these things that were available for them to access that they had accessibility.  So that's when the city said all right, we will allow a grant for you to put these computers into the house.  The banks found out about it and they came to me and they said we'd like to sponsor some of these houses.  We'd like to buy the computers and we would finance the house and put the computer in.  And, of course, on the computer we'd put their software where you can do your banking from home (laughter), that's another component that you have.  So goes on how one things leads to another.  Well actually we're building the houses for $125--$126,000.  That is not an affordable home for that price.  So what the city does it gives--
Story_ID: 64757
Speaker 1: Are--are you putting--on these lots that you see in various areas, not necessarily to three or four together--
Speaker 2: Mm, mm
Speaker 1: --just wherever there is a vacant lot, they want to turn it into a tax paying vehicle and bring the neighborhood back from vacant lots and boarded up homes.  And what are these homes, what are they cost now?
Speaker 2: The cost about $126,000 they vary depending upon what you wanted.  So what we're doing is actually using the church.  They have programs like for first time buyers and so on.  They'll bring down people into the basement at the church and show them how to put their information together to qualify and apply for funds for such a thing.  Like these Smart Homes are also, we work with the Department of Energy, and we insulate them in such a way that they meet the energy conservation requirements.  So the federal government has a grant for every one of these houses that meets that or they will give a $5,000 grant to a person buying one of those homes.  So that's another way that they reduce them down.  The houses are simply constructed in such a way that a person can be taught how to construct one of these homes.  And so we're building assembly areas of plants within the community.  Offering jobs and training people on how to build these.  And I got the idea in terms of you go to some of the large department stores and you buy ready-made furniture or equipment that you can assemble at home with a screwdriver or something like that and directions.  So I found different companies or plants that were making housing materials and pl--panels and stuff like that.  And one from Canada, I remembered, I told him, I said here, if I give you the plans for this house can you make all--all the walls, partition and stuff like that?  And they said yeah.  And I said, can you send them to where I tell you unassembled?  And he said, why you wanna do that and I said because I'm trying to create jobs for people that are going to buy these.  And if you send them unassembled, they can put them together and they got a job putting them together and they can pay for it, their home.  Oh we can't do that.  I said, well you're not the people I need that I need to be talking to.  So two days later they called me and said, we can do what you're saying (laughter).  And so that's how the Smart Homes starts growing and growing and growing.
Story_ID: 64758
Speaker 1: And just meeting with church group, and this last story (unclear).  They told me, they said, you know, it takes a whole village to raise a child.  You heard that.  And they said that we like, we got this program see--we got this program of unwed mothers with large number of kids and stuff like that and we'd like to bring their program into the church and stuff like that.  Can you adopt one of these Smart Homes to do that?  So we put two of them together.  And the second floor, we designed it such a way that it's a three bedroom apartment for a married couple with children, young couples with children.  The first floor, each of these units got the divided wall, but each side is a one bedroom apartment.  And one side is for the grandparents to live, who both have retired and their children can bring their grandkids down in the morning and they can feed them there, watch them in the back yard, play until it's time to go to school, take them to school, bring them back and kept them until their parents come home from work, okay.  The other side, there's always in the family an elderly aunt or uncle who has a job or something, single, but can also serve in responsibility of seeing that these kids are raised (unclear).  And when the evening is through, they go back to their private life within their apartment where they have all the amenities.  So it takes-- we got three different components paying the mortgage on that house and we showed it to the city, they loved it.  And showed it to one of the churches, they loved it.  It's being built on several locations in Chicago [Illinois] right now.
Story_ID: 64759
Speaker 1: And, and so I guess as they're trying to retire these high rise--(unclear)(simultaneously)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's great but not on the market for us because of all these high rises had social problems.  And you cannot raise kids and you living on the 26th floor and the playground is down on the ground level and expect them without supervision to be able to come up a normal life without somebody trying to corrupt them.  And so now they realize that and tearing, tearing down a lot of them.
Speaker 1: So, so, then you'll be exceedingly busy with Smart Homes and--is that--that's a concept that could be duplicated--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)(simultaneously)
Speaker 1: --city after city.
Speaker 2: Right.  Like we had people now that wanna do these across the country.  And, of course, all they need is--that's the nice thing about it is you develop a plan, once you got the plan you can build as many from plan as you want.  So it's--I had a gentleman in this morning that's getting ready to do three of them over in East Chicago [Indiana].
Speaker 1: How long does it take to get it from zero to sixty?  You know, get it up?
Speaker 2: How long it takes to get it up?  Construct it?  It depends upon the crew that you put together and the programs that you get together.  If you're actually a builder, you could build them in less than 90 days.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Mm, mm.
Speaker 1: That is amazing.  That's definitely a Smart Home.  Now I guess somewhere in all this too, the digital divide has to be addressed, getting the people ready to use the computer that's in the kitchen.
Speaker 2: Well that's part of the school training.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The church would have a program too--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and train them.  And--actually I find that the kids adapt to computers much quicker than the adults do (laughter).  And they do-do-do-do-do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well the Smart Home is a today and future thing.  What comes after that as far as our day-to-day living and working environment?
Speaker 2: Actually this is just a stepping stone.  We have so far to go and actually all the computer is, is a tool to get us closer to where we want to go--is how you use that tool.  But right now one of the greatest needs we have is housing, another is employment, another is opportunities.  And you create as many opportunities as you wait for everybody to bring and solve all your problems for you, you gonna always have problems.  Because one of the biggest problems is find a solution and be independent.  And actually that's what I see the Smart Home as being--it's a tool to help you get there.  But what you do with it is gonna depend upon a lot of things.
Story_ID: 64760
Speaker 1: When did you come up with the idea for the Smart Home?
Speaker 2: About three years ago.
Speaker 1: And when did you build the first one?
Speaker 2: Oh about two years ago, year and a half, two years ago.
Speaker 1: Where was the first one located?
Speaker 2: The first one was located 64th and Langley [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Have you revisited that family to see how they adjusted to the Smart Home?
Speaker 2: Have I revisited the family since--
Speaker 1: How did they adjust to--I guess my question is do they use it as you envisioned?
Speaker 2: Well it changes.  What I do is design a structure that's flexible enough that it can be used to adapt to the family's needs, not the family to adapt to its needs.  It can be expanded, contracted depending upon what that family's needs are.  And a lot of times if there's not a grant or program for that adaptation, it doesn't get done.  And a lot of times people come to me and they want me to just sell them the drawings.  And I say, I'm not interested in just selling drawings.  I'm interested in the final product and what you do with it.  We constantly have referrals so I know it's successful (laughter).  But it's successful from a lot of different points of view.  One it's successful in terms of creating new housing.  It also creates jobs, it also creates people that wanna build companies of their own to promote them.  And it's also if I can do it, they can do something else, you know.  So a lot of things are coming out of that.
Story_ID: 64761
Speaker 1: What do you think you will be remembered for?
Speaker 2: It all depends on who you ask (laughter).  I don't know (laugher).  I don't know.
Speaker 1: What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: A person who lived a good life and gave something back as well as took.  I think basically that.  I think one of the things I enjoy is the challenge that I give others.  And sometimes they exceed my expectations of what they gonna do with it which is good.
Story_ID: 64762
Speaker 1: I think you'll be remembered for your consistency.
Speaker 2: You keep mentioning that (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause you've been extremely consistent, just right out of the gate.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which builds a trust factor, you know, among those people you interact with.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a project I'm working on now.  I guess that's what you're getting to (laughter).  Yeah, right there at 14th and Michigan, twenty-two-story high rise which the first five floors are going to be commercial retail and a twin--a tower with six units per floor condos going up.  And--
Speaker 1: When do--when are--that's been on the drawing board for how long?
Speaker 2: It's been on for little over a year.  And today we've just about finalized the financing to make it happen. We're getting ready to the property.  And the person that owns the property, he likes our idea so well that he's reinvesting into the development of it so he's making a lot of it happen.  He's putting in $600,000 of his own money right back into it.  And he is also loaning two of the other participants $100,000 each to come into it.  And he's retired, lives down in Florida, eighty-five years old (laughter).  And he said most of his life is gone, so he just likes to see something happen while he's still here.  So that's my timetable to make it happen before something happens to him (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you know you can't delay that one.
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, I can't wait too long.  I told him I have to adopt his wife as it is now (laughter).
Story_ID: 64763
Speaker 1: What would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have no idea.  Some--a lot of people tell me, you need to write a book.  I said, I don't need to write a book (laugher).  I'll let someone else write the book.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well you're so busy living the book (laughter), you don't have time to write it.  Is there anything in any area that I didn't ask you I should have?
Speaker 2: I would say that you've been pretty thorough.
Story_ID: 64764
Speaker 1: To our future architects, male, female, all ages, all group sizes, shapes, creeds, colors what do you suggest they be about in the future?
Speaker 2: I think they need to be about is just, remembering that they can go--the sky is as high as they want to make it.  They can accomplish any of their dreams as long as they have faith in themselves and the ability of other people to work with them, to accomplish their objectives, that it can be achievable.  And there's enough people around here that they can talk to, to make sure they have it.  Usually when they come to see me in my office, I meet them and I greet them and I introduce them to somebody closer to their age who happens to be around.  Let them develop a dialogue along with them.  And it seems to be very successful too, because they keep coming back.  And a young lady this summer who down at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], was looking for a job, she came and worked with us.  And the next thing I know she's talking about changing her whole career and coming back and working with us permanently and all that.  And I said well (laughter) I hope that's happens, but in the other case, I hope that's what you really, really want because there's a lot of things that you could do, that you keep on doing.  And she's one of the few--now all they ask me when I walk out of the office, where you going?  (Laughter).  When you gonna be back (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well that's wonderful.  Well it--well that must really make you feel good seeing those newcomers coming along and how they take to your suggestions really 'cause that's how you offer more as a suggestion rather than a demand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually, you've been in my office several times so you'll see most of the young ones up there coming and going.  And everybody that works for me has a story.  And a lot of them are very exciting and impressive stories.  I get a lot of people that work with me are referrals from people that know me, know our office and feel that the person will work in very well with the office.  And I think that's a very high compliment that they pay--pay me.  And I--I guess as you get older you become a story teller (laughter).  And each one that I see is a story involved with you know.  I spend a lot of time just talking about individuals in the office and how I'm happy with the way they're running their lives.
Story_ID: 64765
Speaker 1: One thing that I didn't ask you about in any kind of detail, your wife [June Campbell].
Speaker 2: Mm, mm.
Speaker 1: How does she fit into the overall--
Speaker 2: That's Purple (laugher).
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Everybody nicknamed her Ms. Purple.  Her license plate is Ms. Purple.
Speaker 1: Oh is that (laugher).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she loves purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all her clothes are purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So every time you see anybody comes into that office that's all in purple, that's her (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter), okay, that's great.
Speaker 2: And she's a retired school teacher.  And she is now employed by federal government and she's employed by city to look into the Head Start Programs that they have, preschool programs.  And she spends at least one week a month visiting different programs in different cities around the country and writing a report on how they're spending the government's money.  And she loves that, plus on Saturdays she works at Tiffany's [Tiffany & Co.], she loves jewelry.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So she's been there for almost twenty-five years working one day a week.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So on Saturdays--there's quite a few stories tell about how people come in there looking for her and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: So she's been at my side all the time.
Story_ID: 64766
Speaker 1: I like how did you meet stories, how did you meet?
Speaker 2: How did I meet her [June Campbell]?
Speaker 1: Ms. Purple (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ms. Purple?  She wasn't Ms. Purple when I first met her.  She was a student teacher at the time.  This was right after the war [World War II] and they had a shortage of teachers in Chicago [Illinois].  And she went to Chicago Teachers College [now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and they would go to school in the morning and they would be assigned out to a school in the afternoon.  And they would get credit both for--as teaching-- student teachers, as well as being paid as a substitute teacher.  And I at the time was joining a fraternity here, I was a student at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) and her brothers used to always--they nicknamed me "the coat" 'cause I had this huge coat that was twice the size--it looked like I was lost in it.  But that was the only coat I had (laughter).  And so anyhow, what happens is that the fraternity I was pledging to, on Sunday and visit one of the local young ladies and get a chance to meet them since I didn't know many people in Chicago.  And we went to visit her one day and they serenaded her outside the house and the rest of us.  And I said that's a lot of waste of time and everything else like that and she was just enjoying too much, I felt (laughter).  So they came back and said I was terrible that I acted like I was bored and all the rest of the stuff.  And I said anybody can go out there and entertain her and you all actin' like a bunch of fools and all that.  And so one of them got angry with me because he had been dating her so he told me I need to go out on a date with her, see what kind of person she really was--she was a really nice person.  And so I called her and the first call she refused (laughter).  I guess he talked her into going out with me the next time I called and one thing led to another and the next thing I know we were getting married and we've been married now for, it's about forty-seven years.
Speaker 1: Oh that's wonderful.  Did I get her name before?
Speaker 2: June.
Speaker 1: Yes I did.
Speaker 2: June Campbell.  And I had two daughters by her, Susan, which we talked about, and Leslie which is also working in the office right now as a consultant.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So both of them were expecting.  Susan just had a baby girl, Sunday.
Speaker 1: Oh, she had it.
Speaker 2: Uh, huh.  She had it and Leslie expecting in the middle of November.
Speaker 1: Boy or a girl?
Speaker 2: She won't tell us.  Susan had a baby girl
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you've got two girls--
Speaker 2: I have five wives, I tell everybody.
Speaker 1: Five wives.  You had girls, girls, girls.
Speaker 2: (Laugher).  All you girls, they all try to run me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well thank you very, very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Speaker 1: I certainly enjoyed part one and part two.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I still come back to that consistency thing.  I mean, you really are, what you see is what you get.  And that's really very wonderful actually.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
