Story_ID: 667342
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Graham, G-R-A-H-A-M, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R [HistoryMaker Bob Carter].
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 29, 1938, Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Artist, professor, designer, depending on which hat I'm wearing at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're a professor at?
Speaker 2: At Nassau Community College [Garden City, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Twenty-seventh, two ten, 2010, April, I had to think for a moment.  April 27, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home and family room right now in Dix Hills, New York.
Story_ID: 667343
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled by management to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's easy, chili.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anyone knows me, knows I'm a chili nut.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You ever been to Ben's Chili Bowl in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] where the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but that's--I'll have to make it there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No, I think as a designer, it depends on the context and challenge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Hadn't thought about it, but when the, when the weather is nice, you know, it's spring, summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My wife [Panchita Carter] tease me, teases me about my saying, to make a long story short.  I think she says that because they're never short, (laughter) it's always longer.  I find myself being conscious of it.  'Cause for a long time I didn't, I didn't think about it.
Story_ID: 667344
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Carter] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sara Birdie Thomas Carter [Sara Thomas Carter].  S-A-R-A.  She preferred to not have the H.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  How did she spell Birdie?
Speaker 2: B-I-R-D-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And Thomas, the rest, the regular way I guess?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eminence, Kentucky, 1919, I believe it was.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Eminence, Kentucky?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Because that's an odd name for a town.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a small town.  My father used to say if you, you know, bat your eyes you might miss it going through.  And they got their first traffic light about twenty years ago.  I don't know the his- specific history but obviously--matter of fact it's interesting that you ask that because as a child I didn't associate the meaning of the word eminence with the name of this small town, but I'm sure someone was altruistic or very idealistic, but it's a very small country town.
Speaker 1: Is it near Lou- Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: It seemed like a long time then, but it's twenty-five miles--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) outside. It's a little country town that had a black section that my mother grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what are the, are there any stories about the ancestors on your mother's side, or what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you--
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather--her father is named Graham [Graham Thomas], and he was a house servant that, for that community, did very well, mean- meaning for--within the construct of the black community, financially he was maybe a peg or two ahead of some of the others.  Because he died before I was born, I now, I--for years now I've signed my full name Robert Graham Carter [HistoryMaker Bob Carter] on the work that's framed.  I say that because I do illustrations, things that don't get hung on the wall per se, but it's in tribute to him.  I always try and sign my full name.  My grandmother, who was very much a part of my growing up and my brother [Jesse Carter] growing up, grew up in Eminence and really struggled after his death to, just to keep going.
Speaker 1: Were they both from Eminence?
Speaker 2: Frankly I'm not sure where he was born.  I'm not sure but my--as I understood my grandmother grew up there.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute (laughter), Birdie Thomas [Birdie Simpson Thomas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she born there?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandmother was as I, as I understand, but I'm not sure about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, okay.  Well, you said your grandfather was a pretty well to do house servant he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --worked for, worked for some very prominent people.
Speaker 2: Well, he worked for some well to do whites and as I understood, he lived on the premises and came back to Eminence at whatever interval, and there's a term that my wife [Panchita Carter] hates but it's descriptive, nigger rich, which simply means that within the black community, he was more comfortable than some, but not really wealthy, but by no means.  As a matter of fact by mainstream standards he--it might not have been considered middle class, but he had some discretionary income.  I remember my mother, I mean my grandmother had two pianos and an organ, and it was just for that day a very comfortable environment.  Sh- my mother's growing up was far more comfortable in that regard than my, than my father.
Story_ID: 667345
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think someone we interviewed yesterday [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson] ironically mentioned the same term and I thought that they were saying, you know, nigger rich, but they used another prefix, but it meant pretty much the same thing, and they were talking about a relative of theirs, an ancestor of theirs that had not only a little bit more money, but he had more influence--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and could get things done in a community or would--could do things other people couldn't do because of his stature within the community (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.  Well, the term is not politically correct today obviously, but it was acceptable, but more importantly, it's an accurate accounting of the circumstance of the time, so whether one relates to the term or not is a separate issue, but it was reality.  And after he died, my grandmother [Birdie Simpson Thomas] had a very difficult time, fi- financial time, so the, some of the standing that he had acquired evaporated to make a short story of that, but it just evaporated.  So by the time I came along she was struggling to keep going and got some support at certain stages from my parents [Sara Thomas Carter and Robert Carter].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she live in the town of Eminence [Kentucky] itself--
Speaker 2: No, at the--
Speaker 1: --or was she more rural?
Speaker 2: No, at the time that I was growing up she lived in Louisville [Kentucky]--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and literally just, the property just didn't, wasn't maintained and eventually it was signed over to my uncle, my mother's brother [Richard Thomas], and he brought it back to service, but she just wasn't the kind of business lady that kept things going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so you knew your grandmother right, but you didn't know your grandfather [Graham Thomas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exac- right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was very much--her and my, her sister, my aunt, were very much a part of my growing up, my brother [Jesse Carter] and my growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any other stories about those days, any stories from sl- slavery days or any of that?
Speaker 2: I--in looking for some material, photographs and so forth, I found a picture and I don't remember her exact birth date.  It was 1890 or so I think, but, it was post slavery, and I only have one slavery story re- relating to my father's side.  I have one--
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll wait (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'll come to that, yeah.
Speaker 1: --just hold that for a second yeah.
Speaker 2: But to my--there's no connection in slavery, with slavery with my mother's side, meaning specific stories.
Speaker 1: Stories, okay, okay.  But is there a tradition that they were enslaved or were they--'cause it's possible they could have been free co- people of color and--in that town?
Speaker 2: It's possible that they--some of them were, but see, Eminence was a very small--there was virtually a handful of property owners.  There were sharecroppers that were very poor, and I used to hear stories of--from my great uncles, particularly, of how important it was to get out of that cycle and leave that poverty.  So coming to Louisville, to that twenty-five, thirty miles, depending on which town they were from, was a, was a quantum leap, and although they were doing labor, it was not the same hard labor that you got on the farm.  I grew up with the term sucking tobacco and I had no idea what that was.  I could imagine someone using a straw and going around (laughter).  And all that means is that suckers are the energy absorbing smaller growth that keeps a main shoot from developing, so when you pull that, you allow one shoot to--'cause tobacco at that time was a big important crop for Louis- for Kentucky.  So the process of sucking tobacco as I heard them describe was back breaking work, literally, I mean just.
Speaker 1: Just pulling the weeds and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just pulling and, you know, bent over all day.  I guess it was comparable to cotton picking.  I don't know but getting away from that was what virtually all of my family worked toward.
Story_ID: 667346
Speaker 1: What mother--what stories did your mother [Sara Thomas Carter] tell about growing up in--did she grow up in Eminence [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, again she had a comparatively comfortable life.  As a matter of fact, she didn't have to do certain chores that you might associate with a, with a relatively working class family.  And after she was married my, literally my father [Robert Carter] taught her to cook and I, you know, remember stories of the fact that she--by comparison to my father, was--grew up fairly comfortable.  Again not by standards of middle class today, but by standards of a small town.  She just didn't have to do certain things.  I think she didn't have to iron and other things that other children might have had to do, young girls might have had to do at a, at a certain point in their growth.
Speaker 1: She was pretty pampered if she didn't have to iron (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By comparison, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but iron.
Speaker 2: I mean by comparison--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --not just to my father but by comparison to what might have been average at that time, sure, relatively.
Story_ID: 667347
Speaker 1: So was she able to go to school in Eminence [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The high school was X number--about fifteen miles or so away--called Lincoln [Lincoln Institute, Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky], but, yes, she went to school.  As I recall, in one room type school house with several grades in one area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she had attended a one room school and was that in Eminence itself?
Speaker 2: Yeah [sic.], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she go to Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us a little bit about Lincoln, it's a historic place.
Speaker 2: Well, Lincoln's a--I don't know if he was the founder, but Lincoln's prominent citizen was Whitney Young, and his family, his father, Whitney Young's father, was the president of Lincoln during the time that my mother [Sara Thomas Carter] and father [Robert Carter] was there, (clears throat) excuse me.  It was what I thought of as a college campus with residency on the grounds, and from time to time, my father and mother would take my brother [Jesse Carter] and I to visit because my father was kind of a favorite son of Mr. and Mrs. Young [Laura Ray Young].  By that I mean there's some social connection that you have with some of the people that are part of your village and, so I remem- I looked forward to it, and we had dinner in Mr. and Mrs. Young's home, which was on the grounds (clears throat).  At that time, Whitney Young had left this site.  He probably was teaching, I'm trying to remember the college that he was teaching before he became Urban League [National Urban League] director, I think it, was it Atlanta [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia]?  At any event, I ne- I didn't really meet him there because he was not present physically, but his, but his family was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear)--like Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], he carried the Jr., as prominent in his name implying that the father was important, you know, very important too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, so Whitney Young, Sr. was a big man in that part of the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, he is.  He wasn't involved with a national event or venture rather, but within the Kentucky area, that area of Kentucky, was a very prominent citizen, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well known.
Speaker 2: Very important person, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well known.  So, now did your mother specialize in any one area when she was in high school?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't finish at Lincoln.  She ultimately got married (clears throat) at a, at a certain point and finished at Central [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky], which was my high school, at night school.  Matter of fact when I look up their history, she finished in 1950.  So after getting married she went back to school, to night school and, and we share the same high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Louisville [Kentucky], okay.
Story_ID: 667348
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your father's side of the family.  Now what--can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Robert, R- (cough) R-O-B-E-R-T, Cecil, C-E-C-I-L, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R [Robert Carter].  And they did not want a junior by the way, that's why our middle names are different.  They had feelings about junior, you know, "Go to the store for me, Junior," you know, they just didn't like that title so to speak.  So very deliberately they changed the name and said my middle name is from my grandfather [Graham Thomas] on my mother's [Sara Thomas Carter] side.  My father had a very difficult growing up, to make a short story out of it.  His mother [Lizzie Mahan Carter] died when he was a baby, a child.  I don't know the exact age.  And his grand- his father [Arthur Carter], I'm sorry, my grandfather, wasn't a strong force in his life, and I remember asking my father at one point--well, at several times he told about working for white families, and they would provide him room and board as a survival circumstance.  And I one time asked him, "Well, how many families did you stay with?  I've heard a little about this, a little about--." He said, "You know, there's so many, I really don't know.  I lost count."  So he was a, if you will, survivor, and I'm very proud of my father's growth, development, achievements because he went from having no support system and family in the traditional sense of the word to an achiever and I've said this formally, and when I've made lecturers about family as, as I'm asked to do occasionally in certain events, and most of us with a functional circumstance love their families, but I'm also very proud of his accomplishment, and I've said, "My brother [Jesse Carter] and I simply had to stand on his shoulders.  We didn't have the same struggle."  We didn't, they didn't have a certain amount of money but they--the security, the love, the connection, the supervision, the encouragement was a very important, you know, part of our development that they provided.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your dad's date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 1, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in--
Speaker 2: New Castle.
Speaker 1: New Castle.
Speaker 2: Castle, New Castle, Kentucky, that's--
Speaker 1: New Castle.
Speaker 2: --X number of miles from Loui- from Eminence [Kentucky], maybe ten miles or so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --twelve miles, I don't--approximately (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Same area basically.
Speaker 2: The same area.  But at that time that was a big distance, in our heads, I mean.  I remember as a child we use to visit Eminence by way of train and for me, that was like going to Florida, in terms of the, the exotic experience of we're getting on the train, we're going to see our uncle [Carter's maternal uncle, Richard Thomas], et cetera, et cetera.  It was a very big experience.  Now the train doesn't even go that route (laughter), that changed many years ago.
Story_ID: 667349
Speaker 1: Now you said there was a story about his ancestors in slavery that you remembered.
Speaker 2: Oh, I once asked my father [Robert Carter]--I've never done the formal search and something that's around to it, some- you know, I should actually.  But before he passed, I asked about how did we get the name Carter.  And as he told the story, his--let's see I remember my great-grandfather, I think it's my great-great-grandfather, I'm not sure of the number of greats, but at least a couple of them, had a very tough slave master and supposedly beat him up, ran away, found a riverboat captain whose name was Carter and because of the connection he adopted the Carter name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's a good story.  So riverboat captain, I assume it's on the Ohio River I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I would think so.  My question never got that focused.  It probably should have in hindsight (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, maybe (unclear) from--well, you know, I don't know, you know.  Did they ever say where he was when he was in slavery?  Was it further south--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and he came up on a riverboat or what?
Speaker 2: No, I'm really not sure.  It was one of those casual conversations that in hindsight should have been pursued to more detail but it was a moment that I was happening to be curious.  One of the things that inspired some questioning a number of years ago when my older, younger daughter [Holly Carter] was in junior high and this goes, this was before the searches that they do through DNA, et cetera, had to do a paper on family.  So I wound up calling my father.  I wound up talking to my mother-in-law who was living at the, at that time, and we got information that we might not have come by.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah.  So, well, he's got a name associated with freedom anyway, I mean--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Well, Carter in your family is associated with freedom, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, as I, as I was told that story, I never thought of it one way or the other until that, I might have been, I don't know what thirty years old or so when I asked that question, and it just never occurred to me to be curious before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your father had it rough.  What was his father [Arthur Carter] doing when he was growing up, I mean it seems like he spent a lot of time with other people?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  It's one of those family links that's very, very superficial to be, to be candid.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet his father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came to Louisville [Kentucky] 'cause again most of my family, not all, but most left the rural area, and Louisville was part of migration, a big, first big city going north.  Others went to Chicago [Illinois].  Others went to Detroit [Michigan], and on the East Coast, they came to the New York [New York] area.  So it was a part of a migration in terms of mileage in a very, very small way.  And he was not the kind of grandfather that visited and, but my father and mother [Sara Thomas Carter] being very gregarious, if that's the proper term for this setting, we would go there and on the bus 'cause at that point we didn't have a car but, and although he had a car he--my brother [Jesse Carter] said he remembered him coming to our home once, that's at the point we were living in hou- housing proj- so the point being for whatever reasons he didn't supply the kind of family unity that we now think of as standard or as appropriate or as middle class it just wasn't there.  So he, as I've said from the standpoint of the experience, he probably should have been a criminal or should have been a bum or something that wasn't productive.  But he got through that and that's part of my pride because as you understand statistics a little bit and sociology a little bit and history a little bit you realize that many people in his circumstances don't survive.  Either don't survive physically or don't survive economically or soci- sociologically, whi- whichever, you know, definition might be appropriate.  And as I understood those things, it just made me very appreciative of what he, what he accomplished.
Story_ID: 667350
Speaker 1: Now I'm sure that Lincoln Institute [Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] was established for black students in need, but is there, is there a story about how your father [Robert Carter], you know, eventually enrolled--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --since he had very little family to help him, you know?
Speaker 2: Right, it was, to my knowledge, the only black school within a certain radi- high school within a certain radius, and as I understood, he just simply had the initiative, and I think that initiative is what endeared him to Dr. Young [Whitney Young, Sr.] because I, as I recall, he sensed his determination, sensed he was a good student, you know, and, so I think it was that determination 'cause I'm sure he did have the money for whatever it might have cost.  I don't know the particulars of that, but as I sort of put the pieces together his spirit and determination, you know, be- befriended him to the, to the Youngs and things were positive from that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so what did your father focus on in high school?  What kind of studies?
Speaker 2: I don't think he had a real focus equated in colle- I think it was probably just general liberal arts 'cause I don't think they had the kind of pro- they might have had some sort of industrial segment that I don't remember.  But he simply had a general diploma.  'Cause for example, my high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky] at that time, they had what they called the track system, and the track system was if you're college bound, you take one set of courses and if you're industrial bound, you take another set of courses and, but we didn't have a major per se in high school and to my knowledge they were--now you can kind of accumulate several courses in high school as you are headed toward certain directions, and to my knowledge, they didn't have that or if they did, I don't think that he was a part of any specialization.
Story_ID: 667351
Speaker 1: So I take it that your parents met in, in high school at Lincoln Institute [Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure they met at Lincoln or just before because small towns like that most blacks know everybody.  When I, years ago when I would visit--, "You must be Carter's boy," you know, that kind of familiarity.  So they could have met before high school, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how they met or--
Speaker 2: No, the only cute story that I recall, I mean I don't remember specifically about them telling how they met, but my mother's nickname was Rusty and the story that he told, he said when he first met her as a, I guess a young girl her knees looked rusty to him and literally her friends and, her close friends and my father [Robert Carter]--he never said, Sara [Sara Thomas Carter] or--it's Rusty and that, and it stuck.  Like I call my wife Pec.  Her, that's her initials.  Her name is Panchita Elizabeth Carter [Panchita Carter], and when we married I said, "Well, you're a Pec now," and I'm the--she's--prefers I'm the only one that calls her Pec.  But that--how they, how exactly they got together I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, so when did they get together was it--
Speaker 2: You mean in terms of when they, when they married, I have to see.
Speaker 1: Right, right or when did they start going together do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They married--I can give you, I think the exact date--May 5th, 'cause my wife and I wanted to get married on that day, then mechanics didn't work out, May 5, 1937.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they get married in Loui- in Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 667352
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Both and I think, as you ask that que- I think of a quick story.  You know they say you replicate or you respond very much the way your family did, and I can remember my daughter was asked, I asked her to do some kind of a job around the house, to put the dishes away or something, and it didn't get done, and I remember saying and she, and her response was well, you know, I forgot.  She might have been nine or ten or--at that time.  And I said if you take responsibility you make it a priority to remember, that's paraphrased, but that was my encouragement at the time.  What was funny about it, it was the very words my father [Robert Carter] had said--I--it was almost as though I was mimicking his comm- 'cause I remember he asked me to take out the garbage and I--my response was I forgot and he gave me this story about being responsible and you don't forget things that you're focused on or should be focused on and so forth.  So there are certain aspects that I'm sure that are from my father.  He had a sense of humor, and I'm kind of known for my weird sense of humor.  He, I think was a people person, and I certainly think of myself as being a people person.  My mother [Sara Thomas Carter] was the softer element between the two, and my father for example as I said taught my mother to cook, taught her to iron, and so I didn't grow with a macho kind of posture with regards to my relationship with my wife [Panchita Carter].  And I say that to say that when my daughters were growing up it wasn't an issue to change diapers or--matter of fact, I remember be- I remember being offended once when I remember taking my daughter, I don't know if my younger daughter [Holly Carter] was born then or not, but certainly at least my older daughter [Heather Carter] at least to a supermarket or somewhere and someone said to me, "Oh, I see you're stuck babysitting," and I was offended because I felt--why is a father babysitting and a, and a mother caregiving.  You know, to me, it's a shared experience, and I should have as much input and involvement as circumstances permit.  So I--I sensed that was from my father because of how he functioned.  He cooked, he washed dishes, he sewed, you know, it was a real team.
Story_ID: 667353
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) One of my earliest childhood mem- memories is waking up after my father [Robert Carter] and seeing scraps of food and wanting to eat what he had left, you know, a small piece of toast and so forth.  And I remember identifying that as a treat.  I mean to me that was at a certain point like ice cream, and it became such a pattern that my father at a certain--after being told by my mother [Sara Thomas Carter], would leave a little more than he normally would, or she would prepare a little bit more, whichever the case.  And to me that was I'm eating what daddy's eating.  This is, this is cool.  I don't know how old I was maybe five, you know, there- thereabouts.  (Clears throat) And also, and my, as my brother [Jesse Carter] talked about this, I'm reminded of the fact that there were times that, we didn't know it at the time, but we don't think there was quite as much food in the house as was needed or wanted and, but as my brother talked--as adults it was so shielded we never thought of that (unclear).  You know, we would come up with little stories of I don't think they ate as much as they wanted, wanted to.  So that was during that particular period as well.  This small apartment as I mentioned was a two- two room apartment and because it was such a small space there was, what is it, there's a king size, queen size and regular.  Well, if--had we a king size bed, it probably would have been from wall to wall (laughter), virtually, literally because it wasn't a question of them finding a cot for us.  It was only enough room for--so we slept at the foot for a certain period and my mother and father slept at the, at the head.  And there was no bathroom, there was only a toilet and tin tub, you know, yet we were in Louisville [Kentucky], but the apartment was you know very, by today's standards, very challenged, very challenged.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now this was public housing?
Speaker 2: No, no, that was before public housing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) oh, before public housing.
Speaker 2: We didn't have enough money to get into public housing at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: And only when my father went to the [U.S.] Marine Corps did her--his income either stabilized enough or got to the level that we were accepted in, and there's another thing I--at a certain point, as you know with public housing, you pay a certain rate relating to your income.  At a certain point, they were, they had to leave or pay X amount of dollars so, excuse me, I don't know the details of the level of, you know, the amount of money and so forth but, you know they, continued to work and finally became home owners--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as did many people grow into that posture when we were growing up.
Story_ID: 667354
Speaker 1: So now your father [Robert Carter] joins the [U.S.] Marine Corps--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a married man, right?  As (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as I recall he was drafted and he opted for the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In other words they gave him a choice.
Speaker 1: Now this is in--during the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen--let's see he was there, probably 1942, '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: So this is during World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Yeah, World War II, yeah.
Speaker 1: So drafted by the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, again as I recall, he was drafted and somehow he got a choice.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't--because I'm not sure whether the Marine Corps actively recruited and drafted.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there--well, I guess, I just want to make the point there were very few black people in the Marine Corps in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he became for lack of better--pres- president of the, what do they call the Montford [Montford Point Marine Association, Inc.]--well, for lack of better term, alumni.  In other words, there was a--he, and he was in the, ultimately in the Pacific, and I don't know his whole duties, but part of it was, he sang with the band.  My father was a singer, and I don't know whether it was out- outside of regular duties or what, but every now and then he would send us a little re- record and along with a message, I don't know if you're aware of that you could go into a booth and get certain, you know, make certain comments and give certain messages and send them back home.  Well, part of his were musical.  And by the way, because of his Marine Corps membership and being so close to my father, when I came along I wanted to go to officer's candidate school or actually called the reserve [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at my undergraduate university [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], and it conflicted with an art course that I had to take.  So for me that was a--no choice, you know, art, reserve, so I decided to take the art course and I joined the Marine Corps reserve as a freshman in college, and it was because my father was--otherwise it wouldn't have made much difference 'cause I was not ever interested in a career, but at that time I though being an officer was a cool thing to do and since that didn't work out with my college schedule, being in the Marine Corps was my next choice.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yeah, this--it's odd, it's odd to be--so he was a singer attached to the Marine Corps.  I know they had a famous Marine band [U.S. Marine Band] or something, but was he attached to that or was he--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did he sing for USO [United Service Organizations] functions?
Speaker 2: I never, never asked whether he had another--you know, my sense was it was a small band 'cause I've seen some pictures, by small, you know, four, five, six guys.  I don't remember the exact number.  So I'm not sure whether--and that might have changed.  It could have been six at one time and four at another or more, I don't know.  But I'm not sure whether it was an extracurricular responsibility or whether they did this exclusively or in the large part of the time as--in other words, when he was attached to an infantry u- unit, but got time to play for the, for the other members of the--I'm not sure how that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --how the mechanics worked.
Speaker 1: Now does he have--there are a lot of stories about World War II.  Did he share a lot of stories with you about how he was treated during the war and--
Speaker 2: Well, I heard some--there's no racial stories that I can recall.  I remember it being the Pacific because (laughter) the white GI that they, people thought that they should have had tails and so forth.  I heard stories like that, that you know, that they were told about the black soldiers, the black [U.S.] Army people.  But no real--see, I don't know if his troop or his company rather was actually engaged in battle or whether they came after the isl- islands were--'cause he was in Guam.  He was in, oh, golly I have to think, Guam comes to mind right now.  But in any event, whether they were, you know, part of the stabilizing forces that came after a confrontation I'm not sure of those details.  But he didn't have any, any horror stories or any nightmares that my father-in-law had.  So I never got the impression that the service was negative, you know, a big negative in his life.  If so he never, it never got to my brother [Jesse Carter] and I, so it seemed like a reasonably stable and comfortable period of his life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a segregated--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --service.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, seg- it was segregated.  That came along by Truman [President Harry S. Truman] much later, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think '48 [1948].  I believe the troops were integrated in--I'm not sure of that date, but that's pretty close.  It was after, after his tenure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when he came out, I guess it was around 1945 or '46 [1946] or what?
Speaker 2: About '45 [1945] 'cause I found a clipping of him going to the police force [Louisville Metro Police Department] in '48 [1948].  Yeah, I think it was '48 [1948].
Story_ID: 667355
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?  Now this is a story, I guess you got to, you know, 'cause they--well, tell us how he became a police officer [with the Louisville Metro Police Department].  I know in those days there weren't that many black police officers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, right and they only served--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --the black community at--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at one point and certainly in Louisville [Kentucky], I think this might be true beyond the borders of Louisville, there was a, oh, for lack of--a social system, a social structure, if you will, and being a policeman and, or fireman and, or postman was kind of equivalent to being a teacher or being a--well, there was the doctor, lawyer, teacher and then, and the civil service community were not all peers--had social standing if, if you will.  It wasn't considered quote, blue collar, and as my brother [Jesse Carter] moved around the community, many times people would say, "Are you Officer Carter's [Robert Carter] boy," because he was known as one of the potent people (laughter) of the, of the community.  It, I think was simply a good stabilizing job, and one of the motives he mentioned one time, I don't know, my great-grandfather was murdered in a robbery, because of a robbery, and I think that at one point he felt maybe if he becomes a policeman there might be something that he would discover as to how that happened, but I'm not sure how realistic it was or whether it was an intense concern.  But I do remember that was mentioned at one particular point.  But it was, it was--aside from the fact that he saw it as a community service, it was a very stable appreciated job at that point be- being, being the black policeman.  Matter fact when he became a detective it was about the time integration was moving, and he was assigned to the downtown area looking for shoplifters because at that time no one ever assumed that a black could be a detective, so he--the professional shoplifters, not the guy that steals a candy bar or what- weren't aware of he and a couple of others that were there dressed in their suits and ties, that they would possibly be, you know, agents looking for them.
Story_ID: 667356
Speaker 1: So he, he became a detective?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was he the first black detective in the community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He might have been, 'cause I don't know who was first because there was a whole, there was a group, you know, maybe half dozen that were detect- matter of fact, I mentioned off camera that he was a deputy coroner before he died.  Well, that came about primarily because there was a rob- my wife [Panchita Carter] and I, my family, we were in Louisville [Kentucky] at the time, and it came over the radio that a policeman was killed, and a detective was killed, and a policeman was injured, and a detective was injured in a robbery, and we were driving, and my mother [Sara Thomas Carter] said, "I got the feeling that your father [Robert Carter] was in that," and of course, I said, "Ah, you know, it's not likely."  As it turned out, my father was the detective that was injured.  He was shot in the neck and had it been a hair's breadth different it would have been over.  Long story short, he fully recovered.  He survived and fully recovered and did a couple of things and ultimately came to being a deputy coroner.  But had that not happened, he might have retired as a detective.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he--the wound I guess kind of qualified him for a, I mean a job that was a little, a little less rigorous than being on the street and--
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't really go to the deputy--he was, there was a senior citizens residence that he was responsible--it came through some government funding and our church.  I don't know what percentage of money, who gave what, but the point being he was, he initiated that structure as a big apartment complex.  I don't know how many units, hundred units or so, and he was manager for five minutes, or I say that figuratively but for a year or two and something--the opportunity to get involved with the coroner's office developed, and he got the training and became deputy coroner.  So that's what he did before he passed and before he retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he like that--the job?
Speaker 2: He seemed to because I remember him saying he felt it was a service that he could provide and because in Louisville the coroner's office is called if you die within twenty-four hours after going to the hospital or die outside of the hospital.  So he would actually investigate and follow up particulars with--even going to the home or go to wherever, or someone drowned or whatever outside the hospital, and he felt that he was making it somewhat easier for the people that had gone through those kinds of traumas, and I couldn't do it.  One time he showed me a photograph of a body that had been shot and because it hit the heart immediately the guy died with his eyes open and that was, that was enough for me to say that's something I could never do.  It was just not something that I emotionally am built for.  But he felt it was okay and again thought, literally thought it as a ser- as he did when he was a policeman [with the Louisville Metro Police Department].  It was compensating in terms of he got X number of dollars but, and I think he was, if not the first, one of the first deputy coroners in the area.
Speaker 1: I think he would have to have been one of the first, yeah.  Did he have any stories about being a coroner that he, that he told do you?
Speaker 2: Nothing that, you know, was exciting, you know, because he worked for, what was it, twenty-four hours and off--kind of like the firemen, they work for long shifts, and they're off for a couple of days or a day or whatever it was, and he was on call, you know, and, so he--during that time, he might go out and stay all night.  On a few rare occasions, he wouldn't get a call at all, but nothing that Hollywood would (laughter) want to make a story of that I, that I recall.
Story_ID: 667357
Speaker 1: Now back to you growing up.  Now did, did you--to your knowledge, were there any other artists in your family?  Now it's you, it's you and your--you had a brother, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how many children?
Speaker 2: Just two of us.
Speaker 1: Just two so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just two of us, yeah.
Speaker 1: You and your brother, and your brother is younger?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was fourteen months younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and got an architectural engineer degree, and his last position he was with the Indiana Highway Department [Indiana State Highway Department] monitoring equal empl- employment.  In other words, if you had a job with the, with the state you were supposed to have minority involved, so that was his last job.
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Jesse, J-E-S-S-E (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jesse, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Jesse Carter.
Story_ID: 667358
Speaker 1: Now when did you, I guess, discover that you were, that you liked art?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember when I don't or didn't have the interest and the story that I, when I was three, I showed interest and just one thing led to another.  One of the weird people that's went one direction, you know, and I admire people that, you know, work ten years as a lawyer and ten years as an engineer and ten, you know, whatever.  And I've said, I've always been involved with this zone in one way or the other, whether it's illustrating or in tele- you know, always involved in the visual.  And I was once on a panel and someone asked me, "What would you do, what do you think you'd do if you never went into art?"  And I thought about it for about five seconds and said, "Mugging" (laughter) because--and it was a face- facetious way of saying, I don't see myself outside of this zone.
Speaker 1: You might have a chip on your shoulder if you couldn't do art (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, might have it, right, right.  It's just something, you know, whe- whether it's lecturing about art of whether it's designing some project for television or for a mural, it's all about art and--
Speaker 1: Did you, what did you first do, I mean what forms did your art take when you were a little kid?  Did you draw first or color or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I have a painting that if at one point you inject some photographs, I'll show.  It was a painting--(gesture), it's about so big, it was a copy of a paint, a couch size paint.  We had a painting over our couch.  It was about thirty-six inches, twenty-four or so, and I copied it, and it's a ver- you know I was what nine years old or so, it's a terrible painting by professional standards, but it was so meaningful because I was encouraged by my family to do your thing.  And my mother [Sara Thomas Carter] took this little painting to a framer and in hindsight, spent a lot of money for it for that time, and to me, it was simply the kind of support that I thought all parents, you know, provided, and I just kind of took it for granted.  And as I've--have gotten older, I have talked to many adults who were actually discouraged from going into art because are you kidding you can't make a living doing that or maybe you should have a real job first and all those kind of cliches.  So I never, ever was discouraged but always encouraged and as I said, at a certain point I took it for granted and as a young adult, I began to realize that they were exceptional.  Now my mother had a sensitivity to decorating and clothing, but she was never trained as an artist, and as I said, my father [Robert Carter] was--he could have been a professional musician.  And I once asked him why didn't he want to do that or why didn't he pursue it and going back to leaving the service and going to the civil service as a, as a policeman, it represented a certain security and he felt that, you know, doing the Chitlin' Circuit, which is what was available to blacks at the time, was too unstable and that potential for in- instability was too close to the kind of instability that he experienced and he didn't want that for his family.  So every now and then I wonder, you know, could he have, you know, been successful from a, what do you call it, economic point of view had he gone 'cause he had a rich voice and the closest to it that I think was Billy Eckstine.  I don't know if you remember Billy Eckstine.  The rich--
Speaker 1: Oh, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: --robust voice.  Not his style, but he had that rich kind of tone.  So the most singing he did once he got out of the service was in church and, you know, in--at home in the shower or whatever, but he didn't, didn't pursue it professionally.
Story_ID: 667359
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What were some of the--well, tell us about your neighborhood and, and where you grew up, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I grew up--most of my growing up was in the, in the housing project [Beecher Terrace], and the housing project in Louisville [Kentucky] was similar to a townhouse format.  You know, they were only three stories tall, you had your own entrance and a very small yard.  As opposed to New York [New York], the housing projects that I know of were high rises where you--they're like giant apartment buildings, and we had a, you know, network of young people that--where it's kind of divided by which court you lived in because they were buildings facing each other throughout a certain area, and we had our own little football team that played another court.  We had a small playground and recreation center, and there was nothing and (unclear)--there was never nothing to do that I'm trying to--you always had friends around and everything from playing ball to comic book trading.  At that time, comic books were very popular, and you had so many and you would read them and in order to not have to buy more, you would go to your friends and trade them.  Marbles, you know, all the, all the street games that were inexpensive and cheap to do.  I remember when our football wore out after hitting the pavement so many times the bladder, the skin, the leather or plastic would wear and the bladder would show and then it would hit and break.  So we would, if it was at a point where no one had the money or our parents had money to buy a new--we used to play with an oatmeal can, (unclear) oatmeal box stuffed with paper and that was our football until somebody could come up with money to play, to find another one--to pay for another one.  It was, it was, you know, it--a lot of good times and at a certain you think of them as the good old days.  There was times that you kind of dreamed of the outside world and not being quote, in the hood, and it reminds me--I'm a movie buff, and I collect them, I've lectured on them and so forth.  I'm not the expert that Robert Os- Osborne is, but I have some--or [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle.  I don't know if you--
Speaker 1: Bogle, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I read everything that they do, but I don't claim the original expertise.  So anyway--but I'm, but I'm very conscious of how movies and the cultural, the art world, music world affect us.  So if you remember, the wealthy would often have these white phones, and if you saw this white phone, you know that's a wealthy family.  So I remember when my brother [Jesse Carter] and I were about, oh, I don't know ten years old, we saved money and there was a--in the, in the dime store, there were these covers that you could put over your black phone 'cause all the phones were black, and we had a party line too by the way.  You couldn't get a single line, or if you could, you probably couldn't have afforded it.
Speaker 1: A party line is, for those who are watching this now or in the future, was a line that--well, just describe--
Speaker 2: Well, more than one pe- one family had the same line and, so when the phone rang, it rang in up to four other houses and, but your ring was a long and a short or two longs or two shorts and a long and so forth, and you're only supposed to pick it up when it was your ring.  And if you were paranoid, you never said anything important 'cause you never knew whether these other three or four families were also listening.  But being influenced by the movie, we thought that my mother [Sara Thomas Carter] and father [Robert Carter] deserved to live like Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers, so we bought this plastic cover and put it over our phone and it had a band that went around the wire, so ostensibly it looked like the phones that you saw in the movies.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what's funny is that we had to save up for that.  Let's say it cost eight dollars or something.  It took us weeks to get that eight dollars, and for Christmas, my folks had the white phone.  Now fast forward until I'm about twenty, no, I'm about thirty, and we are building onto this home, and I decided that I wanted to continue this style of living, so I put a jack on the patio so that someone could call me while I'm sitting on the patio (laughter) and I would enjoy the same privilege as I saw in the movie.  What's interesting is that no one ever called me when I was sitting on the patio (laughter) and, so it was never put to--and then we did some more building and where that phone is now inside the house.  But I literally remember being influenced by wanting to have this phone outdoors and being able to do as the, as the movie kind of people did.  But it's an ex- very tangible story of how I felt that certain symbols were important at that time.
Story_ID: 667360
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: First school, Dunbar elementary [Paul Laurence Dunbar School] in Louisville [Kentucky] and then we moved to the projects [Beecher Terrace] and then we went to Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, S.C. Taylor [Samuel Coleridge-Taylor Elementary School; Samuel Coleridge-Taylor Montessori Elementary School, Louisville, Kentucky] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--now these are important people.  Now Dunbar High School named for--
Speaker 2: No, elementary, Dunbar elementary.
Speaker 1: Dunbar elementary named for--
Speaker 2: Paul Laurence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He's a famous poet, black poet from Dayton, Ohio, my hometown.
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, the Dayton, Ohio I didn't know.  I knew the poet.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where's he's from.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then Samuel Coleridge-Taylor that's a, that's like a middle school or--
Speaker 2: No, that was elementary.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: No, we just moved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you moved, okay.
Speaker 2: We moved to the projects and that literally was around the corner from where we, where we lived.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Samuel Coleridge-Taylor was a black composer so--
Speaker 2: And then we went to--my brother [Jesse Carter] and I went to Madison Junior High [Madison Street Junior High School; Harvey C. Russell Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Madison Junior High, okay.
Speaker 2: And Central High [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that the black school in Louisville?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Mumbles), okay.
Speaker 2: That was the, there was only a small, very small Catholic school, oth- other than that if you went to high school, you had to go to Central.  Let me just share a story that comes to mind in mentioning Central.  As you, you know, walk this journey every now and then, you get a certificate or an award recognizing some factor or another and then you feel very appreciative and certainly I do and humbled because sometimes you don't know that anyone has ever noticed.  But one of the ones that I'm most proud of literally is distinguished graduate from Central and of all the little recognitions, that's a very, very spe- because I feel so spiritually close to Central and humble because people like Muhammad Ali was one of the first, Leonard Lyles, who was the first football player to become professional from Louisville and that--
Speaker 1: Lenny Lyles?  (Unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lenny Lyles, yeah, Lenny Lyles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were--Ali was, what born in '42 [1942] I think right and he was little younger than you.
Speaker 2: He's about four years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, younger than you, all right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: But you knew his family being from Louisville?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't really know them well.  I knew the brother well because he was a student of mine.  I was teaching for the first year after finishing undergraduate school [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], and he was doing--meeting, Ru- his name was Rudy at that time.  Rudy was finishing his senior year, and I met Muhammad (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you mean Rudy Clay [Rudolph Clay], right?
Speaker 2: Rudy Clay, which at that time Cassius Clay's brother, and his name became Rahman [Rahman Ali] and Muhammad Ali was, of course, the name we know so well today.  So I met him and I boxed for a short time, so I knew some of the people like George King [sic. Don King], who knew him much better.  George King was one of the people also, you know, if you remember when Muhammad Ali first won the gold medal, a team of businesspeople pulled together to monitor, to manage, to help, help him along, so George King was a friend of mine that was a part of that, that initial team.
Story_ID: 667361
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, golly, I have to do a litany, you know, both in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky] and in high school.  The, probably the, one of the strongest influence, and he probably never knew it, was Mr. Wilson [ph.] who taught wood shop and--
Speaker 1: Was he in elementary or-
Speaker 2: No, this was in junior high [Madison Street Junior High School, Louisville, Kentucky] at this point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Junior high.
Speaker 2: There are elementary people that I love and admired like Mrs. Gibson [ph.], Mrs. Taylor [ph.], and as I, as I, as I mentioned that my--I'm using the proper protocol because although I'm a dinosaur at this, at this stage of life, I still think of them as Mr. and Mrs., you know, and if any of them were living or if I encounter--there are certain people that I would still say Mr.  It's just the protocol that I grew up with.  But these are, those are some of the elementary people that I feel, you know, remember a very warm connection, but the influence is broader as I would, I would see it.  But a very tangible direct was Mr. Wilson who taught shop, and I remember and if he were living he wouldn't even remember, but we used--at that point you learned to use a lot of hand tools, and we were doing this project where you had to use a plane and a spokeshave, et cetera, and long story short this young man comes to Mr. Wilson and says, "Mr. Wilson, can I go to the next stage," and Mr. Wilson says, "Well, that isn't level yet," and he said, "Well, you know, if you let me go to the next stage, no one will ever know it," and he said, "Yes, but you'll know it," and that stuck with me.  If he were living, I'm sure he wouldn't even remember that, but I overheard that and it, and to this day I feel part of craftsmanship is a very critical, you know, part of my concern and that grew out of the shop, I mean because I hadn't put all of my involvements, you know, there's a certain point where you sort of pull your things, your understanding together and what you, how you feel about let's say your ethics in church is how you feel about your ethics in life, but there's a certain point, certain things are separated, not necessarily ethics, but certain involvement and, so I hadn't thought of art, I thought of it as a, as a hand skill, but not a focused crafts- craftsman's attitude and I taught there as I said for a year because of--the art teacher that taught me had an accident and that's how I happened to teach Rudy, Rudy Clay [Rudolph Clay; Rahman Ali] at that time.  And, so because he liked art, he would do some sculpture, and we would, we would talk and collaborate, but he's one and then oh, golly, Mrs. Wauthen [ph.].  See our school never had an art teacher until I was a junior.  The school started in whenever, I don't remember 1910, 1890, I don't remember the date Central [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky] was founded, but whenever it never had an art teacher.  So when I got to be a junior, by chance they did, and Mrs. Wauthen was that art teacher, and it was because of her that I, that I was led to two scholarships, and she just had that personal interest.  And that was one of the features that endeared me to Central because you really had a connection and you really felt that people cared.  It wasn't simply after three o'clock or whenever school let out, it's over, you really got the feeling they were part of the community.  And I remember she came to my, Mrs. Wauthen came to my house, which to me was like a pope visiting because a teacher coming to my house, you know, to pick up my portfolio, and one was a scholarship from Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation].  And it's interesting my older daughter [Heather Carter] is now the market research director for Scholastic and that became an item of interest at one point when she first got there because they asked me to judge one of their regional shows and so forth, and they have stories about others that, other, other artists that came through their scholarship system and they are now doing whatever they are doing but that--strictly coincidence.
Story_ID: 667362
Speaker 1: In college, there was--
Speaker 2: Let's get you out of high school now.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: You said you said you graduated with honors from Central [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: No, we didn't have that honors system (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You didn't have that.
Speaker 1: No, I was in the upper tier but that's another story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: We didn't have an honors--
Speaker 2: Now did you run for--
Speaker 1: --label.
Speaker 2: --class office or do any of that sort of thing in high school?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: Or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did you illustrate the yearbook or anything?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I worked in the library.  I worked--as a matter of fact, I found some pictures of the whole library staff.  See we were on the cusp of--this was in--so I finished high school in '55 [1955].  The [U.S.] Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was--
Speaker 2: In '54 [1954], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fifty-four [1954] and, so things were--the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] integrated about--in '52 [1952] and seemed to be anticipating--'52 [1952], '53 [1953].  We were on the cusp of things changing.
Speaker 2: Desegregation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so actually I found this article, which I didn't even remember where a whole team of us went to some kind of library conference in the state, and they, and I found this photograph.  Probably--and the local paper was the Louisville Defender, the local black paper.  I'm not sure whether, whether it was the Courier-Journal or Louisville that photograph was of.
Speaker 2: Related to the Chicago Defender I believe, or was it or was it?
Speaker 1: No, not direct- not that I know of.
Speaker 2: They had a Tri-State Defender for Tennessee I think, and I know it was out of Memphis [Tennessee] but--
Speaker 1: Tri-State, yeah, I don't, I'm not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --familiar with that.  The Louisville Defender was run by Frank Stanley [Frank L. Stanley, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And his son [Frank L. Stanley, Jr.] was two years ahead of me and that's one of my first freelance jobs you asked about.  I used to do some cartoons and so forth occasionally for the Louisville Defender.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were still in high school when you were doing that?
Speaker 1: No, at that point I was, what was I--either just--well, in undergraduate school or just had finished 'cause I was in Louisville [Kentucky] about three or four years after finishing.
Story_ID: 667363
Speaker 1: Let me just go back to high school graduation [from Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  You--what were your aspirations--
Speaker 2: Oh, to be in the art world (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at high school graduation?
Speaker 2: To be in the art world.
Speaker 1: To be an artist, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And did you have a path--
Speaker 2: Since three, since three.
Speaker 1: --in your mind or clear path of how you were going to do that?
Speaker 2: No, just--
Speaker 1: Did you think you had to finish school or go to college to be an artist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was convin- see, as my brother [Jesse Carter] and I said it wasn't a question of whether you went to college, it was a question of where you're going to college.  That was just an automatic for my, for my brother and I.  It never occurred to me to bypass college and simply take part--one I didn't, I think, I didn't think I knew enough and I, and for me college seemed to be the most expedient way of knowing something, unlike Bob Thompson who is a Louisville [Kentucky] artist that was very fortunate, he left college, came to New York [New York], was found almost like a movie star and became an established figure without college background.  Well, without finishing 'cause he did go, go for a couple of years.  Well, no, the first year was a medical student and second year as an art student.
Story_ID: 667364
Speaker 1: So when you were graduating, did you have, did you know what school you were going to or what, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the scholarship, you know, had you talked to me as a senior in high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky] or a junior I probably would say I'd like to go to the Lu- University of Siberia (laughter) and that's just a humorous way of saying I thought being far away was exotic and appropriate and because both scholarships led me to the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky], it seemed to be the logical choice.  So I had the Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] and the Eleanor Hight scholarship [sic. Marcia Hite Endowment].  [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam also had the Hight scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--maybe Ed Hamilton also, but I know Sam did.  Sam was the first at the University of Louisville to get his master's [degree] and first, I'm sorry, get his master's in art.  There was, there was an undergraduate before--oh, no, I'm sorry he was the second.  I'm sorry, Greg Ridley was the first, and Sam was the second.
Story_ID: 667365
Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors at the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] that--who--
Speaker 2: The closest to that was a Mary Spencer Nay.  Not formally a mentor, but she took personal intere- as a matter of fact, she is responsible for my winning my first regional award.  I got an honorable mention, which I thought was--she entered an exhibit that was a regional exhibit in the Kentucky, Indiana area, Kentucky, Indiana area.  I don't remember where the exhibit was, but she came back and said, "Your lithograph won honorable mention."  Well, my goodness, that was to me hallelujah time, amen time and so forth (laughter) and so on.  And I remember her taking a couple other students and I to exhibits outside of the city, in Cincinnati [Ohio] and other areas that she thought was important.  So she was a very, very important person in the undergraduate because in hindsight, because of my shyness and also because of segregation, I thought college professors just walked on water, and you don't talk to them, you ask for permission to be in their presence practically.  I literally--but she broke that down.  You know, she was a person in a real tangible sense and with exception to one--there was only one black faculty member in the whole college because before that Municipal College [Louisville Municipal College, Louisville, Kentucky] was the black wing of University of Louisville, and they closed the Municipal and they hired one guy, his name was Dr. Parrish [Charles H. Parrish, Jr.], whose daughter [Ursula Parrish] now teaches in Bergen--
Speaker 1: So you--okay.
Speaker 2: --Community College [Bergen Community College, Paramus, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: They had more black faculty there before they closed (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, the whole Municipal College was black faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the University of Louisville only brought one to their campus.  Supposedly they had some sort of placement system that was, as I understood and as I heard as a younger person, it was kind of feeble, but let's--I know how big, how many--let's say there was thirty, forty college faculty at Municipal College, only one, Dr. Parrish was hired.  So my--I say that to say that Mary Spencer Nay, the professor that I was referring to a moment ago, saw beyond color because she was, you know, part of the white community.
Story_ID: 667366
Speaker 1: Now the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] that's a private school, right?
Speaker 2: It is now, it was then [sic.].  I think now it's city supported or--
Speaker 1: Is it--
Speaker 2: --or state supported, I'm not sure which, but it was then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the Municipal College [Louisville Municipal College, Louisville, Kentucky] would have been a--
Speaker 2: A wing.
Speaker 1: --city--would have been a city supported.
Speaker 2: No, no, it was a subsidiary.  Well, I'm not sure how the money was funneled I just, you know, it was--
Speaker 1: The subsidiary of the University of Louisville.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in other words, if you went to Municipal, you were black.  If you went to the University of Louisville, you were white.  It was just that simple.  So--
Speaker 1: So that's how they segregated you all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so eventually they integrated and that was just before '54 [1954], so it was about '52 [1952], '53 [sic. 1951].  So when I came along it had been integrated for three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what was college life like for you in this newly integrated environment?
Speaker 2: Well, being in the art--there was two communities that I, in which I resided.  One was the art community of art, other art students, and the other was the Baptist Student Union, and the Baptist Student Union was white run because at that time the Baptist associations were segregated.  The Southern Baptists [Southern Baptist Convention] were white, the National Baptists [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], the American Baptist associations [American Baptist Churches USA] were black and, but this Baptist Student Union welcomed me and my very close friend who we're still in contact with, Emmanuel McCall [HistoryMaker Reverend Emmanuel McCall].  He became the first black president, which was resented by the--what was then referred to as the Long Run association [Long Run Baptist Association], which is regional division of the Southern Baptist because they said, "Well, he's not from one of the churches that support us financially."  Of course, it was racial, racial.  But the white students stood behind him and, so he became the first black president of the Baptist Student Union and that was an, kind of an extended family.  A couple of those people I still am in contact with.  Emmanuel McCall went on to be a pastor and one of the first to be an executive in the Southern Baptist system and got his doctorate in theology, taught in seminary [Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Louisville, Kentucky].  In other words, he pursued the church community and very, very successful.  One of these guys that I am very close to and feel proud of though I had nothing to do with his success, but there's certain people that you encounter and say, "Yep, that's my boy I was in school with him," you know.  So there's a landsman kind of pride and connection that I have with Mac.  He's written a couple of books.  Feel very pleased to cross his path at the time.  Whenever I go to Atlanta [Georgia], we always hook up if he's in town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you all have the traditional black fraternities and sororities on campus?
Speaker 2: Never joined, not a joiner.  I guess I would have welcomed being in the sororities, but they wouldn't have me (laughter).  No, seriously I'm just not a joiner.  I--see, because University of Louisville was segregated, the--there was just a few of us that went at that time, so if anything happened, it was, I was a part of it.  You know, I was a part of the NAACP Youth Council and initiated stuff like going to the White Citizens' Council meeting, picketing and all the stuff that happened during that period.  So I never felt left out because we were, there were so few of us.  If you went to, what was the other college there, it was a Catholic school.  I'm blocking on its name now.  Anyway there's a couple of other colleges and, plus it was, you know, a dozen of us on the campus in different, different age levels and disciplines.  So I never felt left out and I, not being a joiner, I just never became a part of that community.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now by the time you were, you majored in art then right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 667367
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1960.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay, all right.
Speaker 2: From the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: All right.  So what were your prospects then or did I, now did I miss anything (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, see I've always been a, been an alcoholic, see--alcoholic (laughter)?  Workaholic, I said (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was getting ready to say.  I was like, okay.  We got to get the story.
Speaker 2: Is it Freudian?  I don't know.  It's funny because I'm a teetoler and always have been.  I've never, you know, so it's maybe some kind of Freudian slip.  But I've always been a workaholic.  So when I was a junior an opportunity to work for the local television station [WHAS-TV, Louisville, Kentucky] developed as a scenic artist.  So I did that and was the first black in the area to do that.  But once I graduated, this opportunity to teach developed, so I wound up being at the TV station and at the school system [Louisville Public Schools] and I did freelance work and I was in the Marine Corps Reserve [U.S. Marine Corps Forces Reserves].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the only time that I had doubts or--uncertain of what's next financially was when I came to New York [New York] to do my graduate work [at Pratt Institute].
Speaker 1: Now I don't want to speed past this television station (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh!
Speaker 1: --(unclear) now these are the days when televisions did their own commercials, produced a lot of local programming--
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: --and stuff for kids, a lot of stuff for kids.
Speaker 2: We did all that.
Speaker 1: So what kind of stuff--
Speaker 2: You're very informed, you're right.
Speaker 1: Well, I used to watch it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, and, so that's all, and I know there were--somebody in my hometown was making puppets and doing all and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --posters and community service announcements were illustrated by who--somebody in the office (unclear), so how did--what kind of stuff did you do and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm--well, I'll tell you, I feel blessed in so many ways and that sounds very trite to some people but I really do.  I ran into--you mentioned school influences, and I gave you a few, but the people I worked with in TV--I learned so much.  You know, it pulled me way out of the hood, way out of the university because I was with one of the cartoonists--was a former Disney employee [The Walt Disney Company].  Dan White [ph.] was the, was the art director, had done, had been an art director here in New York and he had come back to Louisville [Kentucky].  I learned from a--I'm blocking on the name, I hope I'll think of it later.  But I worked initially as a scenic artist under, I'm going through a mental block now, but, and I learned, you know, all about that.  I later did lighting, you know, T- TV lighting, and we did have children shows.  We had--one of our big shows was 'Hayloft Hoedown,' which was a local equivalent to 'Hee Haw.'  I don't know if you remember the network show 'Hee Haw.'
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And we did the sets for all of that.
Speaker 1: 'Hayloft Hoedown,' okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Hayloft Hoedown' with Randy Atcher.
Speaker 1: So you had to paint like scenes of the country, the bucolic countryside (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, for that show.  Very often you would, you'd do a, do a rural, rural scene.  What was interesting is that we'd--we broadcast in black and white at that point, so that meant we saved time by working in black and white but you, so you were contrast conscious, but the audience always assumed it was in color, but it wasn't.  At that point, local stations didn't have the option of broadcasting in color.  I don't know if you go back to remember that far, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I learned set construction.  Matter of fact my studio is set up with some influences of--I have a radial arm saw with almost a twenty foot run so I can rip the whole piece on this platform.  And I set that up similar to what we had in television.  I not only learned scenic art but I learned construction, design, set designing and construction and a lot of that has influence a lot of things that I do today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, yeah, I guess it would and, so--
Speaker 2: I was fascinated by the way.  I loved it.  The only reason I got out of it was when I came to New York to do my graduate work, the New York area is unionized, and the test for scenic art or set design, I don't remember which, whichever it was it was offered a few weeks prior to my coming, a few months prior to my coming and didn't roll around until another year, and I'd developed this addiction to food.  I had to eat every day so therefore I fell into doing other things just by virtue of what was available and my not being in the union.
Story_ID: 667368
Speaker 1: Now how did you or why did you or how did you come to decide to move to New York [New York]?  Was it going--to go to school, or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, just the mecca.  You know, I felt that New York needed [HistoryMaker] Bob Carter (laughter), not the other way around.  No, but seriously, you know, it's like why do entertainers come and so forth.  I really felt it was the place to be because I came with the intent of doing graduate study and staying.  Matter of fact, Sam was going to come to New York, [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam, who is a fellow Louisvillian and he was--
Speaker 1: Were you, were you all good friends in school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: At that time we were, he was doing his graduate work while I was in undergraduate school [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky].  He'd gone to the Navy [sic. U.S. Army], come--I think it was Navy, come back--spent a couple of years there, come back, he came back to start graduate when I started as a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his marriage, his wife was, Dorothy [HistoryMaker Dorothy B. Gilliam] was connected to The Washington Post, and she was at that time relatively new, and quite frankly at that time, I didn't realize what a large figure she was in the, in the journal world.
Speaker 1: Yeah, National Press Club just yes- yesterday gave, I mean over the weekend gave her a big award.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the point being she was grounded, and he was at that time struggling.  So he detoured to Washington [D.C.], and I came here.  Matter of fact both of our first trips to New York as a visitor, we rode together in his Volkswagen and that was (unclear). I moved here for graduate school in '63 [1963] and, so we must have visited in '61 [1961] or '62 [1962] and made the trip in the wintertime in his, in his Volkswagen, small world (laughter).
Story_ID: 667369
Speaker 1: When you went to New York [New York] did you have a job set up or something or--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And, so what did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first direct encounter with--'cause I was welcomed at WHA- WHAS [WHAS-TV] was the CBS affiliate station in Louisville [Kentucky] I was referring to a moment ago.  I was welcomed there and, you know, met people like Colonel Sanders and Langston Hughes and others, you know, because you're there and you're the, you're the local guy that's visible, you know, local guy.  So, yeah, I got to meet these people.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute you met them in New York and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I met those in Louisville.
Speaker 1: In Louisville (unclear)--
Speaker 2: See because when Loui- we had a talk show and anybody prominent or interesting, if they could talk them into being on the talk show, they came to WHAS.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Phyllis Knight was the host- hostess and, so, you know, I'm there working and I would, either they would seek me out, you know, like "Hey, we got a brother over here you might want to meet," or I would seek them out like what's his name Harland Sanders, the Colonel Sanders guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He wasn't looking for me, but obviously he was an interesting personality, so I came out and said hello, you know.  So that was just a, you know, great experience.  But I was going somewhere else where--
Speaker 1: So, okay.  In New York (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, all those people the ones I mentioned and some others I met right there in, in Louisville.  But I had no job.  The only thing that was anchored was my acceptance in graduate school [Pratt Institute, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 667370
Speaker 1: Now I'll tell you another quick story.  I was one of the first, if not the first, to teach a special workshop in a Jewish center in Louisville [Kentucky].  Things that sound so, so trivial now was a big deal then.  In the Marine Corps [U.S. Marine Corps Forces Reserves], I met a Gene Aronowitz [ph.].  We were co-Marines and he had finished his graduate work at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and I was on my way, so he wrote a letter of reference in--to a center in the Bronx [New York] and, so I knew that all I had to do was get to New York [New York], call up, and this letter of reference was going to get me a job.  Well, I called up and said, "I'm [HistoryMaker] Bob Carter, you remember I got--you received a letter from Gene Aronowitz," and they said, "Oh, fine come on up," and when I got there he said, "Oh, no, you're not, you're not Bob Carter."  "Yeah, I'm Bob Carter."  And he said, "I can't hire you."  Now at that time, it was probably against the law to discriminate.  Certainly it is now too, and he made it very clear, you're black, and my folk wouldn't, wouldn't accept you.  It was a Jewish center to be, to be, to be candid (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was no EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] then--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--
Speaker 1: So I know--again it may not have been against the law, but I knew that I had been quote, wronged, but there's a certain stage that you become a pragmatic fighter.  You lose the battle but you win the war.  So rather than picketing or calling some civil rights activist, I just moved forward.  You know who was responsible for getting me my first job indirectly?  Whitney Young.  My father [Robert Carter], I called my father and I said, "Do you know how to get in touch with Whitney Young," and he, and I called the Urban League [National Urban League] and (unclear) I never met him.  What happened, he said, "Well," through the secretary, "tell him to try the Clark Employment Agency [ph.]," which was a black employment agency and that was my first job, so two or three days after I got to New York, I had a job.  But it was through his information that I, that I, 'cause I never heard of, you know, you know, I just got off the turnip truck, what do I know about what's here.  But fortunately there was no real struggle.  You know, with- within a few days, I had a job.
Speaker 2: That's something, okay.
Story_ID: 667371
Speaker 1: So you're going to Pratt Institute [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you're working and, so you, you earned your M.F.A. in what was it--
Speaker 2: At Pratt.
Speaker 1: In two years is it, was it two (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, three.
Speaker 1: Three.
Speaker 2: Actually three and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll tell you why, one I was going part time.  Being a workaholic, I had two jobs and--going to graduate school and when it came time--when I finished my coursework I looked at my inventory and I didn't like it.  I just didn't think it was cohesive.  I didn't think it had the punch that it should have so I didn't apply for the degree and I, you know, did some more prodding and working and applied for the degree.  So technically I could have finished, even part time I could have finished in like two and a half years, and it wound up being three and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is--
Speaker 2: If you're full time you'll probably finish in two years.
Speaker 1: Is there some, is there a real sig- significant work that you produced during this period of time that you want to tell us about (unclear), for your M.F.A.?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm probably more excited about the written thesis.  As you move forward, the work in hindsight I think was acceptable, you know, acceptable, but the written material that went with it, I haven't read it.  I was telling somebody I haven't read it in maybe ten, twelve years, but even at that point, which was years after I finished, I didn't feel embarrassed.  Sometimes you write something or paint something and you look back and say, "Man, what was I, what was I thinking about?"  I felt very pleased because it forced me to find a direct connection between theory and fact and the research that reinforced that.  So I think that was probably, for me, more significant than the work--the work as I look back at it is--it's acceptable, but I don't feel that it's--I don't think that a hundred years from now anyone will care (laughter), really.  But it got me from point A to point B.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the theme of your paper?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to--the, it was the--I'm trying to remember the exact title.  It was a tie between our thinking and understanding of the world with the image and that's very vague.  I have to look back again.  Had I known you'd ask that I'd go find (laughter)--but at the time, as I said, it was very important for me to say exactly what I mean--meant rather and mean what I, what I said before that.  And a Professor Richenburg [Robert Richenburg], who was at Pratt, made me very conscious of focus thinking.  And I remember at one point presenting my work in graduate painting and I said something very generic about I want to do something that's recognizable but more and I want to make a solid impact, and it sounded vague, very superficial.  And he said, "Well what do you mean by more, what do you mean by real," and it made me really focus and it not only affected my thinking and work but it affected my teaching.  I find that he was a very bright man.  He came with books and he would read an excerpt and tie that into some kind of concept, and I find that I do that.  You know, I'm a bookaholic and there are times I'll bring a book in and only read a page and maybe not just, only just refer to it and make it relevant to some, you know, some point.
Story_ID: 667372
Speaker 1: I was asking you off camera about when did you--about 1962, I guess you became associated with [HistoryMaker] David Driskell and some of the history of black artists and that sort of thing and the history of black artist attempts to organize themselves and that sort of thing.  And tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, there was an artist in Louisville [Kentucky] by the name of Eugenia Dunn, and she had taught at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I can't remember the other, other college but she was very close to NCA [National Conference of Artists] and she had attended the first year, and I didn't know her or the group and had come back to Loui- she was a Louisville native, back to Louisville and said, "You've got to come."  And the second meeting was in Atlanta [Georgia], so I went to Atlanta and was introduced to a lot of, [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs and a lot of the people that are icons today and had no idea of these people's importance.  They were just nice people that painted like I did.  What also put me out of that loop was the fact that one, I went to the University of Louisville [Louisville, Kentucky] as opposed to a black, historically black college [HBCU], and also my first real employment was in television but that's another whole industry.  You know every area has kind of its click or its grouping.  And it was also my first time to be in Atlanta and the first time I'd been exposed to such, for lack of a better way putting it, aggressive large middle class achievements and we had--I remember one of our luncheons was at the Paschal brothers [Paschal's Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia], the first time I had ever been to a restaurant where a doorman with gold epaulets, you know, on, you know, opening your door and I said, "Doggone, this must be heaven," you know, Atlanta--and then they had tourism, at that time one of the outstanding black residential areas where you could see a nice home here, a nice home--well, see that was just way beyond the scope of Louisville's achieving group, and we had achievers, but not in that volume or that sort of thing.  So all that happened to me at one time, one, to meet these art people that I really didn't know much about and to, and then to be exposed to NCA and to be exposed to some of the profile of Atlanta.  It was a memorable trip, and I think that was, as I recall, it's either '60 [1960], I think it was '61 [1961], I believe it was '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you become a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I became a part of it for a while, and for a very short while because I came to New York [New York] in '63 [1963].  Matter of fact the next one as I recall was at Howard [Howard University] in Washington [D.C.], and being in graduate school [Pratt Institute, New York, New York], I was caught up in that zone and I really wasn't active for that long and then at, when was it 19--oh, golly, I better not say the year, but Romare Bearden organized a very important show at one of the, was- wasn't Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  Anyway one of, one of the New York colleges, and the NCA had some kind of tangential connection to that and that kind of put it back on the map for me.  But there was a while that I wasn't connected and there were, as well some disagreements developed as to what should be a part of the black art community, et cetera, et cetera.  But my longevity or my lack of longevity was very, my time was very brief that I was really involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the NCA?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, with NCA, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And by the way they, initially they wanted to call that National Conference of Negro Artists, and which is interesting story is that the opinion at the time was that's biased, leaving people out.  It didn't seem to be positive.  And what's interesting, it was just prior to the so called black revolution.  Had that same group been organized another five or eight years forward, I'm sure it would have been called something different.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, there was a convention in, I guess the early part of the 20th century to call all Negro organizations national, you know, it's either the National Medical Association, national podiatrists [National Podiatric Medical Association] (laughter), you know, everything was--national almost stood for Negro.  So, yeah National Conference of Artists, black people would know what it is but, you know, wouldn't necessarily be stigmatized as being a black group by those who didn't know it was, you know, so they applied for money or did something, you know, people wouldn't necessarily know.  National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP], you know, everything was national.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: National Conference of Black Lawyers.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember did they actually change the name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was--
Speaker 2: --name or just start to, but you're right at one point, there--it was very deliberately decided to just have the national conference.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, (unclear)--yeah, I think that happened to a lot of organizations, professional groups decided to call themselves national instead of Negro.
Story_ID: 667373
Speaker 1: When did you start teaching at--
Speaker 2: Nassau [Nassau Community College, Garden City, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Nassau.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I think the first year was about '65 [1965] as an adjunct and then I became a full-time faculty member and about, I think it was '68 [1968] (clears throat) and that particular site developed by coincidence I didn't, I wanted to be a college professor, but the opportunity developed by virtue of a friend that was teaching there, and I had no idea that I would stay this long 'cause I'm still there.  Just one year led to another.  There were a number of reasons in hindsight, one, our political climate was not so negative, and colleges can be known for infighting and biased, not necessarily racial, but just who's in and who's out (unclear), and we didn't seem to have hardly any of that going on, and the compensation was, and the leadership at that time, and it was in New York 'cause our college is only roughly a half hour from the city and twenty minutes from where we are now.  So just one year led to another, but I had no intention of staying per se, I just, you know, I taught at other colleges as adjunct and did some other lectures but the fact that I was going to be there this long--didn't, didn't at all plan it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: Oh, and by the way I'm now the senior professor in our department and one of the senior professors in the college, and I say that to say that I started as a young kid on the block.  I was literally the youngest and the newest to the whole system.
Story_ID: 667374
Speaker 1: You founded yourself, and I don't know what year this comes in, but you founded the National Drawing Association.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what is the National Drawing Association, when was it founded, and what was the mission of that?
Speaker 2: It's no longer, no longer in existence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But like some groups, it had its heyday and faded and different people kind of went their ways.  In short, it was to pull together people who found--at that time, I was doing mostly drawing for exhibition, and it was to pull together people with that common interest, as you have the Pastel Society [Pastel Society of America] and the Watercolor Society [National Watercolor Society], women sculptor society [Detroit Society of Women Painters and Sculptors].  I mean there's a plethora, the illustrator society [Society of Illustrators].  There's a group out here with a lot of national car- cartoonists called the Berndt Toast society [Berndt Toast Gang; Long Island Chapter of the National Cartoonists Society].  And it was intended just to pull the people together that had interest in drawing to the extent that drawing was a finished product and not simply a product leading to something else.  So we exhibited, had workshops, international competition, did some interesting things and did not--focus changed and some people--well, if that's what you're doing I'm not quite as interested as I used to be and one of them was, it was an exhibition opportunity.  Well, I didn't need an exhibition opportunity per se for me to say, send some work to California and I've got to pay the freight, why should I, why should I do that, you know.  If there is an institution that invites us and, you know, so we did several of those things, and I just felt I wasn't--and other people had their agenda, so the group lasted for maybe, I don't know, maybe ten years, and it dissolved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From what year to what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear) approximate--let's see now.  I would say from, oh, golly, about '82 [1982] to '92 [1992], in there, in that, in that range, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who were some of the artists involved in it?
Speaker 2: Well, no one that's a big name.  I'm thinking of Jeff Webb, who is really a regional artist in this area.  We didn't really have any, any national figures.  Helen Meyrowitz, names that wouldn't mean much on the national scene.  We had some peo- we had people nationally that would send work and so forth, but not celebrities.  We never had celebrities.  I think--I'm trying to remember there was one guy who taught at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] who had several books out.  And I'm blocking out his name now.  He was probably--had the highest profile because of his publication.  But it was a great group, I kind of wish it was still around because drawing was so important to each of us that we just felt it was a specialty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, so often the works of, the drawings of famous painters and sculptors even, you know, sell for big money after they're dead and gone (unclear) drawings.  You know, there are several artists I know whose drawings or their paintings sell, you know, it adds another market for them, you know, for the drawings and the paintings after they paint a picture, you know.  One fellow in Boston [Massachusetts] leaves them on the floor.  He walks on them, and some people come in and buy them off the floor (laughter).
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: The drawings (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, I did--drawings were eight feet, nine feet, seven feet you know, not that they were real ambitious pieces.  Sold a few but, even today I don't sell enough drawings to depend on them.  In other words, if--from a business point of view, I've never developed as strong of a drawing market as might be, you know, desired but, and--and because I do a number of media and so forth, it's not a negative, it's just something I'm conscious of.
Story_ID: 667375
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your work.  Now what is your, what do you like to work in, what kind of work are you constantly trying to do, and what is your philosophy of art?  And we'll probably forget all those three, I have to come back and get them (laughter), but tell us something about your art work.
Speaker 2: Well, I've always been centered around a figure.  Many of the figures are black images, but I was thinking about this just the other day, although I use black images, it's intended to speak to universals and very often, and because of that many would consider me an ethnic artist.  And I feel almost offended when that term is used, when it's used improperly because ethnic implies there's a Eurocentric standard, and everything else is ethnic when we all are ethnic it's a question of which variety, of which particular.  So I think that that's often misunderstood because of the fact that I use black as a vehicle I would like to think I'm speaking to, as I said the entirety.  There's certain peculiarities that each ethnic group, each geographic group, each cultural group might have, and there are times I would respond to that.  But usually the figures are my fo- I'll give you an example I did one painting that is called 'The Jazz Lesson' [ph.], and it's a painting of a grandfather teaching a grandson how to play the saxophone.  Now it's inspired by Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], 'A Banjo Lesson' [sic. 'The Banjo Lesson'], so though Tanner's painting and mine are using or employing black images as vehicles, the real theme is the, is the bridging of a generation gap, the grandfather passing on something to the, to the grandson.  And for me, you know, if that connection could have been made with any eth- ethnic group.  But, you know, like many, you know, I experimented here and there, but basically I find the figure as my vehicle to share certain ideas that are important to me.  Sometimes it's social, sometimes it's political, depending on the moment and what I'm trying to, you know, to achieve.  Basically the image philosophy--basically I feel that art is a communication process, and you're trying to make a connection, and I feel that whether it's musical--done musically or done through dance.  And I'll listen to--for example I'm doing something now, if it works, 'cause whenever you're in the middle of a piece, you--it may not work, but Peggy Lee came out with a song called 'Is That All There Is?'.  I don't know if that rings a, rings a bell.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But it's a very--for me, it's a very, very special piece of music that gives you a sense of what life--makes you think about what life is about, if you remember some of the lyrics to it.  And, so I say that to say that when I listen to music or go to a play and I'm really moved, my intent is boy, I want to move people like that so that's what I mean by communication.  I feel that, those that aren't connecting are in some sort of therapeutic process, important but not necessarily connecting, and I think that whether it's dance or music or poetry and liter- there's a line between executor and the recipient, and I hope to make that, you know, very, very special.  And the skills, the media is simply a manifestation of a ve- of a vehicle to make that statement.  And as I, as I tell my students, you know, the--you mentioned, you asked me about color earlier, the color is simply one of the many facets of trying to convey the attitude.  If the attitude would work better with green then, you know, you use green or whatever, whatever might be the--or media.
Story_ID: 667376
Speaker 1: One of the things of, you know, having the experience of doing, you know, stage design and so forth it allows me to bring in materials.  I've used neon like the piece--well, it's a piece behind me, I hadn't realized it's not on camera.  But anyway it has neon in it and what I do is design it and--meaning what pieces for--use neon, and I have someone else fabricate it and incorporate it.  So it's all about using (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this piece, the piece we're talking about it's like a relief--
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in some ways.  It's a building.  It's representing an ice cream shop or store, you know, with a neon sign, and you can actually go in the different dimensions of, you know, you look through the window actually at people inside, actually inside, three dimensionally inside the piece.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Was this created as a, as a, as a work of art to hang--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --by--okay.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I wondered if it was created for--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --an exhibit or something else, something like that.
Speaker 1: I had it on exhibit maybe once or twice and my wife [Panchita Carter] liked it so it's here now.  When people ask me how I came up with it, there's some people that only know me by that particular venue as opposed to some of the frame things that are generically labeled fine art.  And the story is very great and very quick and simple.  It's not a long story.  I--my first job in the art world, first real job doing art was, as I had mentioned earlier, doing set--scenic art and set designing and so forth, then later I did children's books, and somehow the marriage was made.  So I do a lot of--as a matter of fact somebody said to me years ago, "I see that you're a children specialist."  Never thought of it that, you know, I just looked at that person and the works and I guess you're right.  It's like asking the guy, "Do you sleep with your beard under the covers or out of the covers," and he spends all night trying to remember because he just slept.  He never thought about it.  And that's kind of the way--so that particular venue, matter of fact there was a show about two months ago at one of the local universities [Adelphi University, Garden City, New York], it was called 'Carter Light' and it was about these children and relief as you mentioned playing basketball, pick up basketball and all sorts of activities that are intended to be nostalgic and charming, where some of the other things I've talked about are, are addressing what I think to be other kinds of larger, well not larger issues, but issues that are thought to be more, more intense.  Although as I say that, I hesitate because I think humor and lightness is important too.  I think that people that bring us to laughter and bring us to a certain--warm moments are just as important as those that make us think about political injustices.  It's another kind of contribution.
Story_ID: 667377
Speaker 1: Yeah, you do seem drawn to themes around children.  I've noticed a lot of your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --works, you know, include children in one way or another.  Do you have any idea of why, you know, I mean, you said you just sort of do it, but do you have--I'm sure you've thought about like why do I do this or why do I tend to do this?
Speaker 2: Yeah, someone said to me once, "You must have loved your childhood," you know, and I've talked a little bit on my family and the unity, the bonding, the connection, the love, the spirit and I think that had I experienced an unpleasant childhood I probably would not do it, you know, because I have a choice, you know.  Most of the things I do around children are things that I remember doing or watched others do or wanted to do, whether it's playing marbles or whether it's hopscotch or, you know, there's so many things like that that I just--hide and go seek, I mean you name some of the things, I've probably done a painting about it at one time or another.  But they're light, they're intended to be--have a certain kind of--and I said this in a statement for the catalog of the exhibit I just referred to ['Carter Light'], it's intended to bring, you know, back kind of warm memories.  And I don't apologize for that.  I think that, I say that because there are those that would consider important art to be all in frames and pedestals, on pedestals, and I think that's one facet of possibilities.  I don't exclude it but I don't think it's singular.
Story_ID: 667378
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Sam Gillam- Gilliam is a good friend of yours and was in--you were in school together.
Speaker 2: Well, I've lost contact directly with him, but we were very good buddies, and it's still a positive vibration, but I don't really--haven't talked to him in a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he was, he basically railed against I guess the Black Arts Movement of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  Do you have a--what are your feelings about the Black Arts Movement?
Speaker 2: It was a necessity at the time to become visible, and NCA [National Conference of Artists] was established to, if you will, catalyze, to bring together, to unify.  The biggest effort at the moment doing that was the national black, the national black fine arts exhibit [National Black Fine Art Show], who--which was put together or is put together by Josh Wainwright.  I don't know if you're familiar with that project or--.  But they invite galleries--major art gallery, major black art galleries from all over the country, and Josh has said--he's not an artist, I said, he's the organizer--said in effect (unclear) I'm paraphrasing him well, "There may come a time where there--we hope to come a time where separating like this isn't necessary, where there's a flow and a mainstream where no special effort to have access is needed."  And I say that to say that NCA and--at that time, as I said, was a very important, needed experience, and the controversy was, you know, who should be included and who--what they should be doing, and when I used to do lectures on black art, there are several ways. Do you measure by the content, and if so, at points Rembrandt could be considered a black artist 'cause he did some black, portraits of black images, or is it, is it by virtue of who's doing the painting, and I think that you're never going to get total agreement on those kinds of definitions and that was a part of the dissension or conflict that, or controversy that happened during that period.  I, in essence, think that there are moments when some black artists touch base with a unique property of our community, meaning the black community that outsiders may not know of or have a sensitivity for or interest in.  An example would be, would be Tanner's 'Banjo Lesson' ['The Banjo Lesson,' Henry Ossawa Tanner].  In theory, that could have been done by another, another art- because the technical skills are with all of us.  I mean if you go to school long enough, anybody can paint an apple, but would others have sensed the moment and the connection between that young boy and that grandfather at a time when the main job was to pick cotton or whatever the slave duti- duties might have been.  And I think every culture has those moments.  Would a non-Christian bring the moment to the 'Pieta' that Michelangelo did.  And I mention that becau- mention his as an example because at a certain point, as--growing up I mentioned I've always wanted to be an artist and my folks [Sara Thomas Carter and Robert Carter] told me at three I said, "I wanted to be an ar- ," but at a certain point I thought of art as a hand skill, look I can draw an apple better than you, you know, that--then--but when I saw the 'Pieta' for the first time, I literally as a freshman in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], a tear--I literally, you know, at that point, you know, you're seventeen years old, sixteen years old and you're macho, you know, men don't cry.  I literally teared seeing that because it had reached something very personal.  And I, and I say that to say that would someone from another faith--brought that same intensity.  Perhaps, it's possible physically to do certain things, but would they have had that same connection.  So I think there are moments when black art has a certain connection with the spirit that others, as I say, may not be interested in or are turned in, turned on to.  Maybe rare, I don't know but I don't think that you'll ever get Donaldson [HistoryMaker Jeff Donaldson] and Gilliam to agree.  And I use them as, as metaphors.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  They are poles, they are polar opposites, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Different, on different poles, yeah.
Story_ID: 667379
Speaker 1: As a member of the education community, you're obliged to try to be in the middle so that the student is aware of the--that range.  As an individual artist, again many of my images do use the black image because I feel that we're a part of the universe, and if I can show compassion, I can show it with a, with a black image as well as a white.  So if I, if I, If I'm labeled ethnic, I think that's the bias of what ethnicity means--that's the bias that--of what ethnicity means to the spokesperson or to the person doing the speaking.  In other words, if they're thinking of again Western Europe as the standard and I, and I feel that the universe is the standard, Western Union--Western Europe is simply a part of that standard.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: To define art as, you know, European art is art and then every--is universal art and then everything else is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exac- well, see and that's what I object to.  As a matter of fact, I came when--during a time African art was considered folk art, ethnic art.  What was the, what was the, there was another term, not tribal.
Speaker 2: Primitive art.
Speaker 1: Primitive, thank you, primitive and one of my close friends who was doing a doctorate at that time said--used to use those terms in in her doctoral training and I said, "Don't, that's not true, you know, it's just simply, it's another, another form, not directly controlled by Western, so called Western standard."  And she changed, you know, not because we're friends.  You know, it was one of those intellectual dialogues that paid off (laughter) and that's really what attracted me to college teach- teaching.  I said this the other day because at this point I'm still there because I still find positive--every now and then a day comes up I say, "Why am I doing this," you know, because of some- something went that day, a meeting that you didn't want to go to or whatever, but my way of expressing what brought me to college teaching was it's great to argue about how many saints, no how many angels dance on the head of a pin which is a cli- kind of a cliche.  If you're with good people you have, you can argue about that.  You may never agree, but you can argue, you know, hopefully intelligently and with some sensitivity, and it's just a good arena for that.  Some of the people that I know in, in the commercial art world doing, you know, well, graphic design, but I don't know a lot of, a lot of those people.  One of my closest friends doing storyboard and cartooning and so forth, one of their problems is isolation.  One of my very good friends, Stan Goldberg, who does Archie, Archie Comics [Archie Comic Publications, Inc.], don't call him if you're in a hurry 'cause he's going to talk to you for a half hour because he doesn't have conversation every day, you know, he's isolated.  He takes his stuff to the publisher and goes back to the studio whereas the college community brings you into a community that, that, that offers the poss- the potential for dialogue.
Story_ID: 667380
Speaker 1: Yeah let me ask you about that, you say you're a movie buff. Do, do the movies influence your artwork at all?
Speaker 2: I haven't, I have to think if I've done a direct theme.  I haven't, I can't remember doing a direct theme from the movies but--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were in television doing art for a set, you know, sets for the old black and white TV shows, and you're a movie buff.  I just wondered if the movies influenced your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--well, not, not, not directly.  I'm (unclear), you know, whenever I see a terrific anything, whether it's a great movie or great--for example, I just fell in love with Scrooge [Ebenezer Scrooge], 'A Christmas Carol' this year by, what's his name the comedian, oh, golly, terrible.  But it was, it was animated and just thought it was just wonderful you know.  Jim Carrey, Jim Carrey.  So have I done a painting responding to that literally, no, but when I, again I see any out- what I think to be outstanding--it inspires me to say, by golly, when--and in my own, way I would like to reach people like that.  It just, I think it was one of the better Scrooges ever.  So, but, no, I've never done--music, yes, I've done several 'Send in the Clowns.'  Was it--Sarah Vaughan blew me away, and I did a very large painting responding to that.  I did another version showing Christ bearing the cross, a drawing, bearing the cross, and in the crowd is a clown, one in a clown's makeup.  It's mostly, it's black and white with the exception of the clown, and the spirit of it was to--I thought about the radio, when the cowboy is in trouble and he falls off the horse, what do they do, send in those clowns, and you're not aware of the danger and the skill because of the clown face.  So to me that was a logical combination.
Speaker 1: Now you're getting into the Rober- Robert Colescott now (laughter) on some level, but it's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I never thought of being connected, but I, I know where you're going (laughter), yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: It makes sense, but it's a kind of, you know--
Speaker 2: It's--for me, it's sequential and for others it's a non sequitur, you know, depending on how you see it.  I'm really excited about this painting that I've just done some drawings for, which I, which I call 'Is That All There Is?' [ph.].  Hopefully, it works because I feel that the artist, whether they're not objective or abstract or figurative or landscape, your bottom line, in my view, is to exercise your image scales to make it work.  (Unclear) I have reservations about concepts that are only concepts.  When I go to the theater, I want effective directing.  I want effective lighting.  I want effective staging.  I want effective acting.  I want effective writing.  Not simply a concept that stirs my political posture.  You know there has to be some follow up.  And I think there's a percentage of art that is simply idea driven, in some cases to shock you, and what I do, this is gain my--I feel that there's a, there's a commitment to make it more visual, and if it doesn't, it's not because I didn't try, it's because Carter [HistoryMaker Bob Carter] just didn't do a good enough job, but the commitment is to material manifesting a very particular focus.
Story_ID: 667381
Speaker 1: Is there a particular work that's the most popular work of yours?
Speaker 2: Well, the children's work probably is more people volume wise.  I've done many of those.
Speaker 1: Now what are the names of some of the books you've illustrated?  Give us some of the names.
Speaker 2: Oh, golly, it has been so long.  I did a whole series, probably the biggest series was 'What Job for Me?' and it was "Timo the Draftsman" [Martin Hamer] and somebody the police- "Burt the Policeman" [Burton Goodman], and I used my father's [Robert Carter] badge number when I did that by the way.  These were McGraw-Hill [McGraw-Hill Education] productions, and at that time, the politically correct term was reluctant learners.  So they were about careers that a young teenager might want to know more about but written on the level of third grade or fourth grade, whichever the case.  And that one, I think that was my first thing.  Then I did some, what used to be called filmstrips, where you have to do like a hundred or so paintings just from one filmstrip.  I did several.  I'm trying to, try- trying to remember the name of it now 'cause I really haven't done published work in that sense in a long, long time.  I did something from a Marx toys [Louis Marx and Company].  I did some stuff for them.  I did their catalog cover.  Gee, you're taking me back.  And it's funny because I didn't plan to get out of television, as I mentioned.  I didn't get, plan to get out of illustrating.  I didn't plan a lot of things but the phone ring and, or the phone does ring--for example, the people I illustrated for, some of them moved on to other, other shores, and I didn't really pursue it because the phone was ringing for other stuff.  For example, one day the phone rang, and someone said, "The manager of the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] wants to do some set- setting, but a set photograph for these dolls he's buying."  Well, as it turned out, make a long story short, he wanted a miniature stage for anima- if you've ever seen stores like Macy's [Macy's, Inc.] and Bloomingdale's during Christmas when you have these wonderful windows that literally cost thousands and thousands of dollars, well, I did that for Waldorf Astoria.  Now bottom line is I didn't know--it became because of something--someone that knew me that felt that it was not in their zone, and I'm one of these guys that says, "Yeah, I'll do that, you know, I'll try it."  But things like that have evolved.  I've got--I do far more exhibiting now than I used to do because I'm not doing the books, so one thing kind of led to another.  I have been working on a book now with, you know, Ralph Carter, remember Ralph Carter, 'Good Times'?  Well, he's written a book, and I'm in the middle of doing some stuff for that.  That's exciting or interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but that developed by coincidence.  It wasn't like through an agent.  In short, I was exhibiting in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he was signing autographs with Bern Nadette Stanis, that was the one that played his sister [Thelma Evans Anderson], and J.J. [James "J.J." Evans, Jr.] and so forth, that's not his real name.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know who I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In any event, one thing led to another, he liked what I did and he said, "Maybe you want to look at my book," and one thing led to another.  So the good Lord has provided opportunities, and I just haven't had to beat the door down recently, and somehow the rent gets paid (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is, which is nice because I like rent being paid too.
Story_ID: 667382
Speaker 1: Well, it seems as though from the, from the outside, that you, that there's a market for your work, you know, you seem to be very act- you know, active.  You're able to teach and then also do a lot of outside work, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it's funny, people that know me as a professor will say, "Do you paint on the side?"  And the people who know me--that I--as an artist, will say, "Do you teach on the side?"  My response is everything I do is frontal.  I don't do anything on the side.  I'm very, actually very serious about each and like others that have more than one zone, you know, I try to be effective in each.  Matter of fact, I will jump on a student who says, "I don't have time to do my homework," because you can't use your other activities as rationalization for not performing the activity here.  And then I said, "If you work for me, I'd say the same thing."  You can't say, "Well, because I'm in school you have to pay me, but I can't come to work," you know, so I need to practice what I preach so I really take each--whatever I do, I really take it quite seriously.  So it's not just a cliche or clever turn of phrase.  I do think that what I do is frontal.  And as I said earlier, I've always been a workaholic.  I had two jobs in graduate school [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] and some freelance work.  No, no, I have to take that back, the freelance work I think started right after.  Anyway I had two jobs while in graduate school and, you know, I took on what I thought I could handle.  That's another reason I took three and a half years 'cause I took an extra year to get the type, the exhibit that I wanted to put together of what I thought was acceptable, acceptable by my standards 'cause it was up, it was up to me to apply for that degree.  But I just didn't, as I said, within the normal timeframe, I just didn't feel that the quality was there or the unity was there or may- a little of both.
Story_ID: 667383
Speaker 1: Now do you have a piece that's your, your favorite piece of work or project that's your favorite project?
Speaker 2: From more sentimental or personal reasons than academic, aesthetic, intellectual, historical reasons (laughter).  There's a piece in here that--it's a drawing called 'Mama Sho Loved, Loved Flowers' [ph.].  And if you remember in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], the mother [Lena Younger] had that old plant, and the daughter [Beneatha Younger] says, "Mama, why don't you get rid of that flower," and she says, "You don't understand, this plant is me."  And this, and if you remember that in the last scene, she's picking up this plant to carry it to the new house in the suburbs.  Well, it was that kind of--I had a great aunt that, my mother's [Sara Thomas Carter] aunt, my grandmother's [Birdie Simpson Thomas] on my mother's side sister, and I think she could grow a flower on a rock, and this is an older lady with, not really a portrait, with a flower in an old coffee can, and it may or may not be special by some standards, but for me, it's very special.  It did, it was in one of, one of the art history textbooks as a sample of drawing, but for me, the importance is that emotional--and I have another one called 'Proud Queen' [Bob Carter], which is in this room, and my wife [Panchita Carter] told me that if I ever sell that make sure they have a room to go with it (laughter).  Well, she didn't say that literally, but it's just something that she feels very special about.
Story_ID: 667384
Speaker 1: Now you met your wife [Panchita Carter] here in New York [New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Can you tell us how you met your wife?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's easy and quick.  James Denmark, who is a very established artist, he was working with my wife's aunt, and my wife's aunt was one of these ladies that wanted to find somebody for, somebody terrific for her niece, so Denmark said--I think he had met my wife--said, "This good looking lady is, her aunt is interested in her meeting a nice guy," you know, and my response was, "Well, I'm the nicest guy I know," (gesture), you know (laughter).  So long story short, her aunt gave a dinner party, and the rest is history.  My wife said--and she--I agree with her--she said, had she known it was a setup that she would probably haven't shown or wouldn't have shown because she didn't like that, you know, her aunt finding people for her.  And I didn't go there looking for a wife.  I just went looking for a pretty lady, you know, like a lot of bachelors, you know.  My mama [Sara Thomas Carter] didn't raise no stupid children.  The opportunity to meet a pretty lady, I was, I was available, and here I am forty, whatever years, two years later.
Story_ID: 667385
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Well, maybe before I ask this question, I'll ask you what you're working on right now or maybe before I get to that.  What--
Speaker 2: Well, most of us work--and you probably have the same--you work on more than one thing at a time, the image that I mentioned inspired by Is That--'Is That All There Is?'.  The music is questioning the meaning of life you know in a very musical way.  And then there's a portrait involving children and a principal that's retiring, I'm working on that.  There's another theme I want to revisit that I did a number of years ago but, and there are times that you'll just--you put enough down to kind of crystallize it so that it doesn't fade, and you'll come back to it, but usually--very, very seldom--then there's some other things that I'm doing that are just fun things that--in the, in the children's domain that will just be exhibited and hopefully sold to keep the rent paid.  So I probably have now four, five, six things at different stages.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you work mostly at home or at Nassau [Nassau Community College, Garden City, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't work there.  Well, the only time I would work there is that if I have a break between meetings and classes and I might find it--to use that time if I don't have grading to do or something, I'll do work.  No, no, the reason that we are at this location is because I made the decision years ago to have my studio and home together like the dentist that has an office next door, the lawyer or doctor or whatever.  Because there're times when I might have a half an hour, that if I had to go twenty minutes to get to the studio, you know, and I need to get that (unclear) dry so, you know, so for me, I've never even considered having my studio--I know some people need that space.  You know, I need to have a work space to clear my head of all the things that go on at home, and I never had that need to separate.  So even, even as a, as a student and as a young- younger art I had my studio in one--matter of fact, Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] provided studio space for graduate students, but I never used it because at that time, it--they had limited hours, like it closed at twelve at night or whenever, and I've always been a night owl and, so I never, I only use it for storage.  I never, I always used the studio that was in my apartment.  I had, at that time, a one bedroom apartment and the bedroom, which is a reasonable, about an average side, you know eighteen by fifteen [feet] or something, nice, not a big studio, but I did all my work there.  My living quarters was in the other area.
Story_ID: 667386
Speaker 1: In terms of your students, what do you--what's your perception of students these days as opposed to when you were in school, and what advice do you really focus on with today's students?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the human cycle is ongoing, and it's easy to say, especially when you get my age, "Well, it's like the good old days," you know.  It's easy to fall into that trap and when in fact there were good people and bad people all along.  I think the big--there is a difference, and we talked a little about this off camera, is that some in the black community don't see the urgency and need of education and the seriousness of it as might have been in the prev- in the past.  In other words, there's always good students out there.  There's always students that I call flaky, you know, to use a colloquialism.  I would like to see more intensity, you know, from all students, but in particular the black male, because statistically there's more dropouts and more weak performance.  Now whether that overall statistic has changed or whether because we had more opportunities, 'cause we have more opportunities to fail in America than others.  I mean we have, you know, subsidies and open enrollment and remedial classes, which just weren't there.  So I think some of those changes have allowed more people to not do it 'cause some people just aren't ready even with remedial--psychologically or emotionally just not ready to stand--step up to the plate and put X number of hours at home and study.  But I think some of those things have always been around, you know, commitment, lack of commitment in between.  Financial, social changes may affect the numbers, but I think some of the things always have been there.  And for me, I think of a friend of mine that retired several years ago.  He said, he reached the age where he could retire and he says, "When a day goes by if it's a good day, I'll put a check in the good column.  If it's a bad day, I'll put a check in the bad column.  When the bad days out- outweigh the good days, I'll leave," (laughter).  And although, and he might have done it because he was very literal this particular friend of mine.  He might have done that literally.  I haven't done that literally but that's kind of my feeling when I find that--there's two things that would precipitate my not teaching full time or at all, one is time.  I had to turn down a couple of opportunities that were exciting this year because of teaching schedule, and the other is (clears throat) the texture of change.  You know, obviously there's different people that I'm working with as I am the senior person [at Nassau Community College, Garden City, New York] and that texture is not good nor bad necessarily, but it is different.  The vibrations are different, the priorities are different.  There are certain things that I refrain from commenting on because I don't want to say, "Well, we did that a hundred years ago.  You know, why are you doing it?  It didn't, didn't work ten years ago, why do you think it's going to work now?"  And it's easy to fall into those traps, and I try to avoid dinosaurology (laughter) or geriatricology, say it however but, you know, some of those textures make you think, well, you know, how much change do you want to move with and how much change--you're saying, "Well, this is it, you guys take over.  I'm going to move aside."
Story_ID: 667387
Speaker 1: Who are some of the--are there any students that you think you should men- you know, you may want to mention that are--have been really outstanding that you--favorite students?  Not to get you in trouble or anything.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Before I answer that I'm going to--I started teaching when I did with Hale Woodruff.  Hale Woodruff had left NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and the chair at the time convinced him to work with us, and he worked with us for two years and said, "I just want to paint and I don't, I don't want to teach anywhere at all."  And I feel very happy that I stood at his doorstep for a period of time.  Now to answer your other question, there's, you know when, when you've been in the business as long as I there's a plethora; that means more than one doesn't it (laughter).  But there's a lot of folks out there that are in school systems now that are painting, you know, are doing artwork now.  Matter of fact there is a piece inside the living room of a student that did some beautiful sculpture.  It's a--it feels like Degas [Edgar Degas], it's a piece of scul- a young girl, very much like Degas' ballet.  But there's no one that's national that I can re- I can think of right now.  But to me, some of the people that are good competent painters, good competent educators, good competent de- designers and from time to time someone will say, "You know, because of you I now know this," and that happened just, to me just the other day.  You know, I feel happy about that 'cause that to me--what is--I still, you know, love teaching.  And there's something I paraphrase from, I think it was Will Rogers, not Will Rogers.  I'm blocking on the name now.  But anyway the paraphrase is I taught the lesson the first time, and no one understood it.  I taught it the second time, and no one understood it.  I taught it the third time and I understood it, and for me, it's that growth.  Being part of the (unclear) system forces a certain kind of, if you're doing it right, thoroughness and a vocabulary that you wouldn't necessarily respond to because you're supposed to be some sort of reference encyclopedia, not that you know it all.  I don't want to convey that at all.  But you're supposed to have enough of a vocabulary so that people can come to--I had a, had a buddy that I lost contact with that was a very fine painter and I just kind of assumed that he--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: But he was a very fine painter and I once asked him, you know, "Do you teach," and he said--'cause I just thought what he did and teaching would be a positive companion, and he said, "No, man, I just know how to do my thing," and he did it excellently, you know, really very fine etchings and engraving.  But it made me conscious of the fact that I couldn't do what he did because I need to share, organize, strategize, sequ- sequentially develop approaches so that people that are in the middle or are in the end, meaning--'cause I've taught graduate school.  I've taught--there's hardly an area I haven't taught at.  So you have to, to be thorough enough to be able to get them the information.
Story_ID: 667388
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I--I'm thinking of cliches like full participation, you know, full realization, and tears came to my eye when Obama, President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was inaugurated.  We showed that throughout the campus [Nassau Community College, Garden City, New York], classes were suspended and you could, you know, go watch that.  To have--well, to simply, to put it simply, when NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--no one has a job, when any, any group that has to advocate when they, when there's no need for an Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton].  And by the way that's intended to say, the utopia would be a situation where there just wouldn't be a need for those kinds of--just like my wife's formal training, her name is Panchita [Panchita Carter] by the way, I don't know if I said that before, was psychiatric so- psychiatric social work.  She has M.S.W. in that.  And we talked about this a long, long time ago if no one had problems, she wouldn't have a job.  You have to have some sort of a need for that kind of--and ideally it would be, you know, something to where now as human we may never have utopia or was it Shangri La, but to move as close to those possibilities as possible.  It sounds kind of trite, but I think that would be--and having one president and other successful people doesn't mean that grassroots and others are still having certain struggles.  We still live at lowest paid, et cetera, et cetera. The--our health facility, not facilities, our health circumstances, we die more with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and we die more with hypertension and so forth and, so, not more but there's larger--
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) sta- statistics.  So if some of those things are cared--closely connected or more resolved I think we would, we would, we would be better.
Story_ID: 667389
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this stage in life, is there anything--major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Now that's a take home question (laughter).  I would have to think--no, no, I really, really, you know, I mentioned being at the college [Nassau Community College, Garden City, New York] as long as I have and I've thought, well, maybe I should have jumped around a little bit more, got some more experiences somewhere else, but I can't, I can't think of a major change right now.  I remember once we had a guest artist at our college that was at that point, maybe eighty-five, ninety years old, and he had a myriad of experiences, and I raised the question, "Do you think you might be a better painter had you only focused on painting?"  And he said, "Had I only focused on painting, I wouldn't have anything to paint."  And I realized that--and that's a paraphrase but that's pretty much what he said.  And I realized what a dumb question.  He's right.  That made him what he, what he was, so as Popeye said, "I am what I am," and I don't see--thank goodness for my wife [Panchita Carter] and my daughters [Heather Carter and Holly Carter], that's the real accomplishment as you know.  I, I, I--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You have two daughters, right?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very accomplished ladies in their work world and, but they're more importantly good people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as I said my wife and I have, if I get this wrong, she's gonna shoot me, I think it's forty-two years and, and if wrong, if I'm wrong, it's forty (gesture) years (laughter).  I had to fluff it.  And, you know, that is really important stuff, and my work--hopefully it makes a difference.  Hopefully, some people will see things a little differently than or a month early or whatever than they might have had they not--and again it's like reading that novel that has some kind of bearing on your ethics, morals or some bearing on your habits, whatever.
Story_ID: 667390
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, hopefully family first.  You know, the fact that I've shared a value system, you know, that they seem to have connected with.  I'm a toy--we had, we had all kinds of toys for my children [Heather Carter and Holly Carter] because that's, you know, everything from a trampoline to go carts and so forth.  And I say that not, not, not braggingly but in spite of that, there's a value system that I never felt that they were spoiled or asked for things that were unreasonable or there are times they would say, "We don't need that," you know.  There's a pinball machine in here.  It was a total surprise to them because I--we used to go to a Nathan's [Nathan's Famous, Inc.], and they enjoyed it.  I said, "I think I'll get a pin- pinball machine."  So anyway I think the value system transcends all that other stuff that--'cause I just love toys.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the environment is filled with a lot of interesting things, you know, that--
Speaker 2: I never grew up too, that's another (laughter).
Story_ID: 667391
Speaker 1: Last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, that--it's a good question.  I haven't really focused on it.  I would--hopefully as a good person, hopefully the person that cared, hopefully a person that stepped up to the plate.  I'm remembering a line that somewhere someone said, "Where were you--what position did you take during the war, daddy" or words to that effect, and when a time, when it was time to picket, I did that.  When it was time to focus on family and, you know, hopefully, ho- hopefully there's a certain positive that said, "He cared," et cetera.  At this point, you know, I'm on a few community projects and committees, you know.  So hopefully I'm--I leave that he was at the right place, or he tried to be at the right place at the right time with a caring spirit.  I would like, I think that would be reasonable.
Story_ID: 667392
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Graham, G-R-A-H-A-M, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R [HistoryMaker Bob Carter].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 29, 1938, Louisville, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Pr- professor, designer, artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 27th, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home and studio in Dix Hills, New York.
Story_ID: 667393
Speaker 1: Now before we get started and go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of all of our interviewees, and they only require a short answer.  First question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chili, amen to chili.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Easy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, depends on the project.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and summer probably.  I like that good weather.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, no, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: To make a long story short.  If I didn't say that, my wife [Panchita Carter] would say, "You forgot," and would remind me.  That's--since I'm a talker I find myself saying it, but not doing it.  I make long stories longer.
Story_ID: 667394
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to talk about, ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Carter] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sara Birdie, S-A-R-A, B-I-R-D-I-E, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R [Sara Thomas Carter].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's August, I think it was the 10th, 1919 or 1920, probably it was 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Eminence, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Eminence, okay.  Now is there, is there a story behind the name Eminence?
Speaker 2: Not that I know, I--it's just a very small town that prob- I would be guessing a few hundred people and someone's idea of at one point elevating the charm or the character of the community, but there's no special story that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is it near Louisville [Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five miles outside of Louisville.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she grew up in Eminence (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and at that time, twenty-five miles was rural, it wasn't suburb.  I mean, if you go twenty-five miles outside of New York [New York], you're in some re- relevant congested area or suburban area, but it was a very rural area at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Her mother was Birdie Thomas [Birdie Simpson Thomas].  Her mother's sister was Sole [Sole Simpson (ph.)].  I'm trying to remember how to spell it now, S--
Speaker 1: Sole.
Speaker 2: --O-L-E, I believe and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's got to be a story behind that name.  Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: No, well, it may be, but it never came up and--not that I know of.  My mother's father, which was Graham Thomas and there was a, my mo- my grandmother, which would have been my great-grandmother who died before I was born, I used to hear stories of there being a mixture and I don't know--I'm trying to think--it was Ms. Gense [ph.], my mother's, my grandmother's mother or her husband.  Somebody was not black and whether they were Italian or Russian or (laughter)--I don't know.  But in the South at that time, it was more of a point of discussion than it would be today, at least for some today anyway.
Story_ID: 667395
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, Graham Tho- Thomas [Graham Thomas], had a special significance right on your, and your mother side, on your mother's [Sara Thomas Carter] side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard so many wonderful stories about--he was such a generous person, nice person, but I never met, you know, some families that are building bridges from the past to the present will deliberately share stories that in the child's mind will make that connection.  And I became so taken with those stories and who he was and his niceness, if there is such a word that I now sign all of my work, all of my framed work with Robert Graham Carter [HistoryMaker Bob Carter], very deliberately in tribute to him.  So there's a spiritual bond, though I never met him.
Speaker 1: Now his position--he worked for a prominent family, white family in--
Speaker 2: In Louisville [Kentucky]--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in the Louisville area, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In the Lou- oh, it was, was it near Eminence [Kentucky] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as I recall he came home, whatever let's say monthly or biweekly, I'm not sure which, but nonetheless he--it was one of those live in type of things where he spent much of his time at this particular site.  And as such, he for the time, did comfortably, for that area, and as I would understand it, had more of a standing in the community because of the compensation much and then let's say the person that had to do the sharecropping or do some sort of labor on the farm.  So although it was not a so called profession by sociological terminology, it was important in that community and, as I said, he did very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a term, a colloquial term for that I think, and we talked about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, the colloquial term is nigger rich, which is to say that he, by the standards of the black community, he was better than, better off financially than some, but by mainstream standards, it was still working wages, but it allowed him to provide very nicely for my grandmother [Birdie Simpson Thomas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now he passed away before you were born, right?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, but you knew your grandmother, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she, she was a very much a part--she and her sister were very much a part of the family.  Matter of fact, Aunt Sole [Sole Simpson (ph.)] used to stay with us from time to time.  She kind of shifted between my sister, I mean her sister, my grandmother, and our family.
Speaker 1: Now was here any kind of a drop off after your grandfather died in terms of income (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --or prestige?
Speaker 2: --yeah, for my grandmother, she just did not have the, for lack of a better term, worldliness to keep things together.  She didn't have any real skill in terms of employment skills and she wasn't really able to keep the property up physically, and at certain point, it was given to--my mother signed her portion over to her brother [Richard Thomas], and he was able to refurbish and make it livable, but she just wasn't able to do that.  It was just not in her makeup to be responsible in that way.  A loving spirit, but there--not worldly by any, any stretch of the imagination.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting I mean, okay.  I know the concept, you mentioned nigger rich was mentioned just yesterday by somebody else [HistoryMaker Robin Wilson], but they didn't use the N word, but I've heard that before to describe this situation, and they used another word that was more euphemistic but it meant the same thing basically.
Speaker 2: Right, well--
Speaker 1: That they had an ancestor that had a close connection to the white people he worked for or was related to, as a result had privileges or status.
Speaker 2: Right, well, the term--it's funny because when you live long enough, terms come in and out.  At one time, I was colored, then I became Negro and then I became African American and then I became black.  My response is call me anything but late to dinner because it's in the context and the spirit, for me, that makes me accepting or not accepting.  So anyway the term people would have trouble with, but it's the reality of what the term was then, and for me, a euphemism doesn't quite say the character of that condition as that word did at the time.  It wouldn't be used now, but the, but it was critical to understanding of that term then 'cause blacks are very conscious.  I remember my father [Robert Carter], as a policeman, would often say, not often but from time to time say, "So and so is a big man when he, when he gets down on Walnut Street [Muhammad Ali Boulevard]."  Now Walnut Street was the social hub of Louisville, as opposed to 125th Street in Harlem [New York, New York], where the Apollo Theater is.  So I remember my father saying there are certain people that came down and they were the big cheeses, but when they left the Walnut Street, they were the meek and mild in the so called white world or the other world that they, that they had to exist in.
Speaker 1: The double existence.
Story_ID: 667396
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my father [Robert Carter] after--or about to go into the police force.  He was the salutatorian of his class and that's about 1948.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 1: You're doing a long (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's my uncle, my mother's brother, and he lived in Eminence [Kentucky] where my, where he and my mother were born, and we used to visit there as--very, very special uncle, my prototype uncle.
Speaker 1: Now what was--what's his name?
Speaker 2: Richard, Richard Thomas.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: My older daughter, Heather [Heather Carter], with her Zachary [ph.], Zachary gets better treatment than I do.  She loves her Zachary.  He appears on every Christmas card since he's been around, which is about twelve years now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This would be--my father went to the [U.S. military] service around 1942 to about '45 [1945] and that's my father, my brother Jesse [Jesse Carter] on the left, my mother [Sara Thomas Carter], and there I am on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: That's my younger daughter, Holly [Holly Carter].  This is--I think she's in, a senior in high school there.  She was queen of homecoming and a leading student, so she's--both are very special, both daughters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a painting that I did when I was around nine thereabouts and my--it's a copy of a very big painting, well, not a very big, about a thirty, a couch size painting, thirty-six, forty inches, and I was impressed with it and did a copy of it, bad copy but I was so encouraged when it was framed and hung up, and for me, it's just still very special even though it was a copied painting from way back when.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my wife, Panchita Carter.  She is finishing college here, I believe.
Speaker 2: That's a painting called 'First Jazz Lesson' [ph.].  That was done only a couple of years ago, and it was inspired by Tanner ['The Jazz Lesson,' Henry Ossawa Tanner] with the connection between the grandfather and the grandson through the teaching of a less- of a music lesson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I don't know if you can tell it but that's--that one stands out too.  This is a cut out, the fig- the figures are cut out and that's real wall paper behind it.  So it's constructed like a miniature set.  'Descent from the Cross' [ph.].  I was a freshmen in college [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], and it was--the reason I threw that in, it's an old lithograph that it was the first time I had won a regional award in an exhibit that the professor [Mary Spencer Nay] had won I think first prize in whatever category ahe- I think painting, and I was so excited that I had won something in an exhibit that my professor had shared.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's an old photograph that's of Panchita, my--and me in front of a painting that--see, was when--right after we got married, so that's '68 [1968], '69 [1969], and I had all black hair then and fewer wrinkles.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Here's my grandmother, my mother's mother.
Speaker 2: The NAACP Youth Council president.
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm not the present.  I was, I was the--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --treasurer, the president is on the left.
Speaker 2: Robert Williams [ph.] was, okay.
Speaker 1: Robert Williams was the president.  He was the first guy--he went on to be, ahead to get a doctorate in theology.  He was the first guy that I, that letter group, that was very--he had written reports, you know, you know, how some organizations, somebody shows up, somebody is supposed to write it, somebody forgets, somebody--he was so organized--at that time he was in theology school, and I really learned a lot about organization and how it should be run because of the way he handled that group.  But, no, I wasn't the president.
Speaker 2: The NAACP Youth is so historic.  I don't even know, maybe (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: That was a photo right after graduate school [Pratt Institute, New York, New York], and I, at that time, I thought it was important enough to send back to the local paper and sure enough they carried it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother on my mother's side of course.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Give us a description of this photo, who's that and what year.
Speaker 2: That's--let's see, I'm about eight years old there, my brother is seven and that's in Beecher Terrace [Louisville, Kentucky], which was the housing project that we lived in and that's our grandmother that's standing behind- hind us.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Birdie Thomas [Birdie Simpson Thomas].  And my brother is Jesse on the left, and I'm on the right and that was what the housing projects look like.  They made some--they're still there, but they made some changes, cosmetic changes but that's what it looked like at that stage, which is what about '48 [1948] somewhere in there, '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a protest that I initiated when 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] was premi- premiered.  It had an all black cast, but it premiered at a white theater in Louisville [Kentucky], and we couldn't go so we not only picketed, we hired a bus to take us to Cincinnati [Ohio] and this, the sign that I'm carrying on the right, this theater does not admit Negro- Negroes.  That was the vogue term at the time, and we just got along blissfully because the paper, the Courier-Journal, who was more on the left, wrote up the article that we had to go all the way to Cincinnati to see a movie.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: You couldn't go see 'Porgy and Bess,' a black movie (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's my brother and I either in college or high school [Louisville Central High School, Louisville, Kentucky].  I don't remember exact date on that one.  My brother's on the right, and I'm on the left.  I'm older, but he's taller.  I got cheated (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This photo was made when I was a floor director at WHAS [WHAS-TV, Louisville, Kentucky], the TV studio that I worked for.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: A first grade photo, and I'm in the center in the back.
Speaker 1: Is that you?
Speaker 2: No one more, one over to your right, that's me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I don't why, remember why this was taken, but it's nice looking back on it, Dunbar elementary [Paul Laurence Dunbar School, Louisville, Kentucky].  Mrs. Boone [ph.] is the teacher, and she was the sister of coach that I was talking about.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is an outdoor exhibit that is Ken Young [Kenneth Young], [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam, Mr. Coxe [G.C. Coxe], Bob Douglas [Robert Douglas], a whole series of us that were in Louisville at the time, had an outdoor exhibit with jazz, with theater.  I had, I was in touch with--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I was in touch with a Shakespearean group, so we had an excerpt from Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and now that event is an annual event, but not on the same scope that we had it.  But many people don't realize that that started with a, with a black art group.
