Story_ID: 645710
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Josie, J-O-S-I-E, Brown, B-R-O-W-N, Childs, C-H-I-L-D-S [HistoryMaker Josie Childs].
Speaker 1: Now is there an L in your name?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Is there an L?
Speaker 2: That's, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Is that your middle name?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What does it stand for?
Speaker 2: What else but Lee (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) yep. My mother's has one, has the same thing.  Okay, and ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten, thirteen, twenty six [October 13, 1926].
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Clarksdale, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm retired.
Speaker 1: And retired from?
Speaker 2: City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were with the Department of Planning [City of Chicago Department of Planning; City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development], right?
Speaker 2: Cultural affairs, special events and cultural affairs [City of Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs; City of Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I worked for the city twice, that's where I was the last time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Well, you were also--you have something to do with the committee to commemorate Harold Washington, right?
Speaker 2: That's recent, yeah.  I was just concerned that his legacy was fading away.  And you know, how you think about things and you wonder why isn't something happening, you fuss about it to yourself for a couple years, and then really last year, which was the twenty-fifth anniversary of his death, I thought strongly about it and then the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] came out with four page articles and they were good.  But I said, "But, hey you know, what are we doing?"  Well we let that go and then I had breakfast with a friend, Eileen Mackevich, I don't know if you know her or not and we were talking about--we were over at Ina's [Chicago, Illinois]--and we were talking about it.  And out of the conversation she finally said, you know, "I like celebrating life more than I do celebrating death and the anniversary of his inauguration.  So I'll have to think about that."  So the 29th of April was his--the thirtieth anniversary of his inauguration.  In fact, April was a big month for Harold because he was elected on the 12th of April, his birthday was the 15th of April, and the inauguration was the 29th of April.  And so we did that.  So anyway out of that, I just called a few people and believe it or not it was really, really heartwarming to see that Harold's name is still magic in the community.  When I threw it out there, you know, I just started getting phone calls, "I want to be a part of that," which really surprised me, so much so that now it seems as though we're going to make it an ongoing organization.  They haven't quite sold me on that, but, 'cause when we started it was called Harold Washington Tribute Committee [Harold Washington Legacy Committee] and that was because we were going to do a one-time tribute, maybe even an annual thing.  But now there's thoughts that we want to do--you know, civics is not taught in schools anymore and we want to do some things that can kind of promote his philosophy really, you know, his civic engagement, stuff like that--that just isn't happening out there now.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to make sure we mentioned that before we get started all the way, so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But we'll get into the story of that, you know, a little later on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: But, ma'am what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know the date. Today is the 24th.
Speaker 1: The year, year?
Speaker 2: Oh, 2013 [August 24, 2013].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the fabulous HistoryMakers headquarters [The HistoryMakers, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 645711
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always are supposed to ask and they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Blueberries.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Peach.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year.  Favorite time of the year.  Springtime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, not one that I want to go back to all the time or anything like that, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.  I could, but I won't complain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, well now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People say, "How are you," and I say, I, you know, "I could," um-hm.
Story_ID: 645712
Speaker 1: Well, I'm, I'm going to ask about your family history now.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then we'll bring them together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Julia, J-U-L-I-A, Ryan [Julia Brown Ryan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: God knows, I don't know.  But it's October 28th was her birthday, but I don't what year it was.
Speaker 1: Do you think about 1900, 1901?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, she was eighty when she died and my mother has been dead about fifteen years.  I really don't know what year--I really--I really don't.  I'm trying to think and I don't have a reference point really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Was she very young when she had you?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I'm guessing maybe 1905 or so or thereabouts, okay.
Speaker 2: I was just trying to think and I swear I don't know.  You--you're going to have a hard time with me with family history 'cause I don't really know it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's okay, it's not, we shouldn't necessarily dwell on it, but I'm thinking around 1905 that's about--that's close, I guess, it would have to be close.  So, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Are there any stories from emancipation, or?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) My grandfather [Albert Brown], that's far as I can go back.  Her father.
Story_ID: 645713
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Albert L. Brown [Albert Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He was, if you want to call him an entrepreneur, he was a farmer, he was a professor.  He graduated from Rust College [Rust University; Rust College] in 1895 and was quite successful.
Speaker 1: So he graduated in 1895 from Rust College (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rust College, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's up in Holly Springs, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Holly Springs, Mississippi, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think is Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels] who was the president [sic.] of Rust College at one time?
Speaker 2: No, and I know because that's where everything that I've got will go 'cause I don't have any family.  And I've been talking with this--that's not the name of the president.
Speaker 1: Well, he was at one time I think but he doesn't stay the president, but that's.
Speaker 2: May have been, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I think it--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I have been, you know, I dealt with, I did this two or three years ago, but I do talk with them a couple times a year.  But I've only dealt with the, you know, the development office, you know in terms of putting papers and stuff.  I happen--I had never been there, meaning to Rust College and bear in mind we'll get to I'm sure a little bit further 'cause I grew up in Memphis [Tennessee] even though I was born in Clarksdale [Mississippi], between Memphis and Vicksburg [Mississippi].  But we'd drive up and down that highway and Rust College is only like twenty miles, twenty-five miles, if that far, off the highway.  And one year, in the last maybe twenty years, now did you know up and down here all the time and I've never been to Rust College.  It was the summertime, it was on Friday, so school was out, but they did have an activity going on.  And I told them that my [maternal] grandfather had graduated in 1895 and I wanted to see what kind of records they had.  Well, they had none, because they'd had a major fire and everything was destroyed.  And I said, "Well I have his diploma," and they asked me if I would give it to them because they said it would be the oldest record that they had.  That may not hold true now, but that, at that time.  And I came home and got sentimental and didn't send it.  And when Dr. Daniels [HistoryMaker Elnora D. Daniel] was installed out at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] they had all the college presidents and I said to one of the hostesses, I said, "If you can find this gentleman I'd like to meet him."  And she did, and I met him and sent it to him and of course got a letter back saying it hangs in the Leontyne Library [Leontyne Price Library].  But, whether it's the oldest document they have or not I don't know.  They may have run into a million people since that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the school that goes back to Reconstruction.
Speaker 2: Way back, uh-huh.  It's a Methodist school.
Speaker 1: Back to 1867 I think, something like that.
Speaker 2: Well he graduated in 1895, so.
Speaker 1: So, he was an entrepreneur, a farmer, and a professor--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --too?  Now did he teach any--
Speaker 2: Now when we say a professor we're talking about a little school in the country, you know, but he was--he was a professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a brilliant man.  Back when he died, people, white folks said that--what, how'd they put it--few whites and no blacks had his brains.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, at least you--well you know your ancestors after slavery were going to school, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: At least they went to school.  And, now did--what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: She was a school teacher.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Lillie and that's I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, Lillie Brown.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And school teacher.  Did she go to Rust too?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  She was from North Carolina, and quite frankly I don't know where she went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how, how many brothers and sisters did your mother [Julia Brown Ryan] have?
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or about.
Speaker 2: There were seven of them.
Speaker 1: Seven.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 645714
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Julia Brown Ryan] go to college too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, she went to Rust [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They talked about having five children in college at one time.
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother major in?
Speaker 2: Well, she taught briefly, very briefly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she teach in Mississippi, in Memphis [Tennessee] or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, um-hm.  No, no, no, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Mississippi, okay.  Now did--are there any stories your mother told you about what it was like to grow up there and, or what it was like to teach there?
Speaker 2: To teach?
Speaker 1: I mean to grow up, first of all, what was it like when she grew up, did she talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, they were pretty hoity toity, they had a horse and buggy, she and her oldest sister.  Not really, she didn't talk that much about it.  I know she and my oldest aunt, they were the two oldest, Aunt Mary [Mary Brown] and my mother and my uncle who went to Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  No, they just talked about what disciplinarians, my father--my grandfather [Albert Brown] believed in education, he did, he was death on that.  I think there were thirteen, fourteen, fifteen of them, and I guess they didn't have money to send everybody to school so they pooled their money and sent him.  He was the one that went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's interesting, guess what, guess what his diploma said.  Now he was nothing medical in his life, but his diploma said nursing.
Speaker 1: That is, that is interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's that great big one, you know, the sheepskin, you know, those huge ones, about two feet in size.
Speaker 1: Is it in Latin?  Is it written in Latin too?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: I've seen them where they were like huge and were written all in Latin, so--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: From those days.   Okay, so, all right, so, well, let me--any other stories from your mother's side about, I mean did they live in town or did they live in the country?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, he was a farmer and he had, you know, he did, those day laborers, you know how they go chop cotton and he'd have trucks pick up fifty, sixty people and they would, that was both in the season of chopping cotton and then picking cotton.  He had a huge orchard, like a couple acres, every kind of fruit was in there.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I didn't ask you, did your mother grow up in Holly Springs [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Vicksburg [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Vicksburg, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well that's historic Vicksburg, it's supposed to be on a--isn't it supposed to be on a hill that overlooks the Mississippi where you can see--yeah.
Speaker 2: Right on the Mississippi River.  And you know, the military park [Vicksburg National Military Park] is there, as well as the cemetery, veterans' cemetery [Vicksburg National Cemetery].
Speaker 1: All right.  Vicksburg was a strategic prize in the Civil War because you could control the river traffic if you controlled--
Speaker 2: Oh, you should see that military park down there. It's fantastic, if you like that kind of stuff.  To me it was, you know, what we thought about it was nothing.  But--but it's there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, any other stories from your mother's side before I--any stories about her brothers and sisters. Did they all finish school too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  They all went to school.  And I always remember, as I told you they sent them all to college and the baby sister [Elizabeth Brown], who is not--who was not that much older than I am, but I remember when it was time for her to go to college and as I said, on the--my grandfather, well they--they--in that day and age they were pretty well off financially, but then the Depression [Great Depression] and everything hit and money wasn't what it was when it was time for her to go.  And I can't remember it very well, but I do remember her just going into a tantrum because it seems there'd been some discussion as whether or not they were going to be able to send her to school and of course her position was they'd sent everybody else and why were they doing this to her.  I remember that.  But all they--they all went to school.  Uncle went to Dillard.  Two aunts, they were twins [Genonetta Brown and Almetta Brown], went to Haven Teachers College [Meridian, Mississippi]; and the rest of them went to Rust.
Story_ID: 645715
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Now this is going to be interesting.  But it's--he was a dentist.  His name was Charles Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, Charles Washington.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I know absolutely nothing.
Speaker 1: And do you know where he went to dental school?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about him.
Speaker 1: Was he--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Do you know if he really was a dentist or just saying that?
Speaker 2: No he was a dentist, he was a dentist, yeah he was a dentist in Vicksburg [Mississippi].  But he and my mother [Julia Brown Ryan] separated while she was pregnant, that's why I was born in Clarksdale [Mississippi].  And she, whatever it was, and we've never talked about it, that's why I'm--I have the maiden name of Brown because she wouldn't even let me use the name Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they separated early on when--when she was pregnant.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I wonder if they were really married (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: I met him, um-hm, um-hm, I met him, um-hm, and his wife who'd be my stepmother was the music teacher at the school where, you know, where I went, um-hm.  Ms. Katie [Katie Washington].
Speaker 1: So, it was the kind of sit--I mean, okay.  Do you think you have any characteristics of his?  I mean in terms of--I mean--
Speaker 2: I never spent any time with him.  See, as a matter of fact, that's why I was born in Clarksdale and from Clarksdale I went to Memphis [Tennessee].  He was in Vicksburg.  So, I was in grammar school I guess before I really got to know him or you know, meet him anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, well, did he have any special talents or anything that you know of?
Speaker 2: I just know he was a dentist and he had his office on Washington Street, and I--I was in there a few times, a couple times, but I really don't know anything about him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, so, now, you have brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: None, okay, so it's just you?
Speaker 2: Just me.  I was an only child among seven children--seven--my mother's seven siblings until I was eleven before there was a first cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no--
Speaker 2: So they all spoiled me 'cause I was the only brat (laughter).
Story_ID: 645716
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  Well, when I was, like I said my mother [Julia Brown Ryan]--I was born in Clarksdale [Mississippi] and my mother moved to Memphis [Tennessee] with family when I was three years old.  And it was at or about that time I suppose that she met my stepfather [Edward Ryan], and he--he was really my father.  And, but where she lived, and I don't know this, this is all my putting it together and 'cause there's no (unclear) really give me to make it accurate, but where we lived, and I remember vividly where we lived with relatives and he was a pretty hoity toity man.  He was a minister and he was a businessman.  He had the grocery store, you know, and all that stuff.  And I know my bottle was a Coke [Coca-Cola] bottle, I know that, I remember that, you know, put the nipple on a Coke bottle.  But they must've talked about wanting to, I won't say, well I'm going to say adopt me.  And I don't know whether they had been led to believe that she would be amenable to it or not, I just don't know, but I know at the age of three I went to Vicksburg [Mississippi] to--to my grandparents [Lillie Brown and Albert Brown].  And they never let me forget it up until the time they died.  Because they--they had their--you know, they're pretty well off.  And they used to remind me, "All this could have been yours," because if they had adopted me, I assume they would've adopted me, I don't know.  But they eventually adopted a young man, he still lives in Memphis.  But I have a lot of stories, a lot of stories about back then.
Story_ID: 645717
Speaker 1: Well tell us something about your stepfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Edward Ryan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth, do you know?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  Now that I can--well I don't have it, I can give you 'cause I have the death certificates of all of them, but I don't--I don't--
Speaker 1: Well, was he older than your mother [Julia Brown Ryan]?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, they were--they were peers, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, sometime around 1905 or so he was born, again we'll take it.  So, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked for Firestone Tire and Rubber [Firestone Tire and Rubber Company].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--so he just had the one job his whole life?
Speaker 2: That's where he worked his entire life.
Speaker 1: Was he a mechanic?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, no, no.  He--he was inside.  Fact, back then it was kind of unique for the position he held.  He worked mostly with exhibiting stuff that they would do.  He would travel, area--regional, you know, they--when they were doing exhibits and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Was he part of the sales staff or the?
Speaker 2: I would say yeah, um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he worked in the shipping department too, he did that too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They loved him.
Speaker 1: All right, so, is there a story about he--how he and your mother got together?
Speaker 2: If so, I don't know it.  I know they married on New Year's Eve, I know that.  I have my mother's diary so I have a lot of stuff that she wrote (laughter).  But I know they were married on New Year's Eve.  And he was a great dad.
Speaker 1: How old were you when they got married?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, but at the most four or five, because at three I went to Vicksburg [Mississippi].
Story_ID: 645718
Speaker 1: So, did you grow up basically in Vicksburg [Mississippi], in Vicks- no in Memphis [Tennessee], right, you were saying you grew up in Memphis (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's interesting.  I was--I moved about a lot as a child.  Well, see I went from Clarksdale [Mississippi] to Memphis, and at three I went to Vicksburg and I stayed with my [maternal] grandparents until I was in the seventh grade.  And I went to forty schools during that--those years.  But, I was at the little one room schoolhouse where my aunt taught, she was my teacher, and you had five classes in one room, they'd call third grade, you know, for that kind of thing.  Then I went to Magnolia [Magnolia Avenue High School, Vicksburg, Mississippi] because they were living out where--when--where my grandparents lived was out in the country, I mean the real country.  And then he built this house in the city, not in the city, but sort--I guess you'd call it suburbs, but it wasn't a suburb, it was out, it wasn't in the city proper.  He built this huge house and we moved there, and then I started going to Magnolia.  And Magnolia is interesting, now maybe you have reason why they do this, but Magnolia went from the first to the sixth grade, then you went to Cherry Street [Cherry Street School, Vicksburg, Mississippi] for the sixth and seventh grade, then you came back to Magnolia for the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you went from Magnolia to a school called Cherry--
Speaker 2: Cherry Street.
Speaker 1: Cherry Street, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's for seventh and eighth, right?  And back to Magnolia for ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well wait, now wait a minute.  In between there I went back to Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did ninth and tenth grade in Memphis.  But I came back to Vicksburg, then that time was to help my grandmother [Lillie Brown] because my grandfather [Albert Brown] had become ill and it was just the two of them and I was there so I could be helpful.
Speaker 1: Now, what school did you attend in Memphis, do you?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School].
Speaker 1: Oh Booker T. Washington, okay.
Story_ID: 645719
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors in all these schools?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, there was Ms. Lucie, what was her name, Jesus, God.  Oh she wrote the song, the very popular, "If when you give--." 'He'll Understand and Say, Well Done.'  She wrote that and she would stand up--Lucie Campbell.
Speaker 1: And where did she teach, was that at?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Where did Lucie Campbell teach?
Speaker 2: Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a well known gospel song isn't it?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  She wouldn't let us wear lipstick, and the year you had to change rooms, you know go from class, you know, to change rooms and we would have our little lipstick on and we would try to turn our head the other way and of course that was a signal to her that we had lipstick on (laughter).  She'd yank us out of line and make us go get that lipstick off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what about Magnolia [Magnolia Avenue High School, Vicksburg, Mississippi] or Cherry Street [Cherry Street School, Vicksburg, Mississippi], any teachers there that stand out?
Speaker 2: Mr. Stewart, is that his name, Stewart--no, that wasn't his name.  That wasn't his name.  I guess I'd have to say Ms. Pilot [ph.] and Ms. Temple [ph.]--Ms. Temple--Ms. Temple, yeah that's the one.  She was so prissy and proper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have pretty good teachers, you think, on the most part?
Speaker 2: Oh we had excellent teachers.  We really did.  They really did.
Speaker 1: Did, now, did you gravitate to any subject, you know, between grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: I always liked math for some crazy reason, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now did you have science when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, we took it all.
Speaker 1: Did you like that too?
Speaker 2: It was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't that excited about rats and frogs (laughter).  But we had it.
Story_ID: 645720
Speaker 1: Tell us some of your childhood stories.  Now, we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was talking about that because when I would go to Vicksburg [Mississippi], of course, I could go barefoot, but my feet were tender and the ground was hot, and it took me a week before my feet would adjust, you know, to having that.  And I would that--I used to go fishing with my grandmother [Lillie Brown] on the fish bank, I loved to do that.  And I had a horse, it was the first thing I ever owned in life.  A horse named Dan.  I adopted a pig who had, 'cause he had a bad eye, something had no, no, no, somebody--his eye had been injured so he became my pet.  I had a dog, Fluffy.  Everybody in the house went to the field but me and my mother [Julia Brown Ryan]--that was trait of hers.  She stayed home and cooked, 'cause she wouldn't go to the fields.  She used to stay, I wondered sometime if I was really her daughter because she was so fastidious, not me.  And she couldn't--couldn't let the dirt get under her fingernails.  And I tell everybody, they talk about their mama's cooking, I said that wasn't me.  I came up on Pillsbury biscuits.  I know of no stories of my mama in the kitchen.  It wasn't my mama.  She was--and she was dieting--no, I shouldn't say dieting, watching her food.  She, you know, she was--she was a good dresser.  They said she was the best dressed lady at church [Lynch's chapel (ph.)].  I might go to church with blue jeans on.  But that--that was my mother.  And she--lots of stories.  My grandfather [Albert Brown], whom I loved to death and he loved me, and he never, I never got any whippings 'cause he wouldn't let them whip me.  And I remember one day he was doing something and he called my aunt [Elizabeth Brown], who was the baby aunt and told her to bring him something.  And she told me to go get it, and I said, "He didn't ask me, he asked you."  And she said something smart back to me and of course he didn't hear that, but when I came out I said--no, she said to me, "You ol' stubborn bear," and I said, "You ol' stubborn cow," and he heard me.  And when I got there, he had a switch and I thought, this has never happened to me before in life.  He won't let anybody--, but he didn't whip me, you know.  He was--no he wouldn't let anybody bother me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're surrounded with adults who (laughter) are protecting you basically.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, I didn't have--so I didn't have a lot of playmates.  And incidentally, my best girlfriend in Vicksburg was a little white girl.  And because they were in the country, the postman, you know, came and drove, you know, he, they would--and she and I would get at the mailbox and we would wait for the postman to come.  And we were the best of buddies.  And that would be up until--that's when I was in Vicksburg for the early years.  I guess when I went back to Memphis [Tennessee] at about the seventh grade, then I wasn't there.  I just wonder where she is.  Her name was Callie Herron [ph.], probably not alive, I don't know, yeah.  And of course because my grandfather had all that livestock and everything, there were the, not a lot, but there were several whites who would come up and get milk, you know, you had to milk the cow 'cause he had all those cows out there and if they wanted to go milk one for milking, they would, they would come up and get milk.
Speaker 1: You mean he would let them do this?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that kind of a practice down there or he--
Speaker 2: I don't--no I think that, no, I didn't--well nobody else had a cow and hogs that he had.  I mean he had stuff.  Just lots of it.  I tell everybody, he--I guess that's the reason why I have problem with snobby people, because he was a snob.  And I laugh about it because I said my mother married a dentist [Childs' biological father, Charles Washington] and he was, as I'm told, he was thrilled about that.  Another sister married someone whose mother worked for him and he had a fit, and that lasted a lifetime.  And so I said, you know.  But, no he was, he was quite a guy.
Story_ID: 645721
Speaker 1: What about church.  Did you--do you think you--I mean, did your church experience like form your val- help form your values or was it a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we were in church and a little church.  In fact, my [maternal] grandfather [Albert Brown] donated the land for the church and the cemetery.  We'd go to church every Sunday and a couple of Sundays it was we cooked and we stayed on the churchyard grounds and everything.  And you know, I guess they do it now.  I hear people talking about revivals, but when you had a revival there you sat on the mourners' bench until you got religion.  And I sat on the mourners' bench and I sat on the mourners' bench, and I sat on the mourners' bench (laughter).  And by that time I was tired of sitting up there, I was going to just get up and get religion.  And that night, I just got up and said I'm sick of this I'm getting off this bench and my poor little grandmother [Lillie Brown] she was so happy.  She was so happy I got religion (laughter), but no I was not moved that way.
Speaker 1: So they expected you to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, you get religion.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All of a sudden you get the Holy Spirit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, the Holy Ghost and all that, okay.
Speaker 2: I--I di- I just didn't get it, but I was tired of sitting on that seat, so I got up (laughter).  Grandmother was so happy, "Oh my child."  So, I don't know.  Yeah, it was a little church, little, little, little frame church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Lynch's chapel [ph.].
Speaker 1: Whose chapel?
Speaker 2: Lynch's, L-Y-N-C, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh Lynch's chapel, all right.
Speaker 2: Lynch's chapel.  It moved though because the land he donated was at the house up in the hills; and then the church moved over on the highway.
Story_ID: 645722
Speaker 1: Now, did you, were you interested in music, and, you know, radio or TV (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved music.  I loved music and they tried giving me--
Speaker 1: There was no TV then right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: There was no TV when you were growing up, right?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  No, they were giving me pi- everybody in my family sang but me and my mother [Julia Brown Ryan].  Neither one of us could carry a note.  They were going to give me piano lessons and after about six months I think they decided they were wasting their money.  But no, all of them sang.  And they could harmonize, you know, when they were all together they could sing.  Yeah, they could sing.
Speaker 1: Well considering that you got involved in organizations and helped form organizations, and got involved in special events as a job, what were the special events when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, no, didn't do anything like that when I was growing up.  I don't know but I just liked doing special events and seemed to have a knack for getting, you know, getting them together but that was after I was an adult that I--in fact it was after I was here in Chicago [Illinois] when I got doing some things.
Speaker 1: There's no community celebration in any of the places where you lived, I mean the annual celebration?  I know a lot of communities, some--you know, in Texas they celebrate Juneteenth and some cities they celebrate the, I guess the person that founded the school or something, you know, a founder of a church or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No my mother was very supportive, 'cause as I said she went to Rust and Rust was a Methodist college, would it be C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal], 'cause she was a C.M.E.  I--I've--I've belonged to every Methodist church there was.  In Vicksburg [Mississippi] I was a M.E. [Methodist Episcopal], in Memphis [Tennessee] I was a C.M.E. and when I came to Chicago I was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], but I know she was very supportive of Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], you know, when they'd have their financial drives and stuff.  She made sure they got a contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Supported them.
Speaker 1: So were you involved in organizations in school?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I was--no, not organizations.  I was in the drama class and I usually came out pretty good when we'd audition, I guess that's what you would call it.  And most times I got the little part that I wanted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So you liked to perform?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I haven't done it since (laughter), but I did it then.  Yeah, I did it then.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I was a good student and I loved to read.  And I've heard more people than me say they used to do this because I'd get me a flashlight and they'd make--and get under the--you know, I just loved to read.  And I remember 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell] and that was a thick book and I wanted to read it.  I don't think they were too pleased about me reading it.  But I had--I'd get a--
Speaker 1: So you were only about eight, right, eight or nine when 'Gone with the Wind' came out?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: That was 19--oh I don't know when--I know the movie came out in '39 [1939], but the book was out earlier I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well I was born in '26 [1926], '36 [1936], '39 [1939], thirteen.
Speaker 1: You'd been about ten, I guess, when that book came out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe something like that.
Speaker 1: I think it came '35 [1935], '36 [1936].
Speaker 2: I read it.
Speaker 1: What did you think of it?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.  I remember that, I, I, I remember I didn't want to put it down.  I had a good time reading it, I remember that.
Story_ID: 645723
Speaker 1: When you were in school then, did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Now this is--is this--this is an all-black school, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah, it was all (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where did you graduate from high school, 'cause you went to Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] for two years and then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where did you end up graduating?
Speaker 2: Magnolia [Magnolia Avenue High School, Vicksburg, Mississippi], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Magnolia, okay.  Okay, so how big was your graduating class?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've never gone to any reunions.  There's one girl that I still talk with, just talked with her last week, we were in high school together.  I would say there were maybe eighty, maybe eighty, um-hm.  I've never--if they've had any class reunions I've never gone to one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, well Gloria [ph.] is still in Vicksburg [Mississippi] and as I said I talked with her last week.  And another Horatio Custard is in St. Louis [Missouri].  And I guess that's about all I know that's living.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, about eighty students.  And, so, were you thinking about college, I mean you kind of knew, did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew that, I knew that--I knew that we were going to go.
Speaker 1: And this is like 1943?
Speaker 2: Forty--'43 [1943] um-hm.
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943], okay. All right, so the war [World War II, WWII] is still going on.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I remember Pearl--I remember Pearl Harbor day, yeah, um-hm.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: So, what were your thoughts about the war, did?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had any real thoughts, I just remember hearing my [maternal] grandfather [Albert Brown] talk about it, you know, but I don't think I had any real thoughts about it really.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, did you have any counseling about where to go, go to college?
Speaker 2: No, I was, by then I'm back in Memphis [Tennessee] so there was LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College], you know, so that--that was it.
Story_ID: 645724
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee].  Was, LeMoyne-Owens, was that what it was called, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm [sic.].
Speaker 1: And did you--what was your aspiration at that time, what did you want to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I majored in business administration.  That's odd isn't it?
Speaker 1: I mean it might be odd, I mean do you think it was odd for those days to major in business administration?  I mean, is it because you were a female or what, did you think it was odd?
Speaker 2: I don't know, maybe it was just because all the time I spent around my [maternal] grandfather [Albert Brown] with him being a businessperson, something like that and maybe that's--maybe that had an impact.
Speaker 1: Were there any female students in business with you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: There wasn't anything unusual about that I don't guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that really wasn't odd, so.  So, okay now.  Were there any special teachers or mentors at LeMoyne-Owen?
Speaker 2: No.  Unh-uh. Nobody really special, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: And LeMoyne-Owen, this is an all-black school [HBCU].  It's a small school I guess, but.
Speaker 2: Ain't that small.  But I don't know if you remember Walter Walker when he was here, but no that has nothing to do with my attorney.  But he because president of LeMoyne-Owen because I went down for the installation when he was installed, and we said we were installing Walker on Walker 'cause LeMoyne was located on Walker Avenue.  And his wife is still there, he died--'cause he was interesting.  He contracted some kind of disease, I don't remember what it was, but it was one of those things like muscular dystrophy or something like that.  And he made himse- did research on his illness and I've forgotten where he went--where--where--went to work for some corporation 'cause LeMoyne fired him and he sued and won because he was fired because they said he physically wasn't able and he sued on that and won it.  But that's recent, that's from maybe twenty years ago whenever he was down, maybe twenty five.  It was longer than that, because I wasn't married when we went down.
Story_ID: 645725
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what was life in Memphis [Tennessee] like when you were in school there?
Speaker 2: Life in Memphis was fun.  It was fun.  My mother [Julia Brown Ryan] and my stepfather [Edward Ryan] had a great relationship, so every week, Monday night I guess we went to the wrestling match and Thursday night we went to the movies.  Give or take that was almost weekly we would do that, and they drug me with them most of the time.  And I was so bored looking at that wrestling match, but I would go.  But no I had--I had a good time in Memphis.  My little girlfriend, Essie, her name was Essie Lee [ph.].  And I don't know if she's alive or dead.  She moved to Pontiac, Michigan.  I kept up with her a long time, then I lost her.  I remember one time we had--and this is the truth, we had five dollars and we bought a whole Easter outfit with it.  We dressed like twins, we had the hat, the dress and the shoes.  And we were walking down, wasn't Beale Street, but we were walking down the street and a lady was in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]--YWC--whatever, the Y and she saw us and they were having a fashion show.  She asked--called us in and asked us if we would like to model as twins in her fashion show, well we were delighted (laughter) modeling fashion with our little dresses.  Yeah, I had a good time in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Now is Memphis, what was Beale Street like in Memphis in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh it was alive and well.  It was--it was.  In fact, one of my teachers, Nat [ph.]--wasn't Nat Turner [sic. Nat Williams], now I don't know what his last name was.  He taught math at Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], but he was all they had--guess it's on the same order of what they did at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York]--like amateur night ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'].  And he was the emcee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jack Stewart [ph.], that was his name, that was his name, wait a minute now I'm confusing schools.  Jack Stewart was in Vicksburg [Mississippi], Nat was in and--I don't know what his last name was, Nat somebody.  He was--he was in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jack Stewart was in Vicksburg.  He was so handsome.  He had pretty curly black hair, we just thought he was so handsome.
Speaker 1: Had the career of [HistoryMaker] B. B. King started up yet?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was the black radio station on the air when you were in college [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No there wasn't any black radio station.
Speaker 1: There was--well--
Speaker 2: But it seems like--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Maybe it wasn't open yet, but B. B. King was on a black radio station when he started out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember, the only thing I can re- well that wasn't black and that came out of Cincinnati [sic. Cleveland, Ohio].  Every Sunday morning we would listen to 'Wings Over Jordan.'  You know we would do that on Sunday, my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: Now you were in college when the war ended and I've heard that a lot of the G.I.'s, you know, went to school on a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] that came back.  Did that change--
Speaker 2: But that was World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, well I was in--I was in Chicago [Illinois] when World War II ended.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought you were in--'cause you said you graduated in '43 [1943] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's Vicksburg--I mean that's Memphis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you were in college from '43 [1943] to what?
Speaker 2: Seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, the war ov- was over in '45 [1945], so that's why I was asking if--?
Story_ID: 645726
Speaker 1: Well, let me get this straight now.  When I came to Chicago [Illinois] my first job I was working with Celious Henderson--that was my first job in Chicago.  And he had the Metropolitan tailoring school [Metropolitan School of Tailoring, Chicago, Illinois].  And that was a school--well I guess he had--he had it before I went there, so that, okay.  Because Metropolitan tailoring school, and that was a G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] school, you know, the guys who came from the [U.S. military] service.  And he really became a mentor, my father in Chicago.  In fact, we were talking the other day about Mr. Henderson because he was just a father to so many, including Jesse and Joe Caldwell [Joseph Caldwell] who has the Tailorite cleaners [Tailorite Complete Clothing Care] out on--we talked.
Speaker 2: And Jesse, you mean?
Speaker 1: Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm, Jesse he was around Mr. Henderson.  I wasn't around, but, I mean Jesse, I mean Mr. Henderson was around.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: See I came to Chicago 'cause I go--for some reason I came to say with a family member that, I thought I wanted to go to Northwestern [Northwestern University].  Ended going to Cortez Peters Business College.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I did, I took courses out at Northwestern in business administration.
Speaker 2: So you didn't finish at LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and you came up here before the war [World War II, WWII] was over?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you went to Cortez W. Peters Business--
Speaker 1: Cortez W. Peters Business College [Chicago, Illinois].  Took accounting, fell in love with accounting.  And then went to Northwestern doing accounting business administration.
Speaker 2: So this was about 1944 or '45 [1945]?  Yeah.  Well, no, no--
Speaker 1: Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], '47 [1947] I guess, right now? No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh, let's see now, let me--let me--let me get myself straight here now.  Forty-seven [1947], '43 [1943], I didn't go to Cortez Peters until--I don't know when I went there.  I got my little certificate 'cause I just took the business course, you know, the business, business, you know, whatever, typing and the accounting part.  I went there two years, I think I went two years.  All these years run together, I don't know one year from the other to be honest with you.  But, I can get it for you, I got my little certificate.
Speaker 2: Okay, you can provide that later, but I'm just trying to get a sense of--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --what time period it was, what was going on.  What was--
Speaker 1: And of course I went downtown campus when I talk about Northwestern, I wasn't out--
Story_ID: 645727
Speaker 1: How was Chicago [Illinois] different from Memphis [Tennessee] in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh goodness.  Bright lights and even though, well but no we used to have the big bands come 'cause we would go to the theater and had to go all the way up to the buzzard roof when they would come, like Cab Calloway and all those kind of people.  But I didn't do a lot when I first got to Chicago.  I was--well didn't know anybody until, except for the, you know, the aunt that I came here with--I don't mean my aunt, it was a cousin that I came here with.  I didn't do a lot, I didn't do a lot, I really didn't.  Unh-uh.  What did I do?  Well, I knew I went to work for Hen- [Celious Henderson] and he was at 54th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] and I was living at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], so I could go out the back door and go to work.  Everybody there was a lot older than I was and the--before it was the school though, before he went into the school [Metropolitan School of Tailoring, Chicago, Illinois], as I think about it now, he had the manufacturing part of it where the ladies did piecework, you know, they did piecework.  And--but he was merging, he was really closing out and going into the school, I guess there was more money, I guess, he was going into the school business.  But when I first started with him that's what we were doing.  But I don't think I did that but maybe less than six months before he went into--before he went into the tailoring--tailoring school.  In fact, he and Joe Caldwell [Joseph Caldwell] and can't think of the other guy's name now, started the Tailorite [Tailorite Complete Clothing Care]--tailoring school together and he left it.
Story_ID: 645728
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any politics in those days?
Speaker 2: In those days, no.  I was fishing and hunting.
Speaker 1: Fishing and hunting in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well no, not--no, I dated a guy who, we belonged to a hunting and fishing club.  And of course I had--I love fishing 'cause I'd fish with my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Brown], you know I love fishing.  And it was a fishing and hunting club.  We'd have a wild game dinner every year and most of it would be game that they had killed, you know, and they'd keep it in the--.  I wonder what happened to that place, they bought a place up in Wisconsin and when they bought it, it just had one big house on it and they would, you'd take turns, you had to say--I don't know, that house must've had, it was a two story, I remember it was a frame two story house, but it must've had like four or five, maybe at least three or four bedroom.  And you'd say, "Well I'm going up next week," and you know, everybody couldn't go at the same time.  But they built that up and they have, everybody started putting their own little cabins on the river up there.  And I just wonder if it's still there.
Speaker 1: Now what river was it on?
Speaker 2: Well it was--we went through Fond du Lac [Wisconsin] when we went through there to get to it, but I don't know the name of the river, maybe it was Fond du Lac River, I don't know.  We'd go up there.  They'd take me fishing, but they wouldn't let me hunt.  (Laughter) And we would, I've got pictures of me down trying to trap shoot and stuff. That was fun.  But as I said, and well I guess I was a member of the Women's Auxiliary [of the Joint Negro Appeal], the wives or whatever they called it, but I wasn't--I real--I was--you know, I was dating, I wasn't married to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we had a--I loved to go.  We'd go--Canada, different places, Minnesota, fishing.  They let me fish, but they wouldn't let me hunt.  Some reason they thought I wasn't too cool with a gun.
Story_ID: 645729
Speaker 1: So what did you do during the balance of the--you worked for Mr. Henderson at Tailorite [Tailorite Complete Clothing Care], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were going to school, now did you finish your courses (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I wasn't going to school.
Speaker 1: You weren't, I thought you said you were going to Cortez Peters [Cortez W. Peters Business College, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Was I going? No I wasn't--I went to Cortez Peters--I didn't go there after Mr. Henderson, that was after Mr. Henderson.  It was after Mr. Henderson when I went there--maybe it wasn't 'cause--maybe it was, it was after Mr. Henderson when I went there.  But I was thinking about the typing part and I didn't do any typing at, there, so I hadn't been to Cortez Peters at that time.  No, I didn't do any typing.  Yes I did type, yes I did, what am I saying. I did type.  'Cause that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Hermene Hartman when she was a little girl and her father [Herman Hartman] owned the building Mr. Henderson rented from him.  And when Hermene would come from school, she would come there and stay until her mother [Mildred Hartman] got off from work and she tells the story of how she used to crawl on my knee and I would be typing and she would say to me, "Her fingers go (makes sound)," (gesture), "when she types," and everything.  So, she had--she said that made her want to learn how to type.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the paper--the, I mean the, who you working for?
Speaker 2: Celious Henderson.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Metropolitan tailoring school [Metropolitan School of Tailoring, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well--
Speaker 2: 54th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].
Story_ID: 645730
Speaker 1: You're a young woman, single woman, you're tailoring and as we approach the 1950s, I've heard a lot of stories about Chicago [Illinois] nightlife and the fun in Chicago at the Regal Theater, the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe], all these different places.  Did you take advantage of that extensive cultural nightlife?
Speaker 2: I went to the theater.  I was not--I didn't--you know, the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois] was big and booming during that time, but I didn't go there that often cause it was only across--I was at 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] and they were at 55th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] I guess, State [Street] or Wabash where they were.  I certainly went there a few times, but I wasn't there that often.  That's another thing, see I was here and by then I was somewhat on my own and when I talk about Celious Henderson I remember he had a restaurant.  Been between, he opened his restaurant, he opened--we opened two, one at 41st [Street] and guess was South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] then, forgotten where the other one was, it was over east someplace.  And sometimes he would ask me if I would come and cashier, you know, help him cashier in the morning.  And I would go and did--I guess it was a hotel.  But the people who lived--who worked--you know, the show people who worked at DeLisa, that's where they lived and they would be coming in about breakfast time.  And I never will forget, one of them invited me to come upstairs and I was thrilled, I thought I'd go up there.  And I'll always remember Mr. Henderson sitting me down.  You know, talking to me in terms of that's not what you want to do kind of thing.  And I remember he said, "I've got two daughters and I'd want somebody to say the same thing to them."  But he was just, he was just that kind of guy.
Speaker 1: Who were you living with at the time, were you living with relatives here in Chicago?
Speaker 2: By then I think I had my own little--my own little one room apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well let's go to the '50s [1950s].  So, tell us about the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], '50s [1950s], '50s [1950s].  Okay, '50s [1950s], I don't know, I was--now why was I going to move.  I don't remember, but I know I was looking for a place to move.  And why was I going to move, I don't remember.  But I know a girl that was in school with me, she wa- she sang in the choir at Ebenezer Church [Ebenezer Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], this isn't anything you want to write.  But she knew that I was looking for a place and she knew that someone who sang in the choir with her was looking for a place and she said, "Well this girl, Essie [ph.], who sings in the choir with me," da-da-da-da-da, "maybe you all can find a place together."  And we both agreed.  And for whatever reason, we met, had never seen each other before in life, we met and had to tell each other what we were going to be wearing so we would know each other.  We took an apartment together and we stayed together, I want to say four years.  And then we--we moved once because where we were the manage- the lady, the lady took the apartment back because she wanted it.  But I remember when I was going to move I was going to move 45th [Street] and Woodlawn [Avenue], and I didn't want to be there to say goodbye to her so I wouldn't come home 'cause I didn't--I wanted to get my stuff out and she was doing the same thing, so we ended up there together.  But we lived together.  I know, I know why we we're moving, 'cause we had this big apartment and that time they rented it in front part, back part, but we rented it as one unit, us together, you know.  And then she had a daughter and so she brought--her daughter was living with her--with her mother, which was her daughter's grandmother.  So she came to live with us and her sister came, and it was just too many of us there and so I was going to move.  And that would've been in--that would--that would be the '50s [1950s], because I'm a charter member of the Congregational Church of Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois] and that was in '53 [1953].  I'll always know that, 'cause I was living at 7038--no--no--7152 Michigan [Avenue] and they did--they did--what am I trying to say, they determined that they wanted to do a United Church of Christ in that area and they did a survey around to see if people would be interested in a new church, and Essie and I joined the church.  She sang in the choir.  I can't carry a note.  But I was very involved in that church and still there.
Speaker 1: The church is where, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: 70th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].
Speaker 1: 70th and King, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 645731
Speaker 1: Now what was the relationship to the--of--between the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois] and the black community in those days?  How did--was there any significant participation by black people in city government?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Because that's--see that's when--when did I go to work for the city.  I went to work for the city 'cause that's why--that--now it comes to me--that's why I had to move because Bob Miller [Robert Miller] was my sponsor and he was 6th Ward and I had to move to be in his ward.  And actually when I went to work for the city I was supposed to be one of those people that you read about.  Because I was going to be paid by the city, but I was going to run the headquarters at 65th [Street] and Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue], and that's where I would've been, although the city would've been paying.  And Edith Sampson was the--she was a lawyer and she was at city hall.  And we had the Chicago Daily News in and they came out with this huge article on this black woman lawyer making this high salary, I don't think it was two figures, I don't think it was ten thousand.  But she was never at her desk.  So they decided the heat was on and they better not move me out you know, you know, because the press was going around and everything.  So I stayed there.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: This would have been, I'm going to say this church [Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] was '53 [1953] and I had to move because of not living in the ward, so I'll tell you, if you know when it was--it was when Adlai Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] ran for president, I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  That's when he lost to Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], yeah.
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], '52 [1952]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: Okay, well that's when it was because-
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no.  Oh, you're, wait a minute.  Eisenhower won in '52 [1952], he won in '56 [1956] and '60 [1960] was Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] and Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy], you know, and Kennedy won.  So it was '56 [1956] was Adlai Stevenson I guess, right?
Speaker 2: That could be about right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Because Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt] was doing a tour of the country, you know, for campaigning for him.  And they discovered that they didn't have anything scheduled in the black community, and they gave the assignment to Edith to put together some kind of a rally, you know, for him.  And they assigned me to work with her to do this rally.  And then she wouldn't let them take me back, and she--I worked with her for a few years.  Oh god she was a taskmaster, but she was a, she was an in- we had the same birthday.
Speaker 1: So what stages do you work for, who are you working for?
Speaker 2: Bob Miller, 6th Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay, 6th Ward Democratic Organization.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And she lived 1020 East 48th Street and I was living at 48th and Woodlawn [Avenue].  She would make me go home with her and we'd sit up and play Canasta, and at that time you could walk the street at night, you didn't have to worry.  And she--I'd have to sit there and play Canasta with her from whatever time we would get in 'til ten, eleven, twelve, one, two o'clock in the morning.  And I had to go home, and I had to be in the office at nine o'clock.  But the funny thing about it, she was a--she was a slave driver in the office, but the minute I crossed her threshold I was her guest.
Speaker 1: So this is Edith?
Speaker 2: Sampson.
Speaker 1: Sampson, okay.  And the--Bob Miller, is that the same Bob Miller of the Chatham--
Speaker 2: Chatham Home.
Speaker 1: Chatham Business Association [Chicago, Illinois], is it?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't know.  No Bob Miller had Miller Major Funeral Home [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Miller Major, okay.
Speaker 2: Eventually became Miller Major Ockleberry [Miller Major and Ockleberry Funeral Home; Cage Memorial Chapels and Cremation Services, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Miller Major eventually became the headquarters for Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan].  They sold the building (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was the second building.  At first he was on 63rd Street [sic.] and then he moved on 79th Street, um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now we get it, okay.
Speaker 2: And so we--we put this activity on for Mrs. Roosevelt, it was quite a success and then.
Speaker 1: Now when--since this is an activity, an event and you're putting it on, what did you all do actually?  Well what did you?
Speaker 2: It was just a matter of getting--doing a rally, you know, having people there for her to talk to.  I can't remember any particulars about the rally, but I remember that we had a full house.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where'd you hold it?
Speaker 2: It was held at KAM temple [KAM Isaiah Israel] where PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it was the 6th Ward?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, 6th Ward didn't have anything to do with this.  This is a I guess you'd say the Democratic National Committee sending Mrs. Roosevelt on a tour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and when they discovered they didn't have--and that's when we did.  No that wasn't in the six--that didn't have anything to do with the 6th Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were working in the 6th Ward, but that was assigned to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I was assigned to Edith to put on that event for Mrs. Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 645732
Speaker 1: And I stayed with her and Colonel Riley.  I don't know if you ever remember hearing of Colonel Riley, Colonel Jack Riley?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm going to write him down.
Speaker 1: I would stop and for some reason in the afternoon I would stop by and say good night to him, and he was in the mayor's office--I mean, he yeah well 'cause he didn't even have an office, he had--the big desk, the table where all the newspapers were here and he worked here.  And he was putting--okay now--now I'm getting my years together now.  He was working on the Pan American Games and the Queen of England [Elizabeth II] was coming, so he was working on those two things.  And I would stop in and he had done some other things because he would ask me and I was delighted 'cause he wanted a little black face there.  When he had state people, I remember my first one was Nkrumah.  He wanted somebody at the front desk, you know, to check people in and everything.
Speaker 2: Oh Kwame Nkrumah was coming in town?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: The president of Ghana, now this--he was brand new in '56 [1956], 'cause that's when Ghana got its independence [sic. 1957], so.
Speaker 1: Well, now we had him, we had two--two or three of them there, and he'd ask me if I would sit with--on the door to check people in, a couple other people, they wanted a face.  And I was delighted.  And I'd go spend all my money to get a dress and sit at the door and you know, check people in.  And I got mad with Edith [Edith Sampson] 'cause I said she was a taskmaster and I was going to quit.  And I stopped that evening and said good night to him and you know, like, "See you tomorrow."  And I said, "No you won't see me tomorrow I'm quitting."  And he looked at me and he said, you know, he said, "What's the problem?"  I said, "I'm quitting."  So, then he said to me, "How would you like to come work with me?"  Well I'd love it, because that was--that was the special event--we didn't have any special events, there was no such thing as department.  We founded the department--he founded the department of special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events].
Speaker 2: It's Colonel Jack Riley?
Speaker 1: Colonel Jack Riley.  One eyed Jack, who became a mentor to me.  Anyway, he told me, he said, "How would you like to come work with me," and I said, "Oh I'd love it."  And he said well, "Just go and come on back to work tomorrow, keep your mouth closed and let me see what I can do."  Now I had no way of knowing if he was sincere or whether he was just trying to keep a little girl from quitting her job where she was living from payday to payday.  And about two weeks later I came in and there was a note saying to report to Jack Riley.  And we were doing both the Queen of England visit and the Pan American Games at the same time.  And I'll always remember that she came on the 5th of July 'cause the 4th of July we were down there teaching--well not teaching, but working with people on how to curtsy to the queen.
Speaker 2: Okay. So were the Pan American Games here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, they were in '58 [sic. 1959].
Speaker 2: Okay, now those are--well--they're Pan American, all the American countries and nations send representatives to the Pan Am Games.  And so this is in nineteen fifty--
Speaker 1: The games were in '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], okay.
Speaker 1: Now the queen must've come in fifty--when did you say--when did you say Stevenson [Adlai Stevenson II] was running?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], okay, now we put the rally on.  So I mus- the queen must've come in '57 [sic. 1959], must have, because when I went to work for him.  And so I became quote the first black working in the mayor's office.  But I wasn't on the mayor's office payroll, 'cause see I was still on corporation counsel's payroll, but I was work- I, I--when he took me to work with him.
Story_ID: 645733
Speaker 1: But that's significant though, you were the only, you were the first black person to work in that mayor's office--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the mayor's office of the City of Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  But if you check it, you won't find me on payroll--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't on the mayor's payroll, I was on, you know, they probably--you paid over here, but you work over here.
Speaker 1: Now, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think Richard M. Daley [sic. Richard J. Daley] was new as the mayor then, right?
Speaker 2: When I went to work for the city, who was it--Kennelly [Martin H. Kennelly] was--was mayor and then all the hullabaloo and stuff and I didn't know anything about politics and I really didn't know what people were talking about.  But I remember this, you know, when this happened I was there.
Speaker 1: So Kennelly was mayor then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you started?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  What by, by, by now, Daley is the mayor when we get up to '58 [1958], '59 [1959], Daley, Daley, Daley is mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Simultaneous) Right, right, yeah. I thought he was elected in '56 [sic. 1955], but I might be wrong.
Speaker 2: He could be, I--
Speaker 1: So Kennelly was the mayor and were there any blacks on the city council [Chicago City Council]?
Speaker 2: Was there any blacks in city council then?  Were there any blacks in city council?  Let's see--
Speaker 1: I think, I think [HistoryMaker] Bennett Johnson (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yes, you--you had Harvey and--Bill Harvey [William Harvey] and Claude Holman, not sure when they came in.  But I know we--when we finished the Pan American Games, well that was--Colonel [Jack Riley] had completed, you know, what he was there to do.  And then that's when he started the department of special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events].  I remember he went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to look at some festival that they have every year, and there were five of us.  We used to call ourselves u--little united nation because Judy [ph.] was Polish, Kitty [ph.] was Irish, I was--what were we then I guess colored or African American, and Stella [ph.] was Hispanic, and Marian [ph.] was Irish and that was our staff and we started the department of special events.  We--that was when the first McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] opened, we were in charge of that.  Cutting ribbon for Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway]; all that sort of stuff was going on then--that--that--that's what we did.
Story_ID: 645734
Speaker 1: Okay, so you made sure that all the arrangements were made and whatever props and equipment were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, we did it all--we did--now he, being who he was, I mean he had--when the event, itself, would come off there were people he would pull from other departments just to work the last two or three days if it was major where we need stuff.  And the day and--of the event, you know, he'd pull in some people like that.  But we did all of that work, five of us, and.
Speaker 1: So did you work long hours?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, god yes.  And we didn't--we didn't get any time off.  Didn't matter you worked whatever, if it fell on a holiday you just didn't have a holiday, and you didn't have tomorrow off because you worked the holiday.  He was a great boss though.  He was a good guy.
Speaker 1: So what were they--why do you say that, I mean what were the benefits?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot from him, I really did.
Speaker 1: Now is this from Colonel Ryan or--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Is this from Ryan or Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley]?
Speaker 2: No, Colonel Riley [Jack Riley].
Speaker 1: Co- Riley, Riley, okay.
Speaker 2: When I talk about being the first, the only, I do have a picture 'cause we do Secretary's Day [Administrative Professionals' Day] and you know, Daley would take us for Secretary's Day.  So the only proof I would have to say I was part of the staff is a picture in the newspaper of him and his secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I stayed there and that's when the people started marching in the street, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and everybody.  And they pulled me out of there and that's when I quit city hall.  They pulled me out of there and they put me in with Dick Elrod [Richard Elrod], and they were monitoring the marches.
Story_ID: 645735
Speaker 1: Okay now tell us about now--so you were working at city hall, but there were activists protesting the lack of African Americans in city hall, right?  And a lot of other things in the city?
Speaker 2: Well what were they march--'cause they would march from Buckingham Fountain [Chicago Illinois] to Daley's [Richard J. Daley] house, Buckingham Fountain to Daley's house.  But see when I--while I was still with--Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected while I was still with Colonel Riley 'cause we put on the parade, which was a Democratic parade, but we put on the parade for--we did all that stuff.  And when the inauguration wa- the colonel got us--they--the colonel was so well versed in doing special events that when they were getting ready to do the Kennedy inauguration, and I think it was First National Bank [First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I may be wrong, but they were one of the major sponsors as far as they--inauguration in Washington [D.C.] was concerned.  And Washington called--no, Washington--no.  First National wanted Washington to send somebody to help them put together the pieces for the inauguration and everything.  And they said to First National, whomever, "You got the best person right there in the City of Chicago [Illinois]," meaning Jack Riley.  So that's who you need to touch.  So we did some of the stuff, I don't even remember what, for the inauguration, but then colonel went to Washington to, to, to work with the inauguration.  And even got us some tickets to some stuff and we went and they had the worst blizzard you'd ever had, so we didn't do any of it.
Speaker 1: Was it 1961 I guess for the inauguration of John Kennedy, January '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Prob- probably it was uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So when were the demonstrations, were they in the?
Speaker 2: Oh when I said that's why I quit city hall.  They pulled me and put me in--bear in mind I was on corporation counsel payroll.  They put me on some division, Dick Elrod [Richard Elrod] was the head of it.  And I was on--I would be on the phone, they would be calling me from the demonstration to tell me what was going on and all that kind of stuff.  And then, I don't know if I should put this on record, but it's a fact, there was a restaurant in--one block down from city hall in the basement and we would go there every evening, 'cause they had night court for all the people they'd arrested all day.  And we would go there in the evening and there'd be the judge, the corporation counsel, me, Dick Elrod, and we would go and they would sit there and they would determine, at dinner, what kind of sentences they were going to pass out that night.  And I remember I went to work the next day, and I wasn't married to Jack [James Childs, Sr.].  But I went to work the next day and I said, "I cannot do this.  I cannot be a part of this."  And I called Jack and I called Bill Berry [Edwin C. Berry].  And Bill Berry wanted me to stay, he said, "You be my--you be my person inside," and I said, "I can't do it."  And I called Jack and told him I was cleaning out my desk drawer, "Come get me."  And he did (laughter).  He told me how proud he was of me.  He said, "I promise you, you will never, you'll never be out of doors and you'll never go hungry."  So we got married and I started asking for things, and he said, "I didn't promise you all of that," (laughter). "I just told you you'd never be outdoors, you'd never," yeah.  And I remember the--the thing that really got to me, was [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, he was marching.  He was a part of the marches and they were standing in front of the judge and I remember, I don't know whether they were jeans or what, but I just know they had two back pockets and he was standing with--before the judge with his hands, you know, in these back pockets and he was just shaking his head as if to say I don't believe this.  And the sentences were the fines or whatever it was, I don't know, but I said, "I can't do this, I can't be a part of this."  And I went to work the next day, but that's when I called, said, "Come get me," and cleaned out my desk drawer.
Speaker 1: Oh, I was going to ask you--
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was a part of those marches.  'Cause I remember the first time they arrested Dick Gregory, I can't think of his name now, but one of the lawyers called me--called the office and naturally I was answering the phone; and he was scared to death 'cause he had Dick Gregory and he didn't know what to do.
Story_ID: 645736
Speaker 1: Now where did you meet James Childs [James Childs, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: In the grocery store at the counter--meat counter.  Yeah, we had--well you know [HistoryMaker] Juanita Passmore.  Well she introduced me to Jack. We had gone to a wedding that day, it was a girl who was severely handicapped.  And we were just so excited that, you know, she'd gotten married.  And I, I don't--I don't know her financial circumstances or anything like that, but I know that she lived in this house somewhere like 50 something and Michigan--Michigan [Avenue].  And she got married at the house and she was going to have a little reception at the house, but because of her handicap, she wasn't able to do it and I guess she wasn't able to pay anybody--I don't know.  But I know when it was all over, we went back in the kitchen and started, lunchmeat and stuff, we were putting out.  And we were so upset that she didn't say to us before because we would've been there and we would've done it.  And anyway, we went through the little reception and Juanita had to be driving, 'cause I didn't drive.  And we stopped back at my house and Juanita said, "If you've got some wine, I need--." We--we were just, you know.  And so I said yes.  So she went into my house and we had a glass of wine and stuff like that.  And both of us needed to go to the laundromat.  And so I put my clothes in the bag and put them in the car and then we went to her house and went to the laundromat.  And while the clothes were drying, grocery store was right over there and we decided to go in the grocery.  And Juanita knew Jack.  And she saw him standing in front of the meat counter and it's the kind of meeting nothing was ever supposed to come from and she said, "You all don't know each other.  Nice single man, nice single--you all ought to know each other.  I'm going to take my basket I'm going down the aisle, I'll be back." (Laughter) And she'd come back, "Well they ain't got no frozen that--I'm going shop some more."  And this went on and--anyway before we left, Juanita had set up breakfast for us the next morning, we were going to have breakfast at my house.  And I'll always remember, it was the second Saturday in September 'cause Park Manor [Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] had been the fastest growing church in that denomination and we had had to have two services.  But for summertime, we just had the one service, but in September we'd go back to two services.  And I was going to go--I mean--I--in my mind I thought the next day would be the beginning of the two services, so Jack's coming for breakfast right, so what time, I established a time, and he said, "What do you want me to bring? You want me to bring anything?" Single girl I got a bottle of water and a lemon in the box, you know (laughter), what do you want me to do.  But I remember I told--and this I learned about accountants, be specific, be specific.  You say--if you say, "Oh just bring me a couple tomatoes," you'll get two.  You say, "Bring me a bushel of tomatoes," you'll get the bushel.  So I said, "Well you can bring some bacon," and I told him where to come.  And the next morning, which was Sunday, I don't know why I called the church.  But I discovered that we were not going on two services until the following Sunday which meant the time I told him to come for breakfast wasn't a good time.  And Betty King [Betty Jackson King] was the director of music and this was her last Sunday.  She was going to take over the music department at Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] and they were having a reception for her.  Well I had to be at that.  So I stuck a note on the doorbell and said to Jack, "Gone to Park Manor Church."  That's just what I said, "Gone to Park Manor Church."  Well now there's Park Manor Christian [Park Manor Christian Church, Chicago, Illinois], Park Manor Baptist [Park Manor Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], (laughter) and he went to all these churches before he got to me.  And when he got there, this reception was going on and he saw Mel Chatman [ph.], he said, "You know [HistoryMaker] Josie Childs," or something like that.  "Oh yeah, everybody knows Josie Childs, there she is over there."  And Jack had gotten me this pound of bacon and he got slab bacon.  Well you know they slice slab bacon so you get it rolled up so it's about this big, right.  If there had been a pound of bacon it wouldn't, and (laughter) when I got in the car, (laughter) he said, "Here's your bacon."  And I looked and I said, "This cheap guy, he'll never get back in my--my house again," 'cause he had this little thing of bacon.  But anyway, that was Juanita, she did it.
Story_ID: 645737
Speaker 1: So, you meet James Childs [James Childs, Sr.], and now this is, how long did you all court before you got--I know you got married in '69 [1969], so?
Speaker 2: We must've dated for about a little over two years 'cause actually I was the one who pushed getting married 'cause.  About two years, about two years.
Speaker 1: Well 'cause, now he had been married before, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and had, 'cause we were discussing the s- the attorney Jack Childs [James Childs, Jr.], his son?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I'll tell you a funny story about that, it's not in my resume, but.  Jack's first wife, Jackie's mother, they lived in Dayton [Ohio], they were in Dayton.  And there were two sisters, they weren't--they were half sisters but anyway they lived together.  And when Jackie would go see them and he would come back, one sister was failing, you know, mentally and the other one was failing physically.  And I remember saying to Jackie, "You--you know, you really should bring your mom here."  And he--he tells me, he said you know, "You were the first person to tell me, you know, that I should bring my mother here."  And she brou- he brought her here and of course she lived with him until she died.  And when she died, I was out of town for whatever reason.  And it was in June, I remember that, it may have been May--May or June because proms were going on, you know, school proms.  And when I got back there were all these messages that they had called and I said they, oh, I wasn't here Friday, Jack went to the prom with his son, you know, I said he went--and they just wanted me to come, you know, how they do to prom.  And of course when I--when I called them I found out that Louise [ph.] had died.  And Jackie he's--he's such a big puff.  He doesn't deal with stuff like that very well at all.  And so they were at the funeral director and they were trying to get stuff together.  And they were going through whatever you go through and Jackie just wasn't being any help at all.  And Lydia [ph.] said, "Well that's all right," you know, to the funeral director, "That's all right you don't have to worry I'll get my mother-in-law to help me."  And he's saying, "But that's your mother laying there dead," (laughter), you know.  Ah that was funny.  And we got together and we were trying to write her obituary and I didn't know nothing and she knew less, and we were trying to put it together.  But I finally called Jack's brother [Christopher Childs] and we got some information and put that obituary together.  Jackie just couldn't deal with it, yeah.
Story_ID: 645738
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago [Illinois], you got married in '69 [1969] and Chicago was going through a lot of changes.  We just had a big riot here after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, right, on the West Side, Madison Street burnt up, the assassination of Fred Hampton on the West Side also, '69 [1969], you know, there's a lot of discontent with the Daley administration, the police Red Squad and all these different things.  I mean what was--
Speaker 2: Democratic National Convention was here [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So I'm just trying to, what were some of the issues--other issues that you remember that and how would you characterize those?  Were they the fault of Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] or were they things that happened beyond his control or what?
Speaker 2: You're talking about the convention?
Speaker 1: No, all these things, all these different--'cause it was a pretty rough time, you know.  I mean the mayor had the backing of white Chicago basically, but the black issues were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Jack and Jake Arvey [Jacob Arvey], um-hm, who ran the city.
Speaker 1: Now who was he now?
Speaker 2: Jake Arvey.
Speaker 1: Okay, explain?
Speaker 2: Well he was a major--I don't know who he was, he was a lawyer, he was a big lawyer, big law firm, and had a lot of influence on the Democratic Party.  And I think he was--I think, I can't--I couldn't prove this, but my observation is and many others that he was the one person that could pull Daley's strings.
Speaker 1: This is attorney Jake Harvey.
Speaker 2: Jake Arvey, A-R-V-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Arvey, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And Richie [Richard M. Daley] and the rest of them were in their teens at that time, I guess, yeah they were.  And I know they would come to the office, meaning Colonel Riley's [Jack Riley] office and like when we had special events and things going, they would come to the office [of the Mayor's Office of Special Events]  and wait 'til it was time to go.  They'd be in there all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew the Daley brothers when they were kids?
Speaker 2: I don't think he--he knows me, but I don't think he even remembers it, I don't think he knows where he knows me from.  But he, whenever he see me he'll come across the room, I say, "Now you don't know who I am."
Story_ID: 645739
Speaker 1: As we get into the '70s [1970s], what was--there are more blacks on city council [Chicago City Council] and--
Speaker 2: Well we had Silent Six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  That would've been Metcalfe [Ralph Metcalfe], Campbell [Kenneth Campbell]--well I can go through them--Harvey [William Harvey] was second, Metcalfe was third, Holman [Claude Holman] was fourth, what ya call it was fifth, he was Jewish, fifth--fifth--sixth was Bob Miller [Robert Miller], Bob Miller was the only one who was financially independent.  He could sort of be, you know, whatever, that was six, seventh, eighth, eighth--
Speaker 1: Cousins [HistoryMaker William Cousins, Jr.] in city council?
Speaker 2: He came in later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Who was the sixth--the Silent Six.  Was it somebody on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: It had to be, yeah, it had to be somebody.
Speaker 2: You know, Ben Lewis [Benjamin Lewis] came in there somewhere, because you know, Ben was killed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right
Speaker 2: --he came in there some, but I don't know if he was--he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well Ben Lewis was killed, what around '68 [1968], '67 [1967], '68 [sic. 1963]?
Speaker 2: Now don't ask me the years.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't, I can't keep any years separated.
Speaker 1: But that was--his killing was said to be politically motivated, right?
Speaker 2: They always thought it was, and you remember they questioned the Shell brothers [ph.] extensively about it because they thought they may have been involved.  Ben was my buddy.  He, "You all can do anything, but when you come on Madison Street you're in my area."  I guess Ben Lewis, maybe Ben Lewis was the sixth one.  Two, three, four, five, no.  Larry Bloom [Lawrence Bloom] was the fifth [sic.].  Ha- Harvey, Metcalfe, Holman, two, three, four.  Five, six was Bob Miller.
Speaker 1: What the third was?
Speaker 2: Metcalfe.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. You know, one story, and I'm going to try to do it--it's probably out of what I'm--out of the range of what I'm doing, but I think I can do it in the Harold Washington bit.  That 3rd Ward, Young Democrats, the training ground was just tremendous.  Harold was president for a period of the time anyway, but out of that time and I mean for the same period, I don't mean the--over a long period of time, they were in Young Democrats at the same time.  You had John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] who became your president of county board [Cook County Board of Commissioners], you had Harold Washington who became your mayor, you had Charlie Freeman [HistoryMaker Charles Freeman] who became supreme court justice, all in that--at the same--I mean they met upstairs together and came down to the Black Train [ph.] and got drunk together.  But I'm just thinking, all of that was right there.  It's not like you can say oh it's over a ten year period.  That was a real strong organization.  The Train was there and it, you don't have it now.  I mean you had Kenny Wilson [Kenneth Wilson] and you had, well Sam Patch [Samuel Patch] came along in that group but he wasn't elected of course anything like that.  But they were--they--they were.  Well we--well, The Young--at that time all of the organizations interacted, you know.  The fundraisers were same time of year so you knew next Friday night is the 3rd Ward affair, everybody went.  Next week is going to be Claude Holman's affair, we all went.  And second of course, 2nd Ward that was Dawson [William L. Dawson], of course, everybody had to show up at that, you know, that was the biggie kind of thing.  They don't--they don't--they don't seem to have that kind of interaction anymore.  In the 20th Ward and the Young Democrats was Cliff Kelley [Clifford Kelley] and a fellow named Campbell, I can't remember his first name.
Speaker 1: Cecil Partee in twenty, too?
Speaker 2: He was in twenty, Cecil Partee was in twenty.  Kenneth Cam- that's the one we missed, Kenneth Campbell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in the twenty, that's the one that we missed, yeah Kenneth Campbell.
Speaker 1: All right so there was some--now why was the, was the six called the Silent Six?
Speaker 2: 'Cause they'd sit in city council and not say anything.
Speaker 1: So they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We call--our one black alderman was Leon Despres.
Speaker 1: Okay and he wasn't black, right, racially (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But he was the one that would speak up on behalf of the issues that affected black people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--he was supposed to speak out, right.  Um-hm, Leon Despres.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard people say this and I--I suppose though--
Speaker 2: Oh no question about it, no que-.  Leon was just--he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 645740
Speaker 1: Now was it a function of the machine that the black community would elect leaders that would not speak?
Speaker 2: (Pause) How do I know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, is it because the machine would steamroll a candidate in and the black community didn't really hold these candidates accountable because of the machine or what?
Speaker 2: I guess you're right because if you--if you got out of line they just ran somebody against you, I guess and that was it.  I remember--god you don't want to hear all this crap.  But, it's part of the Harold [Harold Washington] story though.  I happened to be with Harold at that time--anybody who ran or got any kind of consideration to it had to be cleared through Daley [Richard J. Daley].  And it was in December 'cause it was a Christmas party where I've had all these different auxiliaries, I don't know what they were, but anyway, they all had their little Christmas parties.  And all I can remember is we were in the 90s and we're at somebody's house who was a fireman, in the basement, that's where this little Christmas party was.  Everybody do their own thing, so everybody had thirty-five, forty people, you know, at their party.  And Harold picked me up and we went.  And Ralph [Ralph Metcalfe] came in and he took Harold upstairs.  And what he told him was, that he had met with Daley and Daley had okay-ed him to run for the state rep.  Now Harold was the most private person you will ever know, but I think I would wager he had a conversation with me that night that he didn't have with anybody else.  He was elated, he was euphoric, you know I mean, and on the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] coming home, he told me what Ralph had told me--told him, you know, when he took him upstairs.  And--backspace a minute, Harold's father was sponsored by the 3rd Ward.  He was a city prosec- some kind of prosecutor at 38th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  He died, and at that--I never knew his father, he was dead when I met him.  But at that time certain wards had certain jobs, you know, and his ward, his job was 3rd Ward job.  And that's the reason Harold came to city hall because they didn't think Harold was ready, he'd just come out of law school [Northwestern University School of Law; Northwestern University Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois] and they didn't think he was ready to be, you know, like prosecutor or whatever over there.  So they gave him a job in corporation counsel.  I didn't know Harold, but everybody was excited that Roy Washington's son was coming, you know, he, Roy Washington's son was coming.  And that was the year that they ran at large whenever they didn't get the districting together and stuff like.  I'm--I'm mixing stories, mixing the apples and oranges.  But anyway, that's the way I met Harold.  But that night as we drove home, he talked about himself, his aspirations.  He absolutely resented being referred to as Roy Washington's son.  He didn't want that to be his legacy, he wanted to make his own mark.  He thought this is where he could do it, you know, the legislative kind of thing.  He just talked.  Now if that've been the next day he would've never--but at that moment, he talked.  Next day, he--I'm sure he wouldn't have.  That's why I say I bet I'm the only person that he had that conversation with because he was just that kind of a private person.
Story_ID: 645741
Speaker 1: But anyway, they all had to run at large.  Josephine Baker was in the country doing a tour; and we Women's Auxiliary [of the Joint Negro Appeal] or whatever you want to call it, we were just scared to death we were going to lose our little black reps.  It was Corneal Davis [Corneal A. Davis] and Kenny Wilson [Kenneth Wilson] and Jimmy Carter [James Y. Carter], I guess, Cecil Partee, they were all in Springfield [Illinois].  And they had to run at large because they didn't get the redistricting together.  So we knew we were going to lose them.  Josephine Baker was in town--in the country doing these tours and she was coming to Chicago [Illinois].  So we decided we would do a benefit with Josephine Baker to raise some money and we were going to, I'm sure, it was rent 'cause we wouldn't have been able to buy a station wagon and we were going to go across the country--the state, it's where the black pockets were and campaign.  Well you don't do anything without approval of Dawson [William L. Dawson], right.  Well they belled me to go talk to Dawson.  I didn't know Dawson, all I knew was about him.  [HistoryMaker] Earl Strayhorn took me in.  He was the one to take me in and introduce me to Dawson.  I was scared to death.  And I'll never remember this as long as I live, I'll never forget, I sat there and I rambled on about the--we were going to lose out and we were going to buy--get this van so we could go to the black pockets, campaign and all this sort of stuff.  And he just sat there and looked at me and he let me rattle on and on and on with my spiel.  Then when I got through, he said and I'll never forget, he said, "Little lady," he said, "I hear what you're saying," he said, "but I don't want my boys to run as black boys."  And then he said, "All that I have done," you know, carrying the water for all these other people, he said, "they don't dare cut my boys."  And we didn't lose one.  He said, "'Cause if they do, I won't leave from this desk by this phone and they'll hear from me."  And we didn't lose one of them, and they ran statewide.  But that's what Dawson, he said, "Little lady, I don't want my boys to run as black boys."  And of course we--that killed our little thing we were going to do with Josephine Baker.  He said, "You don't need to do that."  And not--oh and I think, if I remember, I think Harold [Harold Washington] was the number one vote getter.  I'm not sure about that, but I think he was.
Story_ID: 645742
Speaker 1: Going into the, into the '70s [1970s] with--Richard M. Daley [sic. Richard J. Daley] died in '77 [sic. 1976], I guess it was so, which created a crisis in the city government, so do, do you remember what happened?
Speaker 2: I remember very well.  I was working, somebody had gotten a grant, Connie Seal [Costello C. Seals] and somebody had gotten a grant, it was called the coalition, coalition, coalition on the war on crime, but it was for women [Coalition of Concerned Women in the War on Crime].  But anyway, it was at 24th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], and the ambulance passed our door carrying Daley.  Must've been going to Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] I guess.  I just know the ambu- and it was Daley that--that had died.  And yeah I remember, I remember it very well.  He died.  And that's when Harold [Harold Washington] ran, you remember, mayor--ran for mayor.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Few people remember Harold ran for mayor in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Who was the alderman who was sup--he was president pro tem of city council [Chicago City Council]?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost.
Speaker 1: Wilson Frost, right.  He by--
Speaker 2: And he was scared to go take the position.
Speaker 1: --yeah, law, was supposed to take the position of mayor, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they locked the door and didn't let him in.  And I don't think he tried very hard.
Speaker 1: Now this is Chicago [Illinois] politics.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, yeah, I remember very well.
Speaker 1: Anyway, so, Harold ran against--now the things had changed a little bit in '77 [1977], because Ralph Metcalfe had sort of broken with--
Speaker 2: Had he broken at that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that was right after--that was after the Doc Odom [Herbert Odom] incident and some other things that made--I guess that made--
Speaker 2: Now bear in mind, Ralph broke with Daley about Herb Odom, the dentist that the police stopped and did whatever he did.  And that's when he broke--'cause that's when we elected Bernard Carey over Hanrahan [Edward Hanrahan], that's when we defeated Hanrahan.
Speaker 1: Right. And this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Carey was a Republican and we all--and we elected him, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's almost unprecedented in Chicago--
Speaker 2: It almost, it was, unprecedented (laughter).  Yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 1: So Hanrahan had been the architect of the raid on the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah--I don't know.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was the state's attorney when that was done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 1: So, those two things cost him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, a lot of stuff went on back during that time though, we were all part of it.
Story_ID: 645743
Speaker 1: So Harold [Harold Washington] run- he runs against the Daley [Richard J. Daley] machine.  Did you think it was a good idea at the time, to?
Speaker 2: Oh sure.  And he carried six wards, carried six wards.  Carried the 6th Ward, the 8th--I guess he carried the black wards, I remember.  We had our offices at State [Street] and Randolph [Street] upstairs over Walgreens.
Speaker 1: So did you work on that campaign?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Bennett--I can remember about six or eight, [HistoryMaker] Bennett Johnson was one, [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage was the campaign manager, Don Rose handled PR [public relations], Brenetta [Brenetta Howell Barrett], and I can't remember any other people, but we were sort of the hub of it, you know, kind of thing like that.  I remember we got enough money to put--to run an ad twice on TV, we were so excited.  You know, we had I mean got that put together.  He had enough money to pay for it to run twice.
Speaker 1: Now who put your ad together, was it one of the black ad agencies?
Speaker 2: Probably, no I think it was Don Rose.  I--I think--I think Don Rose left 'cause you know, Harold had those tax problems, remember and that's the one time in life that I truly saw Harold shaken.  Dick--they had--he had a press conference and Dick Kay was brutal.  He was brutal.  And when it was over, I was sitting in this little room at the desk and Harold came and he sat down in front of me, he was shaken.  He did a good run, he did a good run.  I remember we had, I guess it was a fundraiser, I know it was at Roberts Motel [Chicago, Illinois], and--it wasn't a fundraiser, because--what's the fellow who was Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], died, Callaway.
Speaker 1: John Callaway.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, he interviewed Harold.  And I remember Callaway asking him about, you know, the tax returns something like that.  And I remember Harold's answer was, "My father [Roy Washington] didn't raise a perfect boy, but he raised the best candidate for mayor."  And we were so--oh we were up there screaming, yelling and going on--I mean, "My father didn't raise a perfect boy, but he raised the best candidate for mayor."  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in '83 [1983] right, when he?
Speaker 2: That's '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], okay.  So that discussion took place in '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, I remember that.
Story_ID: 645744
Speaker 1: So then were you part, part of the congressional campaign at all?
Speaker 2: I was part of all of his campaigns.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See I--as I said I knew him before he ran for public office.  I mean, I told you I met him downtown when he came to take his--he didn't take his father's [Roy Washington] position because it--but they sent him to corporation counsel's office.
Speaker 1: So, Ralph Metcalfe passed away and the seat for the 1st Congressional District was--
Speaker 2: Harold [Harold Washington] always wanted to run for [U.S.] Congress, but he would never run as long as Ralph lived.  And he was his own person.  I mean he just would not be controlled by Ralph or anybody.  And at that time, I don't know about now 'cause I don't keep up with it, but at that time all of your--whoever sponsored you had a headquarters and that's where your office was.  If you were a state rep, you know, you had a--you had a office over there kind of thing.  Harold never had an office with Ralph, ever.  He always wanted to be independent.  And he ate, slept, drank--he was just a politician in and out.  I remember--just to show you just a little thing.  I remember one time we were going for some meeting and I don't even know where the meeting was--what kind of meeting it was, but I know we stopped at 87th [Street] and the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway], Jewel [Jewel Food Stores; Jewel-Osco] was open then, and we went in there.  And Harold bought this little--I was the one that needed to go in, I don't know what I was buying.  But Harold bought this little steak and wrapped it, it looked like that bacon that Jack [Childs' husband, James Childs, Sr.] brought me.  But he knew everybody in the place.  And I said to him, I said, "You see this is where you need to come shop, you don't need to be shopping at those little ma and pop stores that you go to," or something like that I said.  He said, "But it sure helps when you get ready to put your signs out."  And he would go to the laundromats every Sunday morning and he'd go to different ones, just talk to the women there, just talk.  I don't mean every Sunday, but I'm just saying, he would go to the laundromats and just talk to people.  And he might go 47th Street, 53rd [Street], just go to laundromats and talk to people.  And when he--he was a precinct captain in the 3rd Ward, Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], I remember (laughter) one time, Harold made Christmas cards and he forgot to mail them.  He mailed them at Valentine's--it didn't matter to him.  He said they dated it early for next year.  But anyway, he--if he had a precinct, if it had--let's say it had 410 registered voters, and he would tell me, he would say, "Well I got 410 voters and Larry Crowe is going to get 382 votes and [HistoryMaker] Josie Childs is going to get 272," and he'd just (unclear).  And he'd call me election night, he'd call and, "I want to give you my count."  It wouldn't be fifteen or twenty votes off.  He, he, he had it down to a fine science.
Speaker 1: Now he was in touch with the streets and he knew what to expect.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, yeah he would do that.  He would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't want to run for mayor though.
Story_ID: 645745
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that--this is a story.  I rem- I remember when he won the congressional race and there on Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] with Walter Jacobson, [HistoryMaker] Gus Savage, and Harold Washington sitting side by side talking to Walter Jacobson.  And someone said, "Oh we got to," you know, these guys went to school--this is the first time I realized they went to school together and knew each other so well.  You know, one's in the 2nd Ward, now there's one in the 1st--one's in the 1st district, one's in the 2nd district [2nd Congressional District], so we said, "Well this is--maybe a lot of things will get done with two congressmen that know each other and work together."
Speaker 2: Politically, they were like Siamese twins.  They used to say--well I've had--had Gus say anyway, "We don't have to talk," if an issue is up, you know, if say a reporter grab you on the street, they just knew whatever that they were going to be on the same wavelength about it, you know, that's just the way they were.  The relationship became a little strained, but they were okay, they were okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about Gus Savage as a politician?
Speaker 2: He was fantastic.  He was fantastic.  A little more militant.  Harold was, shall we say, quietly militant.  Gus was, you know, fiery with his kind of thing.  Well he's--and I mean he has really gone underground.  I talk to Gus from time to time.  I talked to him doing this thing we did for Harold.  I talked to him, I tried to get him to come.  But he won't touch anything and we--he keeps saying he's writing a book, but he's been saying that God knows how long.  I--I'm sure he and Bennett [HistoryMaker Bennett Johnson] stay in--I guess I don't know.  I'm trying to--I know they would always fall out, Bennett would be working on something, he wouldn't do it the way Gus wanted and Bennett would quit.  Yeah, but Bennett, Gus and Harold were--they were pretty tight.
Story_ID: 645746
Speaker 1: Did you go to Washington [D.C.] with Harold [Harold Washington]? Or did--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, that's a funny story.  When he was elected, I remember we all went to Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] and he was congressman elect at that time.  And it was the most disorganized thing I'd ever seen in my life.  And I remember we were sitting in the lobby of the Hilton--yeah, the Hilton, and I said, "Harold when you get down here, you really got your work cut out for you."  And he said, I'll never forget, he said, "You mean we have."  And I knew I had a job (laughter).  I kept seeing all these jobs going, going, going.  And finally I confronted him, I said, "You know who, dinky everybody, where's my job." I don't know what I said.  You know what he said to me, "You never asked."  And then we talked about it.  But I did--but then that went in--no well I never went--never did anything with him for D.C., but when he became mayor then I went into special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events], which meant I came back to special events because I was there when it started up.  But then I came back when Harold was the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the Chicago [Illinois] perspective on politics is a little bit different than most places in the country, I think I heard--remember reading that Richard M. Daley was asked about a congressional seat or something and he said, "Well that's just national," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Probably.  I don't remember that, but probably (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, but--
Story_ID: 645747
Speaker 1: Why didn't--well, you know, Harold Washington was in [U.S.] Congress, you know, and from what I understand he loved it.
Speaker 2: He didn't want to run for mayor.  The day before he--the day before he announced I sat on my kitchen phone for at least forty five minutes talking to Harold Washington.  And you remember the, Roland [HistoryMaker Roland Burris] was in the mix and we're trying to get Roland and he really wanted Roland, and he did not want to run.  He liked what he was doing.  Harold wasn't an administrator.  Legislating was really his--best thing ever happened to Harold was Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak].  We laugh, I used to tell Delores [Delores Woods], that girl, "I said if he didn't have--" 'cause Harold would disappear on us and we couldn't find him.  And he had a friend, Johnny Cheavers [ph.], they grew up together and Johnny was a Republican, but they--they were kids together, slept in the same bed together.  Stay over at your house tonight, you know, this kind of thing.  Johnny was handicapped.  They called each other horse, "Hey horse."  And when we couldn't find him, couldn't hear from him, we called Johnny.  And Harold just might be at home not answering the telephone.  And they had a whistle.  And Johnny would go over and give his whistle and Harold would stick his head out the door.  But, I told Delores, I said you know, "Vrdolyak is the best thing that ever happened to Harold," and she said "You've got that right."  I said, "'Cause if he didn't have to try to outsmart Vrdolyak," I said, "you'd be answering the phone, 'Well I talked to him about an hour ago, he said he'd be here,' (laughter), 'but he didn't get here yet.'"  But he--he--it--that was--but what people didn't know with all that fuss and fight that was going on, they were both politicians, and they talked every day.  They put that show on, and, you know, they'd talk every day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there wasn't as much animosity as it seemed to be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it really wasn't. It really wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Half of it was show.  They were politicians.  Now, the--the struggle for power was there now.  But it wasn't as--it wasn't as, in my opinion, it wasn't as much race as it was power.  And they saw--actually, the council [Chicago City Council] at that time functioned the way the city council is supposed to function, strong council, weak mayor.  But 'cause it wasn't the way we wanted it, but actually that's the way, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, I, 'cause I read that in the paper in those days and I was baffled by it, because where I come from there's a strong, I mean a strong--
Speaker 2: Strong mayor, weak council (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --{simultaneous) council, weak mayor.  In fact, a lot of city administrating is done by the city manager, not even by the mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So he doesn't even wield that much power, yeah, but he just presides over the council meetings.  But in Chicago [Illinois], they said the mayor is supposed to be weak, I couldn't see it under Daley [Richard J. Daley], so?
Speaker 2: No, Mr. Daley, no.
Story_ID: 645748
Speaker 1: So at any rate, so, what persuaded Harold Washington or what people, what activity--was there any one thing that made, that convinced him to run for mayor [of Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh that--that conversation I told you that I had.  He told me that he did not want to run, but if Roland or anybody else--and this is the day before--but he said, "If nobody else runs," he said, "I'm going to do it."  He said, no, "I'm going to give it my--" I'm not saying I'd quote that, now he said, "I'm going to give it--like a hell of a shot."  I can't remember now, but I remember he said something to the effect, he was going to run and he was going to put all into it.  That--that's what he really said.  He says, "I don't want to do this.  You all sent me to [U.S.] Congress. That's where I want to be."  But he said, "I'm committed to a black running and if I have to I'm going to go all out for it."
Speaker 1: Now this is something I just heard today from [HistoryMaker] Bennett Johnson.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: He said, that the political organization was in place and the movement of black people in the city and progressive people was at the point where he could've elected [HistoryMaker] Roland Burris had Roland Burris decided to run.
Speaker 2: I think he right, I'd agree with him on that.  Now this was, in fact, Eddie Reed just for this thing that we just did.  See, I think Harold's legacy has--I guess his legacy has three parts.  Well it's not just Harold's legacy.  I think how the community came together.  There were fourteen candidates when they had the plebiscite.  There were fourteen, Eddie Reed gave me all that stuff for this thing.  He gave me copies of the originals, even with the sign in sheets, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is the plebiscite that was--
Speaker 2: Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], Lu--
Speaker 1: Yeah, thought of by [HistoryMaker] Jorja Palmer and implemented by Lu Palmer.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And there were fourteen names on that list to run for mayor.  And how they came together and selected Harold.  Also, (unclear) also gave me, no I don't think, but I have it, Harold's statement where he was rejecting it and telling them he didn't--it wasn't for him.  But anyway, how the plebiscite narrowed it down to one, Harold, that was historic for this community.  Then the coalition that came together to elect him is another story, and then we elected a lot of people, but how he governed, that's three parts as far--.  And they're distinctively, you know.  And they had their own thing, had their own bit.  He--
Story_ID: 645749
Speaker 1: What role did the voter registration campaign that Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] funded play?
Speaker 2: Interesting story, and I have nothing to show for it.  And I raised sand with them at the time.  Actually, the voter registration campaign that ultimately came together was started in Jack Childs' [Childs' husband, James Childs, Sr.] office.  [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman had been picketing--what did they call it, parent equalizer [Parent Equalizers of Chicago], the Mollison School [Irvin C. Mollison Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], I think that's--
Speaker 1: The Mollison School, that's right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and she went across the street to the Alpha house [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and asked them to tutor some of these kids, you know, who were out of school, the kids they were keeping out of school.  And they did.  And when it was over, the Alpha, one of their slogans is, "A Voteless People is Hopeless People."  Donne Trotter, James Hill [ph.]--Donne Trotter, James Hill, Auggie Battiste [Auggeretto Battiste] and a fellow by the na- I think his name was Ernest Green [sic. Elliot Green], met in Jack's office.  'Cause what they were doing with Dorothy was over.  And they decided that they wanted to continue on in the political whatever, whatever.  And they realized registration was important.  And I remember the day that they took the 3rd Ward as a pilot project, going knocking on doors, you know, getting people registered and what have you.  And it was--it was going very well and it brought about a--I'm going to say reorganization 'cause was I told there must be one before, what do you call it when all the Greek organizations come together--Pan Hellenic [Chicago Pan Hellenic Council] and they were meeting at the Alpha house.  This has nothing to do with Harold [Harold Washington] running, nothing to do with the plebiscite, it's just that this is what they were doing and it had grown.  They'd even gotten representatives from PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and everywhere.  And then when--fast forward, when Harold decides to run and says, "I want however many hundred thousand votes you have to get for me," or whatever that was, they had people in place.  Now Tim Black [HistoryMaker Timuel Black], you know, became the chairman of the voter registration drive or whatever, but they had people to feed into--into that.  Now I used to tell Jack, now when they were doing that, I said, "You all ought to keep a record of what you're doing." Well they didn't.  And the only thing that I know that happened, Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], Jack talked to Lu Palmer on the radio about what they were doing on a Sunday morning, from home it's by telephone, and there was one picture in somebody's paper of them.  But other than that, there's absolutely to my knowledge no record of it.  And but, they had a whole--all these Greek organizations, you know, were together.  They had that together when that registration when that started.  And when they did it, they had no knowledge, no thought, no idea that Harold was going to run, but they did.  And he said, he wanted, was it a hundred thousand votes and fifty thousand dollars or vice versa?
Story_ID: 645750
Speaker 1: I remember the votes, he--I know there was a general statement that's been reported by several people that he made in the basement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That--um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or somebody's basement about where they were meeting, he said that he could count and he knew if he didn't have so many votes he couldn't win.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah he said that.
Speaker 1: So many registered voters to win.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so many registered--and the Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] bit, [HistoryMaker] Renault Robinson, who was with us in '77 [1977].  He's the one who went to Ed Gardner and asked him for the money and Mr. Gardner got maybe I'm wrong a figure, I don't think I am, but he said, "I'll give you my October advertising budget."  And I think it was seventy-five thousand dollars, I could be wrong on my figure.  But anyway, he said, "I'll give you my October."  So he didn't write a check, he just whatever slots he had on the different radio stations and things like that, they were saying, "Register and vote," or "Get out for Harold [Harold Washington]," or whatever, that's what they were doing.  And that was Renault, Renault was with us in '77 [1977], and I have a vivid member--memory of John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] being in town and he was at the Hyatt.  And I don't know who made the decision or for what reason, but anyway we went to see John Conyers and Renault was going to be the spokesperson to prevail upon him to--to help us.  And I'll always remember the plea that Renault gave to Conyers, you know, and he agreed to help us, and he did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was at at least three meetings with John Conyers introducing Harold.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.  And when he ran this last time, I don't think John was ever in Detroit [Michigan] on the weekend, he was over here.  I, the fir- well no not the first time I met him, 'cause the first time I met him would've been in that hotel room, if you call that meeting.  But when Ralph [Ralph Metcalfe] was running and Erwin France ran against Ralph and that was a tough one.  I mean, that was after Ralph had fallen out with Daley [Richard J. Daley] and you know, he'd pull all the big guns out against him.  John Conyers came and I rode with him on a Sunday morning 'cause he was making churches.  And it was just fascinating to see how--and it was, it was well organized I mean, and we would do at least five or six churches.  But he would sit, we'd go in the church and naturally we'd sit wherever and he would sit there for maybe five or ten minutes at the most before they called on him, because we were in and out kind of thing.  But he would be able, in that short period of time, to get a feel for that audience, that congregation and he would talk to them.  And, 'cause each--oh and naturally it was basic central theme, but each time it was tailored to--they don't make them like that anymore.
Story_ID: 645751
Speaker 1: So, so you have--I've seen notes where you've pulled out the, I guess the critical contributions of Harold Washington's mayoralty and listed them basically.  And can you talk about what the value of his service was?
Speaker 2: Say it again now?
Speaker 1: Well, you--I've got a list here that I saw online that you pulled out--pulled together and introduced the things--the contributions of Harold Washington to the City of Chicago [Illinois].  So can you summarize them or what do you think his contribution was?  What did he do that Richard M. Daley [sic. Richard J. Daley] and Jane Byrne and Michael Bilandic didn't do?
Speaker 2: He brought the city together.  And you kno- he said, "No one will ever beat me being fair."  That, that, that he, you know, you couldn't move him from that.  And there were those who tried.  You know, there were those who said, "Hey you know, it's our turn, what do you mean?"  And he would always say, "Never beat me being fair."  Every ward will get the same dollars, you know, for street repa- you know, this sort of stuff.  He said, "You can't beat me being--." I think, I think the greatest--one of the greatest contributions that Harold made to the city was how he opened city government.  One example, budget time.  He went to every ward in the city and he took his cabinet.  Now what we would have to do, we would go and they gave me Vrdolyak's ward, you know that, Tony Gibbs [Anthony C. Gibbs, Jr.] assigned me 'cause he hated my guts, so he sent me to Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak].  But anyway, we would go out a week or ten days, maybe even two weeks in advance and we'd talk to the leadership in that ward.  And we would find out from them what their three top priorities were.  And whatever those three were, those were the cabinet members that Harold would take with him.  There was no point in going to Hegewisch [Chicago, Illinois] where they're concerned about pollution, talking about art.  So we knew--he knew what cabinet members to take to address their concerns.  And the budget and how it was put together, and people began--people began to learn, you know, how these th- how these things--how they worked, how they happened.  And I just think--'cause you--pe- I remember we had one meeting where CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] fare or something was part of the discussion and it was amazing what people said, "Well when you were here we asked about, and you said," you know, I mean kind of thing.  And I don't mean--not negative kinds of things, I'm saying they were positive because they had learned how it--how it worked.  And I think to me that is, when he did that--when he--and he went to every, all fifty wards, and I remember how gracious Pucinski was and he was one of the twenty-nine.  And it didn't matter, we went to all fifty wards, and of course--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the twenty-nine were the opposition, right, and Roman Pucinski was one of the leaders--
Speaker 2: He was one of them.
Speaker 1: --in the opposition.
Speaker 2: But he respected the office and you were there, and he was very courteous and whole bit, you know.  Those were good days.  Good days, lots of stuff.
Story_ID: 645752
Speaker 1: The second election in '87 [1987], what was the--did you think that Harold Washington could win?
Speaker 2: In '87 [1987]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He won in '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: He did, but did you think so before the election?
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] or '83 [1983]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987].
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, I guess 'cause you had kind of addressed '83 [1983], but the media was surprised every, you know, they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all that, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were always surprised and the black community was elated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and probably surprised too.  I don't think the black community knew he was going to win, I thought, I think we wanted him to win, but?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know.  I just remember tying up the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] more than it was tied up today, 'cause we were out there when he won, oh that was--that was a wonderful night.  But Harold had some grassroot people who were loyal, he was the chief, he was the chief.  One, (unclear) this was a little wino.  Oh god we could go through a million stories about Harold.  But I remember he was going to, I guess he--I guess he was running for [U.S.] Congress and I remember this fate making meeting was at Cecil Partee's office on 61st Street.  And we just knew the place was going to be packed with opposition.  And Paul [ph.] and I went and we got there early, and we were sitting there and we saw all these people coming, all these people coming, we said, "But ain't none of them Harold's people, where's some of Harold's people?"  We kept and all of a sudden we saw little Herman [ph.] coming down with his little sack, his little (laughter) handmade sack.  We said, "There go one."  But now, that boy, I don't--I don't recall what it was, but for some reason the office needed to be protected.  I don't know--I don't know why, but anyway, he sat outdoors and got his fingers frostbitten 'cause he was sitting out there for the chief.  And I remember, and he had a record, I don't know what it was, but he had been in jail for something, I don't know.  But I ran into him in the subway after Harold was mayor and I said, "Have you been up to see the mayor," or something like that.  And he said "No," he said, "Ms. Childs [HistoryMaker Josie Childs], I gots a record and I wouldn't do that to the chief."  But, you know, that was just--that was what--that was just the way it was, yeah.  "Ms. Childs, I gots a record, and I wouldn't do that to the chief."  And I am told, he didn't say it to me, but did you ever know John McClain--or Clarence McClain?
Story_ID: 645753
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know about him.  I didn't know him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I knew about him.  He seemed to be the--
Speaker 2: I am told, now he, he--he's brilliant--he, he was Republican.  Now he was the one person that seemed to have had some kind of control over Harold [Harold Washington].  I don't know, Harold would always say, "Did you talk to Clarence? What did Clarence think about it?"  But, I'm told that just with this recent thing that we did, because Clarence went to jail--I don't know what Clarence was doing.  Clarence got sick somewhere along the legs had his foot amputated, I don't know if it was the same illness or not.  But he was in the hospital.  Clarence had a whole barrage of phones installed in his hospital room so he could keep on carrying the city business for Harold.  But I, I don't know what the case was, but it was serious and he did go to jail.  But he's worked on it, worked on it, worked on it and about a year ago, he won it and he represented it himself and he sent me these things, this thick (gesture) to read.  Now you know I didn't read them.  But he was approached--
Speaker 1: This is Clarence--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: This is Clarence McClain's case with, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  He sent--he sent me two different things, but I didn't read all that stuff.  But, someone told me that they contacted him about this thing that we just had, and he just thought it wouldn't be good for him to show; and he didn't.
Story_ID: 645754
Speaker 1: So in '87 [1987], did, I mean did you doubt that Harold [Harold Washington] was going to win in '87 [1987] or did you think that was going to?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, we knew, we knew, we really never had much--no, no.  We pretty much--I think--I don't recall us having any--I didn't have any doubts he was going to win.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he had a lot of opposition that was organized against him.  They ran Tom Hynes [Thomas Hynes] and Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] and you know, Harold--
Speaker 2: No, you're thinking about after the primary, in the general aren't you, 'cause that's when they formed first party and all that stuff.  Chicago First [Chicago First Party] or whatever it was called.  Is that what we're talking about?
Speaker 1: Election of '87 [1987], Tom Hynes ran against him in the Democratic primary, right?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then Vrdolyak switched parties and became a Republican to run against him in the general election.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And they both lost--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so Harold wins a second term.  But he did not--
Speaker 2: So what we're really saying, the same thing happened, I hadn't thought about it, the same thing happened in '87 [1987] that happened in '83 [1983], they split the vote so Harold won?
Speaker 1: No, no, I mean they took their, they took turns.  They both--he had to defeat two consecutive enemies who were organized rather than both split, you know.
Speaker 2: Because you know after Harold--well that may be.  I--if I, I don't remember (unclear), but you know after Harold won, that's when they made the mayor's office nonpartisan, remember.  We no longer have a primary for the mayor's office.  And because with the two people, Daley [Richard M. Daley] and Byrne [Jane Byrne], that's where Harold was able to win with something like 32 percent of the vote.  And now you don't have a primary 'cause after the primary then, that's when Epton [Bernard Epton] ran, the before it's too late.  And they, they cut so that--that would never happen again.  Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: Yeah I remember that.  Because in '87 [1987], unh-uh, yeah that's right he did run.
Story_ID: 645755
Speaker 1: Now, what, what are your thoughts about the death of Harold Washington?  What was he getting ready to do and what do you think about the circumstances and the aftermath of his--
Speaker 2: And the what?
Speaker 1: And his aftermath?  After he died, then, some of the political activities?
Speaker 2: Oh. Well I come--I'm, I'm--I guess I'm on my own on that. I don't think anybody agrees with me.  And I guess it's because of the relationship I had with Harold.  Harold thought political.  I can't tell you, as people say, "What would Harold have wanted?" I can't tell you.  But there was a kitchen cabinet meeting at my house that would come together, twenty-four hour notice, nobody knew about it.  But if he--there was something that he wanted some feedback on and you know, you--you'd call this morning say, "We've got together this evening," and they came to my house.  In my opinion about '87 [1987], we blew it.  And I think Harold would've been disappointed 'cause I think Harold would have said, "Keep the seat."  Now first of all I say this, when people talk about which one would Harold have wanted, I said well maybe he didn't want either one of them, he made David Orr vice mayor.  He put David Orr a heartbeat away from the seat.  You know, if you--just you know, you talk about that.  So now let's come down to what we had.  And I worked for both of them.  I know Gene Sawyer, [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] I was one of the first people to meet Gene 'cause when he came to Chicago [Illinois] he was sent here from Montgomery, I guess it is, Alabama, to Bob Miller [Robert Miller].  And I told you I was working with Bob Miller.  And Gene became the treasurer for the organization and I was the secretary.  So, I always felt, quite honestly, that Tim would've been a better mayor then Gene.  I just thought that.  But when Gene won, I worked for Gene.  But when Gene lost, I worked for Tim.  My thing was keep the seat.  And I said to Gene, it was after it was all over, we were talking one time, I said, "I know you're going to be mad with me," I said, "but you know, I think you should've endorsed Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans]," and we went through all the turnaround.  But you know, "If you had said, 'He didn't endorse me, but I think it bigger than both of us, let's keep the seat.  He didn't endorse me, I think he should have.'"  I'm, I'm, I'm saying what I said to Gene, "If you had said, 'He didn't endorse me, I think he should have, but it's bigger than both of us, let's keep the seat.'"  I think he would've been a hero, now that's just my opinion.  But it certainly--it isn't shared by most people out there, 'cause you know, they're still beating up on what we did.  And then when I went over to work for Tim, I called so many of those people that had worked for Gene saying, "Come on, come on," like Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], how she came, you know, if--I just--I just--I don't know.  I would--I called so many of them and said, "Well hey, come on over let's, you know, let's do it."  No, no.  Of course, I don't know if we'll ever get it back.  Course, as I said to them in this little Harold Washington thing [Harold Washington Tribute Committee; Harold Washington Legacy Committee] that we're doing, my thing is not that we get another black mayor, my thing is that we get someone who espouses philosophy of Harold.  I didn't care who they were.  Now David Orr, I'd work my fingers to the bone for David Orr if he said he'd run tomorrow, I'd work for him.  David was with us in '77 [1977].  He had just come from--he went to school I guess, I don't know if Ohio is his home or not, but he had just graduated [from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and moved to Chicago from somewhere in Ohio.  And we had our North Side headquarters in his living room.  Of course that's (unclear).  But that is--and then the other tragedy out of that, in my opinion, and I worked on the committee, but we, historical society [Chicago Historical Society; Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] did an exhibit on Harold.  And Delores [Delores Woods], bless her heart she's dead and I love her to death, but she was in the Sawyer camp, and she had sign off on the exhibit, you know, what was going in and all this sort of stuff.  Now, everything in the exhibit was correct.  But it was the omissions.  Now how you going to do an exhibit on Harold Washington and not include Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner].  But Ed Gardner was a campaign--was cam- no, no co-chair of Tim Evans' campaign.  How you going to do it and not do a Nancy Jefferson.  But Nancy went with Tim.  So I'm not saying that they put anything in there that was inaccurate, I'm just saying the left out.  And the tragedy to me was is that the historical society and whoever sees it thinks its gospel.  I mean how you going--how you going to do a thing on Harold Washington and not include Tim Evans, and he was the floor leader.  Didn't matter whether you like him or hate him, this--this is history.  Well, and Charlie Freeman [HistoryMaker Charles Freeman] was there.  We pulled and fought and everything, but we didn't get it.
Story_ID: 645756
Speaker 1: You worked for the department of special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events] under Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]?
Speaker 2: I worked for the department of special events under Mayor Daley, first Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley], 'cause I told you we established it, Harold Washington who brought me back, Gene Sawyer and this Daley [Richard M. Daley].
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the only one who enjoys the distinction of being fired twice by Lois Weisberg (laughter) it's funny.
Speaker 1: So, what, what--I'm going to ask you about that in a second (laughter).  Just give me the dates here, like you came in with Harold Washington in '83 [1983] right, back--when you came back to the department in '83 [1983], and you stayed until--through Eugene Sawyer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety [1990].
Speaker 1: --and the beginning of--
Speaker 2: And the beginning of Daley.
Speaker 1: And to what year, 1990?
Speaker 2: Ninety [1990], '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990], okay.  To '90 [1990], so that's seven years.
Story_ID: 645757
Speaker 1: How did you become the--become fired twice by Lois Weisberg?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, Velma Wilson and I were--Harold [Harold Washington] sent us in on the same day and we were hired.  Now Lois didn't know either one of us and Lois and I are friends, and we--I--and I understand why she fired me the first time.  I understand why she fired me the second time.  But she didn't want us, it wasn't me, she didn't know Joseph from Adam's house cat.  But she didn't want--and Vel- same thing true of Velma, she just didn't want quote mature people that just might have some thought.  She just wanted a bunch of ye- and the excuse she used was, special event, you may have a breakfast and so you have to be down there at 5:30 in the morning because the breakfast is at seven or you may be an evening thing, and she wanted people who didn't have families, husbands and things like that.  That was--but yet she had a family.  But she just didn't want us.  In fact, we, we went in for our interview at 9 and 9:30, I don't know who went first, Velma or me.  But anyway, at lunch time she was across the street saying Harold had sent her two incompetent people.  I know she didn't know me, but anyway and the other thing, strike against me was I had been in special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events] before, I was there and that was of a concern to her.  But what happened, Harold had given me some fancy title, I don't even remember what it was, or whatever, the title was meant I could meddle in everything in special events.  Well Lois wasn't going to have that and I don't blame her, I wouldn't have wanted it either.  So what she did, she gave me an assignment that if I did it well I couldn't meddle in anything else and that was the Sharing It program.  Anything that you see on Sharing It, the food for the hungry that goes to the--what's the place where they keep all the--
Speaker 1: Chicago food bank?
Speaker 2: Food--Chi- Chicago--whatever it's called.
Speaker 1: Food bank repository [Greater Chicago Food Depository, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: That's it. She, she gave me that as an assignment.  And I did--well I think the, 'cause Harold was in almost a year before I went to work for the city.  So, she must've tried to do something a little bit before.  But anyway, the first real Sharing It program was mine.  And it was tremendously successful and it was just by a local group.  Jim Bidwell [James W. Bidwell] did a thing for me over at the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois]--had all, he raised tons of food for me that day.  And I got savings and loan, not Illinois Federal [Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan Association, Chicago, Illinois], was it Talman [Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan]?  Anyway, I got them to do deposit slips and so when people would be in they could just--if they wanted to give--put five dollars they could just fill out a deposit slip and it would go right in the bank.  We got--anyway that's not the story.  I called [HistoryMaker] Wesley South and told him I was doing this program and I wanted to--wanted him to help me get the on air, black on air personalities to talk about this program because we wanted black community to donate some food and stuff.  And he told me, he said, "Josie [HistoryMaker Josie Childs]," he said, "once a month I have a meeting with the mayor and the on air personalities, it's an off the record meeting," and that was so Harold could give him--give them his spiel and they would all heard it from him, no interpretation, they would be--he said, "It's an off the record meeting," he said, "but I'll invite you, but you know you--you can't tell about the meeting."  I went, it was at the University Club [University Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I cannot tell you to this day how Lois found out I was going, but when I got to work that morning she asked me about it and I said, "Yes," and Jacob Cook was the media person for special events.  And she said, "Well have you invited Cook?"  I said, "No."  "Well, you know, you're going to media and we have a media person, why haven't you included him?"  Now I've been in special events before, she's already, you know, wondering if I'm looking over her shoulder kind of thing, and anyway out of that, she fired me.  Well, Harold sent Bill Walls [William "Dock" Walls], yeah, Bill Walls upstairs, the message was, "You didn't hire her, you can't fire her."  Well that just made it worse for me (laughter).  Lois didn't give me another thing to do.  I sat there at my desk and I found little things to do, but in terms of an assignment, I didn't have one.  And pardon the language, 'cause it's not mine, but I remember--remember Bill Henry [William Henry] who is an alderman on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], he saw me one day and he said, "Hey Josie, how you doing."  I said, "I'm fine."  He said, "I hear you the highest paid bitch in the city to do nothing," (laughter).  He said, "Well just sit there and get your tip."  But anyway, finally they transferred me out of there and for a brief period I went to I and I, until he put me in cultural affairs [City of Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs; City of Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events].  That was my first firing.  And then when Daley [Richard M. Daley] won, came back in, Joan Harris [Joan W. Harris] was over cultural affairs.  And Joan was wrong, 'cause you know her husband is Irving Harris [Irving B. Harris] with all the money and--
Story_ID: 645758
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Toni, Toni, I mean--Toni hair products [Toni Home Permanent Company] that's what they make. Irving Harris [Irving B. Harris] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, I'm talking about the banker, the--I'm talking about white Irving Harris.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Irving Harris has a--
Speaker 2: He had--he had hair products?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they own Toni hair products.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  But anyway.  Well, he gave Daley [Richard M. Daley] $100,000 for his campaign so we knew Joan [Joan W. Harris] was safe.  But budget time came up and Joan, as you probably know is an art enthusiast, she supports the arts to the hilt, that's her--that's her--that's her thing.  And budget time came up, and they cut the budget for the arts and she fought it and of course naturally she lost.  And she spoke to the press about it.  Well you know, you can't be on staff and go out to the press and blast the mayor because he--I don't remember just what, anyway she went public with it.  And couple days after that she--I want to say it was Forrest Claypool, but I'm not sure, but somebody from the mayor's office came over and brought her her letter, she was devastated.  She was absolutely devastated and we were too, because we just knew her job was solid.  And that must've been in November, 'cause Lois had sent a notice--no wait a minute, let me get it straight.  Oh anyway, they fired Joan and guess who they replaced her with, Lois Weisberg.  And I said, "I know my days are numb- my days are numbered."  And I remembered she--Lois sent around a memo to all staff saying they had to take vacation time and I had quite a bit of vacation 'cause Jack [Childs' husband, James Childs, Sr.] and I were planning to take a couple week trip somewhere overseas, I don't know where it was.  And whatever time the memo came I had more days then there were in the year left.  And I wrote her a memo back and you know, and she gave them to me, she let me take them.  And I went on my little vacation, wasn't where we were going, I mean I had just took it right then and went on my vacation.  And I came back and I had a doctor's appointment, three o'clock on a Friday.  And no, no, no, no, it wasn't on a Friday, but it was three o'clock appointment I know that.  And the doctor told me he wanted me to go home and stay home for two or three days, I don't even remember what it was now.  And I called the office the next day to say I wouldn't be in because doctor had told me and the girl on the switchboard said, "Oh the commissioner was looking for you yesterday."  And I said, "What time did she--what time?"  And she must've said, "3:15," or something like that.  I said, "Well I had a three o'clock appointment."  "Well she was looking for," she--so anyway when I came back I had to go see her.  And she had my little letter laying on the desk over there and we sat there and talked and chatted and just had a good conversation for about five or ten minutes, and then she reached over and she gave me this letter.  And I said, "I expected it Lois," and she laughed, she said, "I know you did."  (Laughter) And that's just--that's just the way we live.  Which I said, "Well I expected it, Lois."  She said, "I know you did."  So I've been fired twice by Lois.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was in 1990--?
Speaker 2: That was '90 [1990].
Story_ID: 645759
Speaker 1: What did you do afterwards, I mean?
Speaker 2: I haven't been back to work since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now one of the--
Speaker 2: I do a lot--I mean, my thing has been--like I told--all I do is events.  One of the most interesting events that I did was Great Lakes Experience with, with, with the, you know, before '42 [1942] or '43 [1943], African Americans were not in the [U.S.] Navy.  And then when they went in, they were just mess boys, you know, they didn't have any go--
Speaker 1: Right, cooks and.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], they say it was Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt], but naturally the president he gets the credit, decided he wanted to do something about that, and he recruited five thousand, I guess they were Negroes then, musicians from across the country, brought them all up to Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] and they trained, but they never did any naval work.  They were broken into band sizes and they went to various war areas and I guess military bases and wherever and performed, you know.  And they really were really the beginning of course I guess, you'd say Truman [President Harry S. Truman] really did, but they were really the beginning of integrating the Navy, they really were.
Speaker 1: Right, and now did you work with Dr. Floyd [HistoryMaker Samuel Floyd] over at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I know he's--he has like an archive of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I gave him my stuff on Duke Ellington from we did--that was a church activity, the fortieth anniversary of the church [Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] and I was chairman and we had three events.  The first event was the Sunday it was actually done and I got Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] to come for the--I didn't get him, the--we were just looking for a speaker and it so happened that Andy was a very good friend of the interim pastor and he got Andy to come.  Church had a fit, thought we were spending all this money to bring in Andy Young.  Andy Young cost me twenty-nine dollars for breakfast, that's all we paid.  But that we had, we did an Andy Young, we did an interfaith service, and Erwin France got [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height for me, and then we closed it out with the Duke Ellington sacred concert.  And so then we did, on the Ellington thing, the Duke Ellington Society [Duke Ellington Society, Inc.], we brought them here which is an international conference [International Duke Ellington Study Group Conference], we brought them here, that was a tremendous success.  Well back to the Great Lakes thing, Clark Terry is a good friend and--
Speaker 1: He's a jazz trumpet player, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Bless his heart, he's got both legs amputated now and everything, but he's still hanging in there.  [HistoryMaker] Claude Walton, you know how they talk about the murderer always returns to the scene of his crime.  Claude is a--he's a drummer [sic. pianist], but also he really was a historian in terms of black jazz in Chicago [Illinois], and he was at Great Lakes.  And well once or twice a year he'd just drive up to Great Lakes 'cause he'd just drive up to Great Lakes.  And the band master up there [Gregory Dudienski] was a trumpeter.  He was a fan of Clark Terry's and had never met him.  But he went to somewhere in Minnesota for some kind of a concert or something.  Clark was there and he met him, and he came back to the base talking about Clark Terry and they had to do some black history month with Clark Terry.  And it just so happened that Claude made one of his trips up there.  And he was talking to him about Clark Terry and Claude said, "Well you know, you need to talk to [HistoryMaker] Josie Childs. She's a good friend of his and she was talking about doing something to honor him."  So bottom line, Claude takes me up there too, you know, to meet.  It was a pretty sunny day and the band was out on the lawn rehearsing when we got there.  And we talked and they expressed an interest, and, I was to go back and we went back and here was all this brass sitting up in there with these military people, and I'm sitting there, and we talking about Clark Terry.  But as people would talk I would hear, "Well, you know, that was Gerald Wilson," and so and so and so, "Oh well you know, Lou--" whatever his name.  And I kept listening and I said, I said, "You know, what I'm hearing," I said, "I hear something here that's more than just Clark Terry. I hear, you know," something.  And I remember the PR [public relations] guy was there and he said, "I'm so glad you said that."  He said, "'Cause I was sitting here trying to figure out how was I going to get the Navy to be interested in one man."  And they just turned the whole Navy library over to us up there and gave us the band for free, we had--it was a weekend event.  We went up there first, then we had a Saturday thing and then that Sunday we had a concert down at the Symphony Center [Chicago, Illinois].  All the Navy stops were pulled out, all the black admirals that were--who had come along, because the idea was it was their shoulders, you know, that they were standing on.  And it was, it was great.
Story_ID: 645760
Speaker 1: I learned about this from, when we interviewed, when The HistoryMakers interviewed Dr. Samuel Floyd [HistoryMaker Samuel Floyd] of the--
Speaker 2: He helped me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Center for Black Music Research.
Speaker 2: You know, he was the first one to, to, to, to, to bring those guys together somewhere down in southern Illinois.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sam was very helpful, very supportive.
Speaker 1: There's the Center for Black Music Research at Columbia College in Chicago [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah Sam.  In fact, Sam, Sam helped me--he worked with me on it.  He, he--'cause he had a lot of resources and you know, knew a lot of sailor--oh he was just helpful.  That's all I--well he was helpful on both though, he was helpful even with the sacred concert, he was helpful with that too.  They had to transcribe all that music 'cause Duke [Duke Ellington] didn't keep anything.  'Cause they said when he would write, he--he'd change it every day and he wrote for the person, not for the instrument.  And they said you might come in and you played 'A Train' ['Take the A Train'] this way tonight and you might come in tomorrow and there'd be a sheet on your stand saying okay this is what we're going to do tonight.  That--that turned out--that concert was fabulous.
Speaker 1: So what year was this?
Speaker 2: Which now?
Speaker 1: Well the concert, the one you just--
Speaker 2: The concert was in ninety--it was the fortieth anniversary of the church [Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois] and the church was founded in '53 [1953], so it had to be in '94 [1994].  The Duke Ellington international conference [International Duke Ellington Study Group Conference] was in '99 [1999] because--no it was in '98 [1998] because the next year would've been Duke's 100th birthday and he was born in '99 [1999], so we did it.  And of course that's the conference where people come from Denmark and London [England], all those places, they all come and they just--it's a study group.  They, they just eat, breathe and sleep Duke Ellington.  And then the Great Lakes thing [Great Lakes Experience] was--I don't know, it's been since Jack's been dead.  Jack [Childs' husband, James Childs, Sr.] died in '99 [1999].  So I guess it was like 2003, '4 [2004], '5 [2005], something like that.
Story_ID: 645761
Speaker 1: There's a--when did you form, form the organization to commemorate Harold Washington?
Speaker 2: I like you say organization. I'm not sure we all--I guess it's going to be--
Speaker 1: Well what is it called?  What's the official name for this, the?
Speaker 2: It's--I'll ask you, but right now it's called the Harold Washington Tribute Committee.  And if we are going to continue on, I'm suggesting--I'm going to suggest this on Monday that they change it to the Harold Washington Legacy Committee.  I don't know that that will happen, but that's--I'm going to recommend that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I know something was done.  I left town in 2006, but something was done in 2003, I know Bob Starks [HistoryMaker Robert T. Starks] and a lot of other people I know were involved in it and I had to be out of town doing interviews and couldn't participate.  But, but there was a commemoration in 2003, right?
Speaker 2: Are you sure you're not talking about the historical society?
Speaker 1: I know about that exhibit, other--the historical society has an exhibit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, let's just go--the Harold Washington Library [Harold Washington Library Center, Chicago, Illinois] was opened some years--about three years after Harold Washington passed away, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was opened under Daley [Richard M. Daley].  Oh foot, I have it--I've got it in the car too.  I believe it was opened--I believe it was opened in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: All right.  The DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] has a Harold Washington exhibit and the Chicago Historical Society [Chicago History Museum, Chicago, Illinois] has a Harold Washington exhibit?
Speaker 2: Well, but theirs wasn't--a museum is permanent, the historical society was just for a period of time.
Speaker 1: And now it doesn't exist, okay, all right.  The Harold Washington Library, though, does have a permanent exhibit, so I guess, I mean it's been there a long time on exhibit, but I hear that it's not in very good condition these days, so.
Speaker 2: That's one of Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] and we're gonna--we're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell us about that.  There's something--there's another story that the Harold Washington Library, which is what it was known as when it was opened up is now--there's some, it's in jeopardy of not being the Harold Washington Library anymore?
Speaker 2: I've heard that.  And they--first, I even heard that they don't answer the library by Harold Washington.  But I called the number and they--they do say Central Library something, something, something, something, something, and then they say something about Harold Washington.  But, in fact, I have a letter in the car that's going out tomorrow, hopefully, certainly Monday to the mayor because Harold's name is not on the library.
Speaker 1: Was it ever on the library?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so they finally--everybody was so shocked about it.  In fact, just last week I guess I said, "I'm going to go back and look again just to be sure."  And no, it just says, "Chicago Public Library 400 South State Street."  And it's in the glass, it's etched in the glass.  But there is nothing that if a tourist was passing, you know from somewhere, that would say that that's Harold Washington Library.  Now that "L" stop [elevated train] there is called the Harold Washington Library stop or something like that.  And they, where they had this little room is probably as big as this room is up there where they had some exhibit of Harold.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hear it's in a, on a higher floor in--
Speaker 2: Ninth floor.
Speaker 1: In, is it the ninth floor is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's not the ninth floor, that's their winter garden is on the ninth floor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the atrium and all that.
Speaker 2: So it, could it be the tenth floor?
Speaker 1: I don't think you can get any higher than nine there.  But there are a number of mezzanines and other things there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I've heard it's really not a centerpiece, all though--
Speaker 2: It's not, it's really not.  So hopefully we'll be able to do something to get a better presence of his in the library.  And it's such a natural, not only is it natural because it's already named for him, but he was such a book--you know, it's just a natural.  So, I, I hope we don't have any trouble getting that done.  'Cause there's a letter going to the mayor [Rahm Emanuel] on that now.  Working on the inside is, you know, is a different story, or different difference.
Story_ID: 645762
Speaker 1: Who, who's on your tribute committee [Harold Washington Tribute Committee; Harold Washington Legacy Committee], and?  I mean I don't expect you to name everybody, but you know, who are some of the principals?
Speaker 2: Julieanna (laughter).
Speaker 1: Julieanna Richardson is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm
Speaker 1: --you know, I mean now this, I'm just telling you that, you know, this is oral history but everything you say you may as well say the person's name out, you know, 'cause we know it's going to be for somebody three hundred years from now they won't know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Well there's Clarence Jenkins, Lois Woods Walker [Loisteen Woods Walker], Don Rashid, Deborah Crable, James Hill [ph.], Tim Wright [Timothy W. Wright, III], Chuck Hunter [Charles Hunter].  Think about--oh, Karen Gunn, her daughter [Rhiana Gunn-Wright] just made the Rhodes scholar, the little Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] girl.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Karen Gunn and--
Speaker 1: Is she a librarian?
Speaker 2: Karen?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She has a little project called Urban Solutions [Urban Solutions Association].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well now, I--I'm going to say that's the core of it because--oh in fact all the security is coming to the meeting Monday night because they want to do something on archiving a lot of stuff that has.  (Unclear) some of it they have, but I'm told that they'll all be there.  What I'm kind of excited about now, I think I asked you if you knew him earlier as we talked, if you knew Hal Baron and you said you didn't.
Speaker 1: Who's that?
Speaker 2: Hal Baron.  'Cause I was saying he's commissioned this--this work and they asked me for the names of some people that they could interview 'cause they have to have, I mean it's choral, so they got to have some words, so they just wanted a feel for it.  So I gave them Jacquie Grimshaw [HistoryMaker Jacquelyne D. Grimshaw] from the political side, I gave them Mary Ella [Mary Ella Smith] who was the closest fiancee.  I gave them his sister [Geneva Washington] and two people from security, and they can reach out from there, they can refer.  I just gave them categories of people, you know, there are a million people that you could give, but I gave them that, so.  Yeah, we got a, and we've got really five projects that's coming out of this thing.  And I was very firm with them and I haven't moved from where I am, but maybe I have a little bit when they started talking about, you know, the ongoing organization.  'Cause the tribute, to me, we do it and do it next year, and do it.  But then we started talking about the legacy, his philosophy and civic engagement and all that sort of stuff, and it just isn't happening out there now.  So we're looking at doing that as a group called the Young Professionals--no, Young Powerful--Young and Powerful [Young and Powerful Group] I guess that's what they call themselves.  They're starting a speaker series on the 26th of September. It's going to deal, you know, with Harold [Harold Washington].  And we've got--we're working on--well I met, I think I told you already that I met with the Mikva people.  Are you familiar with the Mikva Challenge [Chicago, Illinois]?
Story_ID: 645763
Speaker 1: Sam, is it somebody named Sam Mi- Mikva?
Speaker 2: Ab Mikva was the--
Speaker 1: Ab, Abner Mikva, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I met with the executive director of the Mikva Challenge [Chicago, Illinois] and he--it's indicated that he'll be supportive and we're supposed to meet back with him in about six or eight weeks, because right now he's on vacation and then he comes back, school is opening and the--their program involves high school students.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Abner Mikva was a Illinois supreme court judge, I think, right?
Speaker 2: No, he was--he was in Washington [D.C.], U.S. attorney or attorney ge- something like that [U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in Washington.  But he's ninety, but he's still kicking.  And we've got we had--one thing that we did on the Harold [Harold Washington] thing, which was really great, but I'm squashing it to a degree, or redirecting it anyway.  We did a Know your Harold and they did it in middle school.  Those kids were so excited.  And Don Jackson [HistoryMaker Donald J. Jackson] who used to do 'Know Your Heritage,' he gave us the equipment and everything so they could hit the buttons and all that sort of stuff.  And one of them was--now these are middle school kids.  They told them they could answer or act it out, and one of the questions was, "What was Harold's favorite sport in high school," or something like--well he ran track and he boxed.  And (laughter) so this little boy he was over there running and they asked him why, and he said, "You asked, he ran track."  So he was running track and everything.  But, we had the winners and we gave them some little trophies and everybody said they would donate the same thing.  But my position on that is, it's all right we can do that with grade school kids, it'd be fun.  But it doesn't matter that Harold ran track or boxed, you know, I want them to learn about the civic involvement, you know what I mean, really, so.  With young kids you do something, I guess, to get their interest, I don't know, but that's my concern.  I'm more concerned that we learn something about his philosophy and how he governed and everything than that he ran track.  That may be a way of getting to it, I mean it could all be worked into it.
Story_ID: 645764
Speaker 1: So you were saying off camera that you enjoy events?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  No, I just--I just enjoy and to a degree have had fairly decent success with them.  Like I talk about the Great Lakes Experience and like I talk about the Ellington Conference [International Duke Ellington Study Group Conference], and all of these have educational components to them.  I just like putting on events, the Joint Negro Appeal.  When I was a member of the Joint Negro Appeal, I got--oh I'll tell you an interesting story.  Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] used to be dark when the University of Chicago [sic. Chicago Undergraduate Division; University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] left, it was dark and dreary, whatever.  And I was chairman of Women's Auxiliary for Joint Negro Appeal.  I always wanted to go to a clam bake and I remember when we were on our honeymoon we were driving somewhere up Connecticut, Delaware, I don't know where we were, but we're on the ocean.  And we saw some people and we just knew it was clam bake, and we went flying over there and they were broiling hotdogs.  But anyway, I came up with the idea that I wanted to do a clam bake, I wanted to do it.  I was in--I was in special events [Mayor's Office of Special Events] at that time and I wanted to do it at Navy Pier.  This was for my church [Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois], it wasn't--this was just my church.  And I wanted--no, no, no--I'm sorry it was for Joint Negro Appeal.  And those lights that are always out on the end of Navy Pier were dark, they were out.  So I told Colonel [Jack Riley], I asked, "Can you get me Navy Pier?"  Fast forward, he got it.  And--'cause it was closed.  It was just out there, it was closed.  And Captain Manley [John J. Manley] was the--whatever you call the person that's over the pier, captain or whatever you--anyway he was over the pier.  And I didn't ask him, 'cause I didn't know if the lights were on or off, I just wanted Navy Pier.  And would you believe, this shows you what happens in city government, you believe whatever it cost him, he came that one day and told me, he said, "Guess what I did for you."  I said, "What?"  No, no, no I'm past that--I'm past that.  No, no, no I'm back, yeah.  He told me, "I turned those lights on out there for you."  And I remember Jack [Childs' husband, James Childs, Sr.] and I were driving down the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] and I saw the lights on and he (laughter) had to take me up in there--I had (unclear) what I want to see.  I said, "Those lights burn for me."  But that was the best party--that was the best party we had out down the lake [Lake Michigan].  Folks came in their boats and docked, and we had a true absolute clam bake.  Gave them half chicken and the lobster, sweet potato, corn, and guess what we charged, ten dollars.  But that was, you know, that was in the '50s [1950s] give or take, yeah probably, maybe in the early '60s [1960s], probably '50s [1950s].  But that's what I enjoy doing.  This stuff with Harold [Harold Washington]--that was a side effect.  I just like--I like doing events and seeing them come off well.
Story_ID: 645765
Speaker 1: Okay so the Harold Washington Tribute Committee you hope to make the Harold Washington Legacy Committee?
Speaker 2: I'm going to suggest that on Monday to say if we're going to be ongoing.  What I've said to them, I said now you know, you're talking about forming an organization.  I'll stick with it until it's formed.  I have no desire to be chairman of some ongoing organization forever.  But I told them, I said you know, there're a million organizations out there, all looking for money from the same people.  And unless we can find a unique niche, you know, two years from now it'd just be a dead organization.  So, and I have no interest in that.
Speaker 1: But don't you think it's going to take an ongoing effort, you know, this committee?
Speaker 2: Well, I like what's happening, I like what's developed, I'll like the Mikva Challenge [Chicago, Illinois] being supportive, you know, kind of thing.  I like--well we are going to--well this isn't on-going, but we did make a few pennies.  We were lucky enough to come out and make a few pennies at the affair.  So we're going to give a student from each of the seven city colleges [City Colleges of Chicago] and Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] a computer or something, or something like that, and we didn't have the machinery to set up selecting the student and all that sort of stuff.  So we are letting the college select a student, but we're giving the criteria that the student has to come from.  But I want to do that because you announce at an event that you're going to do something, I really wanted to do it by September, but that's impossible.  We'll certainly do it before the second semester though.  You know, so that we can make an announcement that, you know, we did make some dollars, and here it is.
Story_ID: 645766
Speaker 1: Okay, now for your efforts with the Harold Washington Tribute Committee [Harold Washington Legacy Committee], correct me if I'm wrong, I think this is why you received the Jorja Palmer award from Congressman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], right?
Speaker 2: No, it was just starting when I got that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just starting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got the award for your ongoing activities.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  I noticed in the write up I read Jorja's name was spelled wrong (laughter).  Like it was Georgia the state instead of J-O-R-J-A [HistoryMaker Jorja Palmer].
Speaker 2: J-O-R-J-A.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jorja.
Speaker 2: And you know, I just knew that we were getting the award from, you know, Danny was giving me the award.  And I guess I care so little about that kind of stuff, somebody--but anyway, when I got there I found that it was the Jorja Palmer aw- you know, they gave several awards and each had a different name, mine was the Jorja Palmer.  And I thought, gee whiz 'cause I was so close to Jorja.  As a matter of fact, Jorja had in--you know Jorja was the most organized person in the world and she had in her papers wherever that I had to be involved in the funeral, but.  She was--that was a brilliant woman.  Jorja was a brilliant woman, so.  But I got that.
Story_ID: 645767
Speaker 1: I agree.  So, we ask this question always, and that question is: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today in 2013?
Speaker 2: What are my concerns?
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for our community today?
Speaker 2: Stop the killing.  Hopes and concerns for the community.  I mean it's just trite to say something about economics and schools and stuff like that.  I think, and this will tie back into the Harold Washington thing.  If we can educate our community on the importance of civic engagement and particularly in the political arena.  You know our people don't know--they need to know they don't go to the congressman to get the pothole fixed.  And if that, to me, if, if, if we could empower our community with that kind of knowledge would be meaningful.  I mean yeah sure I want to see education and I want to see just--but I think this is a part of it.  I mean if you get that, I think you can get the other.  If you can get the involvement, you can, yeah, I think, I think.  Yeah, I want better education and I want the gun violence to stop.  I want all that sort of crap.  But I just think this (gesture) could be a basis for making that happen.
Story_ID: 645768
Speaker 1: Now wh- if you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Everything (laughter).  When it's all over you say, oh if I'd just done that.  I would've--what would I have done differently.  Gotten married earlier.  No, I think about it 'cause it's a big joke with me.  What's his name, he's dead now, but he told, 'cause I was--bear in mind, you see it was late in life when I got married [to James Childs, Sr.].  And he told me, 'cause I had all the buddies in the world, I had--and they were good to me, they'd--whatever I wanted, wherever I needed to go, whatever I could call any of them and say.  And I can't think of his name now, he's dead.  But he said, "Josie [HistoryMaker Josie Childs], you're everybody's buddy and nobody's sweetheart."  And that was true (laughter), you know, I just had all these buddies.  They'd come by the house and sit up and talk about their girlfriends.  But, it's been a good run.  It's been a good run.
Story_ID: 645769
Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back, once again, on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  I don't know.  'Cause you know, it--it's difficult because I've been more project oriented, you know what I'm saying, then I have an ongoing kind of a mission and that's just because I'm selective about projects that I do now.  I want to see that they have some form of an impact.  Even if it's fundraising, you know, if the event is a fundraising event.  But, I can't stand and say I was responsible for this or that or this or that, because that's not what I've done.  I have a million folks out there who swear up and down that I've been an inspiration to them, they swear that all the time.  And I think they're just talking, but if that's it, I could, you know, I could sit here and give you ten or fifteen people who would say I've been an inspiration to them kind of thing.  And, said they loved me to death.  And to me, on a serious side, that's important because I don't have family.  I don't have family, they're all gone.  But I have family, bookoodles of it, who will come at a drop of a hat for anything that I need.  And I'm grateful, I don't say that lightly, I mean I take that very seriously in all seriousness.  I always kid Dorothy [Dorothy Williams (ph.)] 'cause I tell her she's the one that got the--got authority to pull the plug; and thank god she's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Dorothy--?
Story_ID: 645770
Speaker 1: Dorothy Williams [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, no, she goes--she lives in Arizona now, and she is an R.N.  But I've had three major surgeries, but she's been here for all three.  And she moves in the hospital, and she's an R.N. which helped, definitely doesn't hurt at all.  But I remember I was going to have my first hip surgery just as she was moving and she said, "You know, when you have your surgery I'll be back."  And she comes and she'll--she'll stay six weeks, whatever, you know.  I've had three major surgeries and never been sick and never had a pain.  Had this heart surgery, and that was funny.  I guess I was in the hospital about three or four days and then I went to rehab.  They didn't want me to go, they said I was doing so well.  I went to rehab and I was there for a week.  And I came home on the 4th of July and they came to get me, and I said, "I'm so sick of this hospital food, let's go eat."  I took everybody to breakfast down to the Yolk coming from the hospital.  And they wanted to hold me.  I mean, well that, it still kind of boggles my mind to be honest, because I didn't have bypass, I mean they split the heart open, but I never--I never had a pain, not one.  Lucked up on one of the best surgeons in the country, they genuflect when they call his name, and he developed some of the procedures that they use, Dr. McCarthy [Patrick M. McCarthy].  And my cardiologist had recommended him, 'cause that's who he told me.  And I went through this bit about, "Well I ain't got no shortness of breath, I ain't got no pain or."  But he said, "You won't."  And then I got, not one, not two, but three opinions.  I went up to Mayo [Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota] and they all said the same thing.  And you know, when you hear of people just keeling over, like they didn't have no symptoms and all of a sudden they just keel--well this aortic valve they said it should be about the size of a half dollar, and of course mine in closing it had gone down to about the size of a dime and when it closes, you just keel over.  And so when he told me, as I said, "I went up to Mayo and over to Rush [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and I got these three opinions and they all--all told me the same thing."  And I said to Mr. Mehlman [David J. Mehlman], I said, "You got somebody you're going to recommend?"  He said, "I sure have."  And of course it was Dr. McCarthy.  And they just genuflect when they he--anytime you--anytime--I meant any doctor didn't say anything, they say oh you have the best doct- so I was blessed in that.
Story_ID: 645771
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't raised that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  Not really, not really.
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered.  Now this is going to sound strange coming from me, but it was something my [maternal] grandmother [Lillie Brown] always taught us.  And I guess it's a song, and this becomes spiritual now.  She would always tell me, always remember this little model kind of thing and it was, "Thou art the potter, I am the clay."  And just sort of let that guide you.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
