Story_ID: 253178
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Wednesday, September 23rd, 2004, and this interview is taking place at Howard University School of Divinity in Washington, D.C.  Now if you would please sir, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it?
Speaker 2: My name is Evans Edgar Crawford, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And all spelled the common way?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Want me to spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes sir, please.
Speaker 2: E-V-A-N-S, first name, E-D-G-A-R, middle name, C-R-A-W-F-O-R-D, Jr.  Evans Edgar Crawford, Jr.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Crawford could you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: The date of my birth was July 2nd, 1923, in Temple, Texas.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is a chaplain, university chaplain, and a professor in the School of Divinity.  I've served here as dean of Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, university chapel, and I also served in my academic location was in the, well first it was in the School of Religion [at Howard University], and then we changed it to the divinity school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 253179
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions, and so if you could just give me short answers to those, that would be great.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, well I have so many, being from Texas, and my favorite food I guess would be red beans and corn bread.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color I guess would be gold, black and gold, that's my fraternity's [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] colors.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the, I like the spring.  Being a Texan, I like the spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Haven't had many of those, but I presume it would be somewhere near the islands.
Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is I count blessings.
Story_ID: 253180
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford would you please tell us a little bit about your mother starting with her name and where she was born, and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's name is Mary Enge. E-N-G-E.  She grew up in Texas.  I've never been to her home but she was out kinda toward the western Texas and she, of course, went to school, I'm told, at the same school I eventually went to, Samuel Huston [College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas].  You didn't ask this question but she got her teacher's certificate in those early years so she taught around in those areas.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, she died when I was aged three, so I just have a, my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] came to rear me, so I don't recall too many stories, I just remember when they were having the funeral, I remember I was at the wake and I don't recall any.
Story_ID: 253181
Speaker 1: Well let's talk a little bit about your father, starting with his name and same thing, his background.
Speaker 2: Evans E. Crawford, Sr., and he was born in Troy, Texas, and that's about maybe seventeen [sic. ten] miles on toward Waco [Texas] from, from Temple, Texas.  It's known because one of the, the governors of Texas who was the female governor, she's from Troy, so we always got some joy out of that, but it's in that area of Temple.  I grew up around Temple and I went to school in the Austin [Texas] area.
Speaker 1: Did your father ever share any stories with you about what life was like for him as a little boy?
Speaker 2: Oh so many.
Speaker 1: Could you share a couple with us?
Speaker 2: Well my father went to school.  He was able to go to the eighth grade because he had several brothers and sisters and those days, the persons who went a little further and helped the others and he worked in service.  He had a long-time relationship with one of the bankers there, and used to drive him when he went out to New Mexico for their vacations, so he told me a great deal about it, told me a great deal about it.  He was in World War I [WWI], got to be a company officer.  He learned to type on his own, so he was company clerk so he told me several things about World War I and France and then told me some of the things about what happened in the town where we grew, some of the tensions and some of the traditions that they got because, you know, they were a southern town and there were some lynchings and so forth.  He told me about some of those.
Speaker 1: And did he ever talk about any of like the particular instances that led to a lynching?
Speaker 2: Well he talked about the tradition that had happened, I think, in my town or somewhere in that area, Temple, Texas, in Bell County [Texas].  He talked about my hometown had, had a record of having once, some citizens having burned a Negro on the square.  Now as I got it, various variations of it, it seems as if in those years when people were traveling along the way, my father worked for the Santa Fe Railroad [Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Company] and we lived right near the track and he told me that, as he, as he got it, that there had been an incident in which a lady that's Caucasian had been blinded and the community naturally rose up and they (unclear) they found this, hobos, they were both white and black because you see we were around on the edge of the [Great] Depression, and the story as I got it and checked it out and all details, is that they supposed to have apprehended a person, a Negro, and in the fervor they burned him on the square only to discover later that they apprehended her husband and he is supposed to have been accused of doing that in a blind rage, a jealousy rage.  So that may be the kinds of stories you hear but it colored the atmosphere.  When I went to college [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], persons said, "[HistoryMaker Evans] Crawford where are you from?"  And I would tell 'em where I was from.  It wasn't humorous but I'm guessing those were the kind of stories you got.  He didn't tell it to me in any bitter sense--in a bitter kind of way, I guess it's one of those things that happened.
Story_ID: 253182
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Evans Crawford, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well my father, since I was reared as an only son, I had two half-brothers, I was not reared with them except a couple of times when they came in the summer.  But I was reared, you know, as an only child, so I had many, many encounters with him.  He, of course, was my idol.  My father worked for the Santa Fe Railroad [Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Company].  He was very punctual.  I say that because I would know because he would challenge me to that kind of responsibility.  My father used to pride himself of being able to outrun me as we was going into the home.  He could do it.  My father could type, my father gave my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] control.  He was my pal.  He would take me, of course he could get a pass in those days.  If you worked for the railroad you could get a pass to go to certain places, so he would take me occasionally to a big city like Dallas [Texas] or Fort Worth [Texas], and so, we had many things.  One of the things I particularly remembered, he used to bring these traveling carnivals and up on Bruno Hill which was a hill.  They always had it.  I remember one time the Ferris wheel stopped with my father and I at the top and I was, in my fright, I was reaching to try to get down to one of the poles and I remember my father grabbed me with a hand and held me.  I say that because I always, you realize, we did things together.  He would take me to the movies, but my father was a local preacher in the United Methodist church it's called now.  It was Methodist [Episcopal] Church South at that time, so I imitated him and maybe one of the reasons why, since my grandmother brought a lot of preachers, she was very active in the church, I eventually indicated earlier around eleven decided to go into ministry.  My father was influential in all of that--
Story_ID: 253183
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, you said you were raised by your grandmother, why don't we talk a little bit about your grandmother, now starting with her name.
Speaker 2: Her name was Rosie Crawford.
Speaker 1: So you were raised by your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  When my mother [Mary Enge Crawford] died, at age three, he brought her home and then she stayed with him and that became kind of the center for all the rest of the sons and daughters who were spread all the way from Galveston [Texas] to Fort Worth [Texas].  So she reared me from age three.  She says that she was born in Cumberland County, Kentucky, and so I was very close to her, very close to her.  She, she says that she doesn't know, but she, her mother she used to tell me after I came back from college [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], I was more inquisitive.  Grandmother, what happened?  Didn't have the particular approach of an oral report, but she would tell me sometimes that when she moved from, with the family for whom they worked, she and her mother, from Cumberland County, she said when they came over toward Texas, they walked often by day behind the wagon.  And she would tell me that.  Then she tells me that she said her mother who was born just outside of slavery, said that she recalls that somewhere along the lines that her mother was sold once three times in one day.  So I began to pick it up.  She is not sure, but she, she had kind of straight hair, kind of tan color, and she's not sure but she, maybe that her, you know, maybe some Indian [Native American] blood in that, and, of course, no one date this particular interview question, that's very meaningful to me now because it just opened up here in Washington [D.C.] here recently, an Indian museum [National Museum of the American Indian, Washington, D.C.] and so I was unable to go.  I was wondering if I should have gone in order to honor her.  So I would say that I have some, some blood.  She was very active in the [Methodist Episcopal] Church [South; United Methodist church].  Where I was, she was, and I often think now, when the refrain is being picked up even on the radio, do you know where your child is.  My grandma would say, I may not know exactly where he is, and this was a small town in Temple [Texas], but, but, but I know the area where he is, so that would give you some kind of the situation.  We picked cotton.  She didn't have to, but my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] had a job, but she felt it was a good discipline.  We were very close to a family now that (unclear) boys and so forth.  My grandmother reared me.  She was the one who whipped me when I thought about trying to stop school and in those little moments of, you know, distress, she was the one who put me back in.  She never had the privilege, she never went to school a day in her life, but as I came up, I remember that was the day you had the WPA [Work Projects Administration] and schools they have and one of the things I have, one of the, one of the remaining photographs I have of her, she's standing by an old Philco Radio, stand up one, and she has on top of it a certificate from the WPA where she learned to write her name and one of the things I remember very vividly in that old picture is that I remember that my grandmother used to call me in from playing marbles to help her practice writing her name and she got a certificate for learning to write her name and I had the privilege, now I know, I had the privilege of helping teach my grandmother how to write her name.  That picture that was standing by that radio, so I remember--that indicates the way all along she would, I had to wash, I had to come home wherever she was.  She'd take me to church.  My father used to say well why take him to church, you know he's going to sleep.  She said that's all right.  He can sleep right beside me on the bench.  So I early indicated some desire to go into ministry.  My father wasn't certain that it was not a lot of influence.  My grandmother thought it was the voice of God and she would, she would let me sleep beside her, beside her, where she was, I was.  I was very close.
Story_ID: 253184
Speaker 1: Did she [Crawford's paternal grandmother, Rosie Crawford] ever talk about why the family decided to move from Kentucky to Texas?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, at that time, I guess she, before she actually married my grandfather [Richard Crawford], but, well I guess she worked for the family and my guess is the migration pattern so for some reason they would go from greater Texas, I use to--David Crockett and all the--
Speaker 1: The folklore there.
Speaker 2: --focus folklore.  But I mentioned that was a movement.  I have never checked it as to what kind of situation it was, but (unclear) families moved, and so I recently, I got on the Internet and I looked at the census and saw what Cumberland County [Kentucky] looked like, even today, but that's where she came from.
Speaker 1: What did it look like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was still a small town.  I just got it on the Internet, got the statistics, got the housing value and so a very small place.  I particularly was interested in it because when I first came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], the teacher, there was some aggressive persons in the stock market so they called me down to one of the place sometime.  They were trying to sell me stock and so forth.  Of course, I had just come from graduate school [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] broke, but the reason I mention that in connection with my grandmother, so one time  very enterprising person said "Well can I call you sometime, Reverend?"  I was a reverend then.  I was at Gainer Chapel [ph.].  Just got first year.  He called me one day and he said hey Reverend, he said you told me I could call you.  There's a colonel down in Kentucky that's opening up some chicken franchises.  Would you be interested?  And I kind of said to him, "Chicken?"  I said, "A colonel?"  I said "You don't think all people like chicken," and I said, "a colonel," and I said, "that doesn't resonate."  Fast forward.  That was the beginning of Kentucky Fried Chicken and I always tell people, 'cause I have kind of a comic perception of life.  I had the opportunity to get in on the ground floor of it.  So, now I didn't get into it, every time I go by a Kentucky thing, my wife [Elizabeth Crawford] would say "Stop the car" and, and I teach a course here now called Poetics and Proclamation, and this what I'm telling you resonates in many of my sermons, and she said "Stop the car."  I said "Why?"  She said "Right in front of a Kentucky," she said "and let's ponder our poverty."  Look at the alliteration. But I say that humorously, but she was from Kentucky and so when I say something--speaking, I've gone there for meetings to Louisville [Kentucky] and so forth.  I was very close to her.
Story_ID: 253185
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather [Richard Crawford]?  Did you have an opportunity--
Speaker 2: He had died mostly when I was born, and he, my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] says that he came into Texas down from Louisiana.  I haven't been able to check it.  He thinks that he may have come from a situation out in Jamaica.  He's not sure, but I'm interested to find that out, and I don't know why I haven't gone to check it since I'm in the place where they have the archives.  And after 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Hayley] many of us used to go down, but he came, we like to say in that a heroic situation.  He may have come from that stock.  You know, they bought him in the slave trade down there and history says they tried to break them and tame them.  We don't, we think he got into New Orleans [Louisiana], this was the hero strain in my family because they couldn't tame him.  My father said that he was a person strong and said whenever they were picking cotton and they felt that the owner had cheated them, they'd tell my father and he was down in Texas.  They said he would go and speak up for justice.  Maybe that's a little heroic strain, but that's where I took it from.
Story_ID: 253186
Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandparents, did you know them at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, no.  My mother [Mary Enge Crawford], my mother, let's say, my grandmother had, you said my--
Speaker 1: Your maternal grandparents, your mother's parents.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--they, I haven't check that.  I know that there was a family there, was very close to them, there were a couple of barbers in the town who was taught by my mother somewhere up in kind of east Texas, and they said she taught them and I know about some of the sisters and brothers, but I soon lost contact with my two half-brothers, so, that's one of the things that I will be possibly looking to some of your oral reports and maybe find out--
Story_ID: 253187
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well my earliest memory of growing up, I do remember always being in church because that was a, that was the background.  I grew up in the church.  My grandmother [Rosie Crawford] was very active in the Methodist [Episcopal] Church [South; United Methodist church], and they had missionary (unclear) and since I had to always be with her, they had a little thing called mother's jewel, and we felt that was mostly for the young ladies, but since I, since I always was where my grandmother was, so I joined it.  Some of the fellows gave me a little trouble for it.  But, I remember though she was in church, she was ecclesiastic and my grandmother what we have in the system was a Methodist class there.  They're the ones who visit details and then they have prayer night.  They have come and would tell their testimonies and whenever we'd come, she would stand up and take the testimony from people in her class meeting.  She would go out and she would collect the money and meet them.  It kind of gave them some extension of the church.  I remember her being in the church, I remember her inviting the ministers over.  My grandmother was from that period in time when they, they so treasured the, revered the Sabbath.  They would cook on Sunda- Saturday and then we'd have everything mentioned.  So my grandmother could cook.  My grandmother would visit with the people.  My grandmother, though she never went to school in her life, she could count a dollar bill as long as she could just see it because she, I always said she was illiterate by that sense, but she wasn't dumb.  So I, she was the key person and wherever you saw her, you saw me.  My father [Evans Crawford, Sr.], because he could give a pass and in those days the Methodist church was divided not geographically as in, like Northeastern [Jurisdiction of the United Methodist Church], we had a central jurisdiction wherever there were colored in certain sections, so my father because he could always provide passes for her, we went to all the Methodist conference when I first went.  We went to San Antonio [Texas] and I'd go out to Laredo [Texas], all of these places, but my grandmother was the common denominator.  So I got a chance to meet a lot of people from whom only recently we've had a reunion in that tradition 'cause it's changed now.  And we, I was recalling some of these things, so she had a tremendous influence on my life because she was the one who provided and some of the others, my father's brothers and sisters in that area, but I lived with her.  She took care of me, and my father never married again, so he provided and leaned a great deal upon her.
Story_ID: 253188
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe your community for us?  What was your town like?
Speaker 2: Well Temple, Texas, was a, was a kind of a forming town about thirty miles south of Waco [Texas].  They, there're a lot of farms around and, but it was noted primarily for being one of the central branching places for the Santa Fe Railroad [Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Company].  Now we had two railroads, Missouri, Kansas and Texas [Railroad], but they had around us.  That's where they would reply and clean up the engines because they had the old choo-choo trains we called them at that time.  My father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] worked on them.  He had the task, so, and when we come up from Dallas [Texas], before you go up to the, you come back there, and then they would branch off to go out to California, so that was an important place.  They closed it now, and, of course, that, that took it away from Temple, but by that time Temple had emerged when they closed it, to be a part and almost not reaching Belton [Texas] because it began after World War II [WWII], to develop Fort Hood [Texas] and Fort Hood was very close there and that's where they had that tank battalions.  But that characterized the town so those people who had those railroad jobs during the [Great] Depression, they had steady jobs, so I was fortunate my father worked for the friends, people that worked in either the food branches of the food services I used to serve so it was a railroad town, and my father had a long-standing activity there.  In fact, my father was among those who organized some of the, or joined some of the unions AFL [American Federation of Labor; American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)] and he was the leading these things and that had impact not only because of the part of the labor movement but it also had an important impact in terms of, in terms of leadership in the town and one of the things I'm just going through now is what my father left me.  He was one of the leaders in the organizing of the labor and the labor at that time handled not only problems of people who were common laborers at that time, but it also had an important impact upon the racial situation.  Now we were divided, we had separate schools and, but my father being active in the [Methodist Episcopal] Church [South; United Methodist church], he's the one who would serve in the lodge and they were the ones with the few professional people there.  We had doctors.  I remember earlier we had some of our medical doctors who would come to visit us from say Waco or Dallas twice a month or twice a week in special emergencies, so that was the typical situation, a small town service oriented- a lot of the people in my church worked in service and many of us picked cotton around, and then I remember particularly I picked until I went to school when there was no more cotton.  So you can say, it may have started in September but if you had a third picking, that is, the third time, so that is the kind of town so I know going out in those years, agricultural gradually because of the railroad having a large important relationship.  One thing Temple was noted for because one of their hospitals was in town, so the hospital for this (unclear) because they had all the privileges when you're in the railroad and I say that now because right today even the medical school, Texas A&M [University, College Station, Texas], they are located in Texas.  One of the famous clinics all over the world, Scott and White Eye, Ear and Nose Clinic [Scott and White Clinic, Temple, Texas], they were in Temple, so Temple had then, as now because of these railroads they had a hospital center so my father knew that's where he could go and those kind of things.  That's generally it.
Story_ID: 253189
Speaker 1: What were holidays like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, we celebrated Christmas because you see there you didn't have the snow white situation. I can say that because I went to school [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] actually in Boston [Massachusetts], so we would have the fire crackers.  We had all of the anxieties around Christmas.  We celebrated Easter, and that was particularly important because many of our people worked in service.  My grandmother [Rosie Crawford], living at the time, so we, we celebrated and enjoyed it and the churches were full.  It mostly was around the churches and we had a school.  The school I went to was called Dunbar [School, Temple, Texas] at the time, was called Dunbar by that time, I went, same, my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] when he went, went on the first floor of the building and went up to eleventh or twelfth grade in the same building, just went upstairs, so activities were centered around the celebrations of the school.  There was only one church there that was built by Negros initially.  That was the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, Wayman Chapel [AME Church, Temple, Texas] and so even though, they had Baptist and all other groups there, but that's general.  That's kind of rambling but that's, that characterizes it.
Story_ID: 253190
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, we were talking about holidays and special times.  Did your family celebrate Juneteenth?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  In Texas because my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] again was a railroad, we had access to getting passes.  My aunt, my father's, you know, sister, that was the only one.  He had another one that had passed earlier, lived in Galveston, Texas.  So we often went down there to celebrate it.  You know, the barbecue, the (unclear) mills, the person would have all kinds of things, but we celebrated it now.  Eventually my aunt in Galveston moved out near the [Atlantic] Ocean so she could walk to it, and so I remember that because we always had the option of going.  But yes, that was in that area, June the 19th, was a great celebration.  I'm glad you mentioned that.  Yes, you always arranged, even the people you worked with, they arranged it so that you could celebrate now a lot of it took place there.  But I was able to go to a larger place and go through Houston [Texas] and go there and back.  In Galveston, we had the advantage of the water and that was nearby, the place.  Now I never learned to swim, but thereby there's a story.  But just to be with the ocean breeze, the Gulf [of Mexico] breeze there more specifically--
Story_ID: 253191
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the sights that I would pick, recall, would be helping my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] wash.  The bluing, building the fire under the pot, selecting some of the soap which my grandmother had made, lye soap, and standing there when she went in to stir it, so I remember that out in the tub, I remember, particularly remember I was fascinated by the bluing and what did that do, you know, but also because that became a kind of, neighbor thing.  They would generally wash about the same time. They would wait for a good day, and so the water pot was boiling.  There was no way a germ could live in that boiling kind of thing.  I remember that.  I remember also the many times that we went to local conferences, some of the sights.  I remember when we would go to the various towns in those days because of the way the segregation was, there was no hotels.  We could work in them, but we stayed with persons in the local church and I remember how, how the people would share with us their best rooms and they had these blankets that they made, quilts, and so I do recall that.  So I could go to the conference and I, my, my horizons were just expanded.  I remember the growing up, the family who had about two boys and four-five girls, the Akins [ph.].  I became a part.  We would pick out of the place called Cyclone, Texas, is where I picked cotton, near Rosebud [Texas] down in that way, and I can remember that was the outing where we really would go and walk out in (unclear) and pick cotton.  One of the things we particularly liked was on Saturday, where, we were stay out two weeks at a time, and they would go over to Rosebud, a little city, and we had, I had money to spend because they would give us some and then we take the, take the car and come back.  That around it, but also I remember, I remember the--
Speaker 1: What sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, naturally, the cooking.  The smells of when they were choosing barbecue, or they would cook.  I also remember the smells of vanilla.  We used to have to churn the ice cream, and my grandmother could do it and without any kind of measuring spoon.  She would just be able to hit it, and I think this is a character, but it's a picture of-- when I go over to someone's house, they would have it, so that's one of the smells, the smell on Saturday, thinking of the smells, and also the smell and the sight, when they used to hang the clothes up on the, up on the, on the, behind the house.  That contrasts now with a washing machine, but it just seems something wasn't right.  The cleanliness of it, the sights of it blowing out from the house, even though we lived by the choo choo train. But those--
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: Well the sounds would be having lived right by the railroad track and my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] worked with it, some of the men when we'd come, there was a major street called A Street [Temple, Texas].  Many southern towns always had a strange street where they were around A Street, and, but there was an overpass and so they, my father knew that they, the engineers had this sound, sounded before they got there and I remember the choo choo trains.  I could hear it.  For instance, when I took my wife [Elizabeth Crawford] who was born in New England, she's from Providence, Rhode Island.  We met at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] where I went to school.  She in music and I in ministry.  When I first took her down when the trains would come by to blow because they had to always blow it before a major place, she almost jumped straight up at midnight, but I had, I just tuned it out, but, so the sounds of the whistle blowing.  I always wanted to get on one and just pull the string because in those days you had the farm and two people were in the situation and then it was later changed to the diesel.  The smells, the smell of and sights pulling in a wagon.  My grandmother [Rosie Crawford] would take food when the church [Wayman Chapel AME Church, Temple, Texas] had a celebration and she could cook catfish and we'd rush our stream so the sounds and the sights of people sharing in the church.  We used to also baptize out in the river although Methodists can sprinkle, but I just remember some of those sights and sounds.
Story_ID: 253192
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, it still was Dunbar [School, Temple, Texas] because when I grew up, now they changed later on because--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of your teachers there?  Do you remember some of your elementary school teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I remember some of the ladies, Mrs. Wade [ph.], Miss Carol [ph.] and, she, she, I guess would be probably be a little bit closer to the earlier part of the school development.  Yeah, the number of tales I could tell about it, because my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] was very good at math, I wasn't.  I used to think that I hated my math teacher but actually when I began to take symbolic logic later on in seminary [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], I can appreciate the part.  Yes, they were very much a part of our lives because in those days, they had permission from my parents and custom to, to administer corporal punishment.  And so I can remember some of my greatest tales were told about this.  I can remember that they had a tremendous influence and all that.  Now Miss Wade, everybody knew Miss Wade, but that was (unclear), I moved to high school that was another person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dur--
Story_ID: 253193
Speaker 1: During elementary school [Dunbar School, Temple, Texas] what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well I think I can characterize it this way, but keep in mind now, we weren't divided into elementary, we went in and moved, so we, we didn't have junior high school, but in those grades we did.
Speaker 1: Right, during the elementary time frame at that age, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well I learned, I'll approach it this way, I, I learned to read early.  I think it may have been the influence.  I didn't know my mother [Mary Enge Crawford] long, but so, but the house my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] had books, he was a local preacher.  Now a local preacher in the Methodist church is a person who is recognized with an order but he, he, of course, it includes she now, but they stay at the local place so he with that eighth grade, always kept that book open.  Now that's a phrase that I picked up later from some of the interviews I did among Baptist ministers in Chicago [Illinois] and I think J.H. Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] for whom a tower is named.  That's where the original schedule for these interviews was supposed to take place because he was a head of the [National] Baptist Convention, and when I interviewed him, he asked some of the same questions you're asking, particularly and so what my background was, now I interviewed him though he being Baptist, I was Methodist.
Speaker 1: So were you a pretty studious student?  You enjoyed reading?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what happed was that I learned to read and because I learned to read, I gather, I was moved, I skipped a couple of grades as a matter of fact, but I skipped them at-- primarily as much for the fact that the school was overcrowded.  We used to have the high and low and I remember twice the principal would come in and I'd overhear him saying to the teacher, he said, we just, this is just too much.  We have the seats and we had the benches around, and I remember one time, they said now you, I'm a put you in the, in the low six, that's what they used to call it, because in the high fifth, you can-- so I skipped twice, and I like to tell people that, not because I was so bright, because it was crowded and when I really want to be humorous about the segregation system, I profited from it.  But it was only blacks, you see, the whites were different.  So therefore, it was very clouded, crowded because I was in the same building that my father went to, we just went then went up to the high school, so we didn't have the other, but yes, I skipped a couple of grades mostly because I was in the family, where I now say that my father had books and I learned to read, and I'd read them, and then he would particularly help me with the math.
Story_ID: 253194
Speaker 1: And did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did because I used to dream a great deal, quite a much. I was--I used to go church a lot and I would hear, dreams are very important.
Speaker 1: What were some of your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, my aspirations were I used to dream a great deal, part of it was related to the fact that I, radio, radio, I could, I could, they could set me off to setting scenes in my mind that even today, you don't, they don't have enough money to do what they could do in my mind.  I went through all the Jack Armstrong, the Little Orphan Annie kinds of things now, I'm relating it to dreams because something were inspired by that kind of thing, but mostly when I was around eleven and then maybe a little earlier than we were talking about, later, I used to preach on the front steps.  In fact, when they used to have the, every Friday they'd have a forensic thing where we would perform, some people who could sing.  They would ask me to preach a sermon.  I used to preach on Little Red Riding Hood.  And they'd say, now [HistoryMaker Evans] Crawford will give us those kinds of things.  Now the reason I, I tell you that in response to your inquiry was so my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] still feeling I was probably too much influenced by-- he wanting it to be a genuine call, he bought me books.  I used to stand on the front of my steps and remember there was a trestle up there where people were going.  I used to preach on David and so, and so all of this peopled my world.  That continued up until, then begin to have dreams related to the fact of my--as I got into school, keep in mind I couldn't, I couldn't shoot marbles for keeps because my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] said, that's gambling.  And so I moved beyond elementary school [Dunbar School, Temple, Texas] now.  Dancing was out and so I don't know whether they were nightmares. Sometimes I'd wake up and my father would say "What's the matter?"  I said "Well, I don't know, maybe I shouldn't be a preacher."  And so he let me go through that and eventually I was guided by a little later than you ask for, by the church.  That had a director of religious education.  He would take us to Belden [Texas; Naples, Texas] and then he would take us to the region and I got in, and I was very active, I would always speak and so forth.  So my, my dreams, and I'd--sometimes I'd wake up crying, but that's as much as I remember--
Story_ID: 253195
Speaker 1: What were your high school experiences like [at Dunbar School, Temple, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Well high school again, when I moved up on the other floor, I got into a lot of more forensic kinds of things.  To be brief, I would say, whereas I was in a school where there were athletics and we didn't have the gymnasium.  The fellows would play on the hard situation basketball.  I went into public speaking and later on debating, so while Mean Joe Greene eventually, he used to play with Pittsburgh [Steelers], was recruited by my coach from the area, I was more of the kind that would go to the cheer squad.  Why, that's why I'm here.  Those guys, you know.  But I got into the annual meets at Prairie View [State Normal & Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas].  I'd go down and I would speak so I used to compete in, you know, oratory and so forth.  So, I went through that and I was pretty noted, pretty much related to my, you know, to my church activities, you know, we, I, I wasn't the singer, but I was the person who, if you wanted a sermon, I was the one relating to it.  So I went through that and got into related matters.  I used to be in a lot of emcees.  We used to have a popular song review in high school and for two years I would, I would be the emcee for it, and, of course, people would come because that's the only time we could, we could use the municipal building and that was a great affair.  So a lot of the public songs now that I knew I had to introduce them and know something about it so I was very active in matters related to presentation, talking, not debating yet, but public speaking and known about him, "That Little Crawford Boy."  I had exhorters license.  In the Methodist church they have exhorters licenses, you could exhort, so I used to preach around, they'd say, "Now we have a sermon by [HistoryMaker] Evans Crawford," but that was known in those particular days but one thing about it though, my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] when I was tempted to be invited to go out to California to become one of these boys.  She says oh, no, you're going back and go to school.  If she had not done that, 'cause I used to go back and forth back to Kansas City [Kansas] where some of my relatives had moved, I probably wouldn't be talking way down here now, but she keep me in school.  I had many opportunities, you know, to become this boy, I didn't have much television in those days.  I'm glad she didn't. That was through high school.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: I graduated from high school around and went into college around 1938, '39 [1939].
Story_ID: 253196
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school [Dunbar School, Temple, Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh?
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Well pretty much I had professors and teachers, you know; they'd come out of the colleges and they were teaching in these schools.  You'd become attached to it, for instance in high school.  I had a person from Prairie View [State Normal & Industrial] College [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] who majored in history, so I took a class in history before, so therefore I was interested to see what that looked like in college also--
Speaker 1: Were you thinking you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes, because you see my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.], and see my mother [Mary Enge Crawford], you know, she died, so then books and then the professors would kind of urge you to go either to Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] down in town of Sam Huston [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], that was a church school.  I was in (unclear).  My religious education director was, encouraged me to go and make arrangements so I went to school in Austin, Texas, but at the time was called Sam H-U-S-T-O-N is now, is now merged with another congregational school, Tillotson [College]. So it's Huston-Tillotson.  So I, yes, they pretty much designated people that they thought should go and encourage you to go.  I got scholarships.
Speaker 1: So you got a scholarship to college?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, the Methodists, they were grooming me for the ministry.  Now when I went to college I had to rethink this thing of ministry because when we had the first opening ministries enforcing dance and young ladies were pulling me to the floor.  We had an Oxford Club, that is named after John Wesley in the Methodist and we didn't do that, but eventually I broke out.
Speaker 1: Was it a struggle?  I mean were there times when you thought okay, is this really what I want to do?
Speaker 2: Yes, because my father wanted to be sure that I wasn't just imitating because I lived around them sometimes.  That's why I used to wake up sometimes in that dream, he says "What's the matter."  I said well I don't know whether I should be rather frank about it.  You don't have in high school several charming young ladies trying to pull you on the floor.  I said no I can't do that because (unclear), so I did struggle with it but in a more serious--I wanted to be sure that's what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Because when you raised that it was improper to dance?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, in those days, it was dancing, drinking, and--
Speaker 1: So dancing was associated with drinking?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And certain denominations clearly, and certainly if you're thinking about going to the ministry.  So I had to wrestle with that because I couldn't compete with some of the other athletes and so forth, but there were ways, there were, you know, I was very active in my hometown [Temple, Texas] and the, the area that where my religious education directed me.  And then I went to the jurisdiction, got me down into New Orleans [Louisiana] and so forth.  And so it's through the church, and I began to meet a lot of people.  So it helped me define, so then I went to school, they had a club and scholarship and then I moved right into a number of courses that was related to ministry.
Story_ID: 253197
Speaker 1: What were you thinking that you wanted to do with your life?  Were you thinking that you wanted to be a preacher?  Were you thinking you wanted to teach others about ministry (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Glad you asked, glad you asked.  Because you see since I had been in public speaking, oratory, I didn't go for debating until I got into college.  Yes, I, I had some thoughts of going into law.  Now people at that time felt, you know, you have a gift of gab or whatever it was, but, you know, my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] had these books and I would read them and, you know, cause he always kept it, you see because he was always reading and he was getting books, could get them and I, I was reading.  In fact, I went one time down to be, I, in Sunday school in those days sometimes they would let you as you grow up in high school, they let you review, what you do, Sunday morning you go to your various classes and somebody would review.  Now what's a reviewer?  So sometimes the pastor if he thought so would let you review.  So I was reviewing it and I was saying something that he, he didn't know where it came from.  Well the Jehovah's Witnesses, and I say that now because I am, it's theology and I know how they came and I know some of their ways.  I would, they were noted for having colored books, but I was, I was a crushed reader.  And so he said to me one time, he said, I said, what's the color of some of the books.  He said they used to go from house to house and because that was their way.  I'm saying that because that was the time that indicated -- I could read and so I had to have guidance you know.  That was not built into anything against them as such. They just people that come, and they would be both black and white.  They would come around and sell you the books, you see.  And so, but I had people as you would have in any small school even now, identify some person, well I want you to go to school.  I would go to Prairie View [State Normal & Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] almost every year.  We used to have interscholastic meets they would have in tracks and all of those things.  I would be in there speaking, learning to pronounce those big words, you see.  So consequently people saw and identified you and you related to the YMCA's [Young Men's Christian Association], in my case, and they would say go to this school.  And now teachers would identify that, and that, that (unclear).  But I grew up in a small town that was dry.  You know dry and wet meant whether you could sell liquor, and I grew up in that time period.
Speaker 1: And so, while you were in college, were you thinking I made the right career choice?  I really want to pursue--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a career in the ministry?
Speaker 2: Yes, because you see it was a religious denomination that supported school.
Speaker 1: Huston-Tillotson [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] was.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  And they would go out and get the various conferences, many of the people who were present and so Samuel Huston, that's spelled, H-U-S-T-O-N, conferences out in California.  Professors come in, I mean presidents traveled.  By the time I went to school in the area of $50 tuition a semester.  So somebody paid for it, and so consequently when I got there I began to meet other people.  I got on the debating club, and we used to debate against Prairie View and I used to even, I remember, I want to be sure about this, after a debate sometimes, say the coach for Prairie View would say you want to come, how would you like to come to Prairie View?  So that's, just to be asked because that was the kind of thing, so I got into that kind of thing and the school supported it.  Now my president [Dr. Stanley E. Graunnum] was a minister who became president.  He had gone to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], so they began to let you know about those places and so consequently, they began to take your courses.  I majored in sociology because at that time they felt there was some areas if you majored in, that would be a natural way for you to go on into that field.  And I didn't have any problem because I didn't think I was too good in science.
Story_ID: 253198
Speaker 1: Once you received your degree, your undergraduate degree [from Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], what were you thinking you wanted to do next?
Speaker 2: Pretty much at my junior year, my college president, who himself like the Stanley Granite [sic. Dr. Stanley E. Graunnum], he asked, well now, you think about going to this school?  And I said yes.  The significance of that was that was about the beginning of World War II [WWII] and they were asking you the questions because that was important in how you would register.
Speaker 1: Register for the draft?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know anything about being registered.  As a matter of fact, to get to the what the point of your question as I understand it, inquiry, I was, I got a summons to go home to register for the draft and I was coming down the hallway and one of my professors that used to be a mathematician, mathematician, I stayed away from him, but I got him with acting.  He was a skeptic but he's, I remembered him of all because he was honest.  He said "Where are you going?"  I said "I'm going"-- he said "Didn't you, aren't you going to go trying to go to theology?"  "Yes," I went back home to Temple, Texas, the draft board, and so I remember the person told me said "What are your plans?"  I said, he said "Are you registered?"  I said "Well I guess so, my, my, I've been talking about it since my junior year- the second year," and he said, "Well we can't touch you."  I didn't know what it was.  He was, I used to always tell this and everybody would know this from those areas, when I went I had the desire.  If I was going to go, I was going to go into [U.S.] Air Force primarily because I was afraid to fly.  So they took the test and they pulled off their glasses and I was wearing glasses back then because I read a lot.  That's what I was trying to tell you.  He said, can you see objects?  I said yes.  He said 1A.  They laughed about that, so then the other person said when I went through, "Well you already registered in high school [Dunbar School, Temple, Texas]." And the school, they had that and then--
Speaker 1: So are you saying that they were asking you were you planning on going to graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, yeah.  I was already planned, I wouldn't have known it.  My professor, my president, he always and it was Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] saying now (unclear).  You have to understand there were no shes generally in any of those positions at that time, so he talked about.  So we had a club.  We went all the way through, those of us who were going in the certain fields, certain of them in science, so it was there that I, so I was registered therefore, that's when I was, I was left to attend theological school [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts].  And then I went up to Boston [Massachusetts] and of course, I, I, I tried to get into the [U.S.] Navy and went down with a friend of mine who was there in Boston.  He told me, he said I just got a great plea.  They need more chaplains.  And if I recall it, I said well okay, I'll go down because they would take care of the tuition and everything and I was being trained but between the time he left and when he came, when I got down there the college said no, we have enough.  And I watched that young man.  He's a good friend of mine even to this day.  I saw him incredulous, he had just, he happened to be Caucasian.  He had just left and they said, get some other people to apply and so I, I, I guess I, I can't swim.  Maybe if I had gone and gotten into the Navy, but in the, that's the way they did it at that time.  Now, of course, they had to watch draft dodgers, but no, I was groomed pretty much from my church.  If left up to me, I don't know what I would have been hence consequently, I went into college.  They knew that I was a ministerial candidate, shaped my curriculum for that.  So those were the kinds of experiences that I had.
Story_ID: 253199
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, let's talk a little bit about your experiences in Boston [Massachusetts].  So you went to Boston in the early '40s [1940s], and tell us a little bit about the differences between Boston and Texas, and what were your experiences like at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well going up north from deep in the heart of Texas, is, can be, call it kind of weather shock for one thing because in Texas we didn't, we had what we call northerners which they would last but three days.  When you get to Boston, and I mention that because of the recent hurricane and all of that here.  I had seen snow but it didn't last long, so I remember one of the things, that were many.  I stood at the corner of Boston Street downtown and Tremont [Street], but one day I got out of the subway and it seemed like it was a corridor for wind.  I never been so cold in all my life.  Fast forward, I had gotten a chance to work in what is called the Goodwill Industries.  I remember when I was going in on the train I saw from the coach a sign saying, "Not charity but a chance, Goodwill Industries."  Well I had not associated the word goodwill and industry before.  Well, went into school and began to assign you to your student work and I was, had a chance to work in the Goodwill Industry, but they had what they call a Church of All Nations, but, 'cause that's known around the world now.  The Goodwill Industries, they're pretty much you got one here in Washington [D.C.] as you go out to the Baltimore [Maryland], so that's where I pastored [Collegiate Church of All Nations, Morgan Memorial, Boston, Massachusetts].  Now then when I went there they had three congregations.  Now 'cause you got a lot of people coming to Boston.  They had Italian congregation, they had a Greek congregation and they had a colored congregation.  Now two of them met in the morning, then we all went to the eleven o'clock service.  I had a vespers service in the afternoon, so that was where I got my own training.  But it's relevance to the weather thing I told you when you asked me what was Boston like.  On that day when I really experienced the cold, that Boston and Tremont Street at the corner.  I'll always remember that.  I went down to the Goodwill Industries because they sold a lot of material that people were getting and they would arrange it you know.  And I came back with three coats.  One was very heavy and one was light. So I always think of the impact of the weather.  That just the symbol for the, the, I went, and then of course then I had to, you know, I'm from Texas.  We call you.  Are you going to catch the car up there?  They said you going to catch the car.  I remember one time I was with some students and, you know, a lot of those things they run under ground and then they come up above ground so I was talking to some of the students at the Goodwill Industries and they said "Are you going to catch the car?"  And I said "The what?"  "Are you going to catch the car?"  And I didn't know what they were talking about so soon one of them came out of the tunnel.  I said, "Oh, you mean the car."  They said, "The what?"  They didn't understand me, and I didn't understand the others.  That's humorous.  I have a you know, more comic perception of life.
Story_ID: 253200
Speaker 1: What was Boston [Massachusetts] like in terms of its, what was it like for an African American in the 1940s?
Speaker 2: Well, in the 1940s, you know they had a long tradition of the abolitionist movement.  I never had been in that situation, and then with the [Collegiate] Church of All Nations [Morgan Memorial, Boston, Massachusetts], you, and then, it just, the stores and the opportunities, you know, the museums, you could go interchangeably to the library widen it, so forth, it was just a, a magnificent place in terms of the climate.  In response to your question, I remember eventually what happened, I went to the public library and I just, so one day I was trying to get out so I stopped and asked the person, "Can you tell me how to get back to the main door?"  She said, "Well right now, you're in the children's (unclear), now if you go through to the young adults--."  Children's?  Young adults?  When I grew up in Temple [Texas], and I guess it was true for many whites as well, they didn't have a public library.  The only place when I went to Austin [Texas], they had a library, but they had an addition to the, to the colleges.  They had a colored library and I had insatiable desire to read just to be able to browse.  I got the browsing permission at my school.  So Boston really hit me when I went to the library and saw all those books and then it expanded when you still had interchangeable library cards and went over to one library at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I had heard of [Gunnar] Myrdal and [Ralph] Bunche and all these people who did a lot of these primary studies and I could go up in the file and see the original manuscript, I, it hit me from the beginning, this could go, and then, you know, they weren't officially segregated up there.
Story_ID: 253201
Speaker 1: Now there were sections where I worked in the South End of Boston [Massachusetts], but then there was a lot of people so I (unclear).  It was just so alive and then one of the things that hit me when I went up there was, in Temple [Texas], you know, we would have in the South, we would have separate housing even though they weren't in the poor section, which weren't shotgun houses.  So I remember when going up on the train, now remember I had a pass, my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.] could (unclear), I dozed somewhere when they changed in Chicago [Illinois] and I woke up and I saw all these houses, I thought glued together, and I remember from my movie things, my picturesque mind, I thought so, well this sounds like houses in England and so I remember when I road in and saw these houses, you know, and I so, these were just, you could go anywhere for me, again, that opportunity to have books.  I loved to read, and to tell me that right now you're in the young adult department, that was the library plus wherever, but I did pick up some because see when I was in college [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] if I might set that to answer your question, I got on the debate team and our debate person wouldn't let us read the, you had a topic for a debate.  They would give you some indication of your pros and cons.  He said you have to read it primarily, so I got permission at our library to not only get a book out but to go and browse.  That's when I saw the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] classics and all the rest of 'em.  And that to me is an impact that I recall because I loved to read and had access to it.  Now, there were a lot of other things I had never seen, a real slum before.
Speaker 2: A real what?
Speaker 1: Slum.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Where after Boston was, [Collegiate] Church of all Nations [Morgan Memorial, Boston, Massachusetts] was right there in south Boston, where at night, not everybody but you know, they would throw it out from the fifth floor.  But I did learn though that you had to be very careful. Not everybody who lives in the slum, some people had some of the most immaculate houses you can see, but I never saw them grouped together and then I could see that the Italians were in one part of the town, the Irish, and subways and all of this was new for me.  Well there are many things, I just picked those out.
Story_ID: 253202
Speaker 1: You went on to get your Ph.D. at Boston [University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] as well.  So what were you thinking you wanted to do?  You were pursuing a master's [degree] and then a Ph.D.  Were you thinking you wanted to teach theology?  What were you thinking you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yes, I hadn't exactly asked that question was pretty much discussed with the registrar when I graduated from Boston with my, then they called the degree S.T.B.  It's a Bachelor's of Sacred Theology.  Now they got it either you used to be a Bachelor of Divinity.  Now what they're done in many schools after you take those three years, we qualify now to get the Master of Divinity.  But when I went up there I discussed and I got through with that degree still within the--the school is sponsored by Methodist but it was at the university and a lot of people studied.  And I was, I guess I was being primed to go into the ministry.  I think many of us were fortunate to go to those schools.
Speaker 1: Why did you think you needed your Ph.D. to go into the ministry?
Speaker 2: Well, that's what developed.  I was pretty much being prepared to eventually get out and take a church.  Many of us who went to those things because I wanted two things.  Gammon [Theological Seminary] in Atlanta [Georgia] is now part of ITC and the Denominational Theological Center [sic. Interdenominational Theological Center].  They, that's where many students of the South went.  It was a Methodist school, that tradition.  And many people said "Why are you going to Boston?"  Well, I wouldn't know anything about it, but my president [Dr. Stanley E. Graunnum] was from there.  He felt he was in philosophy, that was his major, but he still was a minister.  So I got that kind of push.  Maybe they identified persons they thought, I would have never known.  I don't think when I left home I wouldn't have known what a Ph.D. was.  I didn't know in a pile high deep student to say those kinds of things.  But I asked when I got through, I met some of my students and they said well, you going to go on for further study.  You could have gotten a master's and so I went to the registrar and I said to him, well, some people are saying that I could have gone, he said well, two things, he said, one, he said, your grades would allow you to go.  Well I just was glad to get through.  I don't call myself the big scholar and so forth.  So, he said "Well, what do you want to do?"  He asked me the same question.  I said "Well, I think I would like to be in that relationship where I'd be around growing minds," and that was because part of my field work was with the chaplain of Marsh Chapel [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] for the university.  So I began to be associated with a chaplain as a kind of a understudy, and, and, he said "Well, now if you're going to go into, we have two degrees we have Th.D., Doctor of Theology."  I have the--.  He said "Well, if you want to keep in mind, keep in touch with growing minds, then you'd want to prepare yourself so that although you're a minister, then you may go to a school as a chaplain, you might want to prepare yourself so that you, if asked, you can have your doctorate in a field, then you might be invited into a large relationship, which means--." well I talked with him about that and many times when I decided to go for the Ph.D., I, I didn't know whether I should have stopped, but I've been fortunate.  That was kinda the track in which Dr. Thurman, Howard Thurman is a well-known name. He's a mystic.  He's known all over the world.  He became the first Interchaplain [sic. chapel dean] at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He went out to California and with the Presbyterian ministers working at the fellowship of all peoples because it's a lot of mixture of races and so I went to talk to him.  And so that's how I began to get this kind of thing.  So I went for the Ph.D. because that was the field I was interested in.  I went into it in social ethics.  That was the issue of how we were trying to see why the church could be divided.  Why there was a central jurisdiction.
Story_ID: 253203
Speaker 1: So you were thinking at this point you wanted to teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I decided that I wanted to be in ministry and if you could put me in relationship to a university, I would be qualified.  That was suggested to me by the registrar.  I would have taken a Th.D.  The difference between a Th.D. and a Ph.D. at that time was generally if you were gonna stay in the field of ministry and so forth that Th.D., Doctor of Theology, I went for the Doctor of Philosophy as the person suggested.  Not that I was the most brilliant.  Some of the fellows who started out with me stopped because a couple of fellows named Stein Cross [ph.] and so forth, when they told them they had to take two languages and, and they were from German background and they wanted to know why do I have to take it?  Well, since I was from Texas, I boldly, I'd taken Spanish in college [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] and I had Latin in high school [Dunbar School, Temple, Texas] so I went out there.  So some of them didn't go, but I tried German.  I had to take it twice 'cause you know you had to take it until you pass.  You can't take it fifteen times.  So I got into it, so when I came here if I, if they wanted to invite me to do a lecture in the university, I made it in sociology, I made it in social ethics which is basically where you bring together the ethical aspects and you study not just Christian ethics, but you study the ethics of Muslims, Christian ethics doesn't mean that you don't have that kind of thing, but you primarily focusing it from the point of view.  I had to look at the philosophical aspect, so therefore now when people are dealing with relating to Muslims, spirituality, there are a lot of books now that deal with that, but I look at the ethical similarities and where they differ.  So that's how I happened to go into the Ph.D.  It was purely the advice of the person and he said I was qualified.
Speaker 1: Right.  So [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, you didn't necessarily want to minister a church per se, you wanted to teach to others?
Speaker 2: I wanted, because you see many of the Methodist schools or denominational schools themselves were beginning to merge into these others, but generally at the idea.  Let's take American University [Washington, D.C.] out here.
Speaker 1: But I'm saying what did you want to do personally?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be prepared with the advice of the registrar, he said, I said I would like to keep in touch with growing minds and the growing minds were university, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] itself, started out as a small school, and so it opened up and I was ready when I came here so if I had invitation to go to graduate school.  We're nondenominational at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] I'm qualified.
Speaker 1: So your first teaching position was at Howard in 1958?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, I came as chaplain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I came in at divinity school and also if I had the Th.D. probably I could have done it because I had, it was my, when the Th.D., Doctor of Theology when you're going to move as a situation in that field, and the difference is where you got it, you can get it, but see when you go into a graduate school, you see, I had to go over the graduate school.  Many of the members, some of the members on the graduate faculty were theologians, but I had to, I had, all of them, all of the things I took were not taught by theologians, but, again, I got good advice, so I've been blessed because people saw the ministry, and I expressed myself.  I had been around growing minds.  I was around here when the black revolution came.
Story_ID: 253204
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about, what was the climate like at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], you know, on the cusp of the beginnings of the Civil Rights Movement.  What was the climate like at Howard?
Speaker 2: Howard had its, was a part of the overall student, you might say student protests or awareness of the world, the Berkeley's [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and so forth and this whole student movement.  Howard came into it from a tradition.  And they particularly fine-tuned it, if you want to say, maybe that's not the word to the particular problems here.  Students were at, some of our persons had gone to study at Berkeley and they began to protest against what they called the vastness of it.  They protested, they protested the curriculum.  They were protesting against the course.
Speaker 1: This was the students at Howard were protesting?
Speaker 2: The student movements across the country.
Speaker 1: Right.  So what was the climate like at Howard?
Speaker 2: And Howard began to take that and apply it to that particular-first they wanted more black studies.  They felt that, among other things, they felt that we had classified, so you-concentrated--they wanted more courses in black studies, and I guess it, it, eventually you have women wanting to be more inclusive, so Howard's particularly, so it was a part of those movements and so the whole climate was here.  I had been at Boston [University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] when I was there.  The communist situation was very much, they used to always want to know, so how, so therefore, I was here when persons like Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] began to emerge.  Before him there were others.
Speaker 1: Tell us what, you know, you remember of Stokely Carmichael.
Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael was here.  Stokely Carmichael fine-tuned it since that time. He was a student who studied here.  As a matter of fact he concentrated in philosophy.  And I was here and I don't, I understand now.  The students used to come to me and they would, they would come over to the chapel [Marsh Chapel, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], 'cause the chapel here had a tradition.  It was nondenominational.  It was a free pulpit and Howard Thurman was the kind of, what we call a mystic.  His religion touched that dimension in several religions because you see you even had some mystics in the sunni, all these things you're talking about.  You had to know those traditions.  That why, for instance, when students now for the first Gulf War, talked about it, we knew that no one particular ruler of a country could declare a jihad.  That has to be a council, so you have to know those kinds of things in order to have the conversation, so, so Stokely Carmichael, I mean the students here or before, persons before him, they began to have forums.  They used to invite I remember [Richmond] Flowers [Sr.] who was the attorney general for Alabama.  They called (unclear).  They called the persons here and, of course, a chapel.  I brought people.  Howard always brings people, but a lot of-- but any person who's had a significant spiritual experience, that meant you brought mostly ministers but it can be persons who are prominent in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], or persons who's gotten a job so I used to bring him to the pulpit.  One thing about it is if you come to speak from someplace, you don't use it to proselytize, so I had a kind of what you call in parts ecumenical movement, here central religious.  We brought Jewish persons here that was set by the nature of Howard.  Now it was fine, it was prompted by the fact that we got some monies from the federal government so we had to, had to handle it.  But it took the form here there was some affinities they had for people.  They took the form here.  They wanted to get the history department, they said it's too narrow, we won't get more black history and so you had to go through--
Speaker 1: So was this part of Stokely Carmichael and the student movement?
Speaker 2: He was here at that time. I'm trying to think--
Speaker 1: These were some of the things that were going--
Speaker 2: There were other schools that caused a lot movement.  They wanted to have more humanities and so eventually, I was here you see when the groups began to concentrate on Mississippi.  They came black and white, and so our part was they were trying to look at the pedagogy.  Now, we had a group of students here, some students from the [Howard University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  They opened up a lot of things here, similar things in other places.  Glen Echo [Amusement Park, Glen Echo, Maryland], they would go and lead it and they will be joined by students from Wesley [Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.] and other people.  Some people from labor.  I just happened to be in--now, my discipline of social ethics, which studies--my, my qualifying exams were on economics, political science, but we focused upon the ethical aspects of it, alerted me to be open to that kind of thing, but the, the, generative thrust came from students.
Story_ID: 253205
Speaker 1: [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] becoming much more recognizable and just the [Civil Rights] Movement in terms of the movement taking place beginning, getting its beginnings in churches and that kind of thing, were you starting to see an increase in students who were interested in theology, who wanted to perhaps, emulate Dr. King and that kind of thing.  Were you starting to see an interest there?
Speaker 2: Well, yes. I'll try to be a little bit more brief on that.  Yes, it just so happened that I was at Boston [University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], during, finishing my work and started my graduate work when Martin Luther King came to Boston [Massachusetts].  He had been to Colgate Rochester [Crozer Theological Seminary; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] and he came because he was interested in that aspect of a thing we call personalism, one of our Dr. [Edgar S.] Brightman and others, who undergirded and had the dean and who was very interested in social labor issues and so forth herein studied.  So therefore, I was there for while Martin was studying.  Martin used to (unclear) at a church in Providence [Rhode Island].  That's by the way, where my wife [Elizabeth Crawford] belonged and she was (unclear) so she came from Providence to study here.  Dr. Samuel [DeWitt] Proctor, whose name might unsurface.  He got to be (unclear) pastor of you know, of Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] and united us in marriage, so I met her.  So yes, those things began to emerge, so he was here.  In fact, I was there when he organized it.  Martin Luther King organized somewhere in this process.  He said he wanted to bring together all of the African American graduates and the basic thing that he talks about in 'Strive Toward Freedom[: The Montgomery Story,' Martin Luther King, Jr.] he wanted to see what, what, what should be the nature of our studies as we prepare for various disciplines to go backstage somewhere.  And one of the issues that came up there was should we always focus on thesis for our topics that was exclusively African American or black?  And, and we, you know, what kind of problem are you going to work? Now we had persons in psychology religion.  I was in what you might call near sociology religion.  King was studying philosophical theology.  We used to say to him, "King, we can't even spell it.  What is philosophical theology?"  But he was studying it in the context of problems that were arising that you applied to and some voices and some problems.  Africa was arising and so forth.  So he, I, I joined that group.  Eventually we invited some of our--
Speaker 1: The philosophical theology group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a moving spirit, even while he came for a while. He was at the time commuting back and forth to a church down in Montgomery [Alabama] and coming back and doing his thesis.  So I was just here, there and, in fact, [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] came up to preach.  I had a church up in Providence [Rhode Island], so it was at that time, so what it, what it did was, the thing that I remember and this may be taken the inquiry a little farther than you intend, but he happened to be there [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts].  I just happened to have been there.  So suffice it to say that we eventually invited some of our professors in and say do we, are we limited to writing only about the blacks and such and such a thing?  And so, now Martin's thesis compared two philosophers [Paul Tillich and Henry Nelson Wieman], neither of which was mine, but I happened to have written my thesis on the leadership role of the urban Negro minister.  That's how I happened to have gotten out to Chicago [Illinois].  And when I tell my students now that I wrote it.  They said Negro, who's a Negro?  Of course, you see, if I wrote it now, it would have to be the leadership of the urban black--
Speaker 1: But that was the term to use then.
Speaker 2: Yes, but the point is to show you how we had come to those basic kinds of things.  So when I came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] here, they were saying black is beautiful, and, you know, when you go back to that, you know, I had to come in that situation, but I was, they said yes, I was there when King was formulating his-- and he was active up there.  He organized the situation, and I knew him.  He'd come down to preach for me.  He was very quiet, very much eloquent and so when he began to move up, I used to, when he'd speak at Howard here.  I would go pick him up and he would tell me, he said, you know, I get all of these offers he said, but so what I've decided to do, among other things, he said--I hope this gives you some color.  He said "I've decided that I'm--history has moved beyond me.  I'm gonna have to give some days to my--so I saved one day to respond to people all over the country." But he, I talked to him.  He said pastoral type of thing, so at the same time, you know, I knew him as just a human being.
Story_ID: 252900
Speaker 1: Can you just kind of tell us a little bit about how you have seen the students change throughout your, you know, nearly forty years here at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  How have you seen the students change in your opinion?
Speaker 2: Well, I came here in 1958.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: And that was after some of these things had started, so to, to see how they changed, see how they've changed, I would say when I, take it in my point of view from the chapel--
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: --insofar as the persons who were invited in consultation directly with the president now, you know, Mordecai Johnson, who was, served here some thirty-three years, whose the one, great orator who got the schools began to expand and reached one time fifteen, sixteen schools and colleges.  He was here and so it was under him that I was first invited through the [Howard University] School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.] Dr. D. Hill [sic. Dr. Daniel G. Hill, Jr.] and then of course, one day I came in as acting and one day at one of our formal openings Dr. [James] Nabrit was the secretary at that time, that's Dr. Jim Nabrit, who was a part of those who, you know, undergirded the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision and this great constitutional lawyer.  He read the names and after he said, well he is acting no longer, right there on the stage.  So therefore, the students at that time and the chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], they were, they'd become the church and that there were histories that the time people were struck against something.
Speaker 1: Had they started to become a little bit more passive, did you notice?
Speaker 2: Well, the saying at Howard is we now know that some of the people once, but first here, and I'm not sure this is a direct line of history.  They have so many people who are experts at this, but they started first protesting against compulsory chapel.  Now that was more prominent in, in small denominational schools.  As vespers, you sort of required you to go.  And here, so some of the people, one of the ladies who used to be head of our school social work, I think, Dr. [Armour J.] Blackburn, whom, for whom the University Center [Armour J. Blackburn University Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] is named.  He became dean of students.  If you go back and you'll find that they had these protests, but when I became, when the whole, you know, that was a time when characterized college students and all, they began to find themselves and speak out on issues.
Story_ID: 252901
Speaker 1: So when I came [to Howard University, Washington, D.C.], many of the students at the beginning, I mean they would come to chapel, I mean, from all of these places they would come and they were dressed proper.  Now I'm just using that as a peg upon which to hang it.  Then we became aware that we have outlet, we have our chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], of course, at the same time that a lot of the other churches have then, at eleven o'clock.  We used to have those things at vespers at four [o'clock].  There was no competition between the local churches, 'cause -- so therefore the change that I saw was many of the fresh new entrants, they would come, but then as they began to see their heritage and to own some of those things, I'm sure there's more deeper than that, they used to begin to relate to more of the churches in the city.  Or sometimes used to find the sense of affirming their own heritage.  Some people were going back.  It took the form of, for some going to Pentecostal churches because they felt that the chapel came out of that era so although it was nondenominational, it was more formal, it sometimes may seem like an episcopal ritual and so they wanted the first us to have a diversity inviting people to come.  What we used to do then, course we could [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, see so many of the leaders came out of the church, but there were other people who did not come.  So that was parallel so they wanted to get more black courses, more curriculum, and the schools had to deal with it.  Not just a lecture, so I'm saying--so they became, they became more focused in terms of trying to bring the heritage in.  So I guess what happened is more and more--more and more students began to relate to local churches.  They wanted to find their heritage.
Story_ID: 252902
Speaker 1: But that also had the impact--let's take our university choir [Howard University Chapel Choir]. Howard [University, Washington D.C.] was noted for its (unclear).  They sang anthems and they used to be noted for always having spiritual as a part of their repertoire, but there was a tendency to want to have a gospel choir.  Now, you got a school and they're going to bring a gospel choir, so what happened eventually was that more independent choirs came and then, you know the university specialized in one kind.  But I had to go through that situation and then they wanted to know the kinds of speakers you bring in.  Howard generally would bring in rabbis and others, most of them predominately in these situations, but then there were those, what, what about the Malcolm Xs and the others and so forth.  So many of them there, we had lecture series, so we had lecture series after.  So it began to have an impact upon the, their participation in the field, the kinds of in addition, extra things you had.  We use to invite a lot of people.  Many of the people who used to come to Howard, exclusively through the chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because Mordecai [Johnson] had a rather social justice issue.  He would speak truth to power.  He'd go down to [U.S.] Congress and he would speak.  He speak at the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization].  He was noted for that justice thing.  He came out of Colgate Rochester [Rochester Theological Seminary; Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York], where Washington [ph.], Bush [ph.] and so forth.  But basically, we got to keep the chapel non-denominational so that, and then more and more African students, foreign students came in, and so consequently I used to be asked, they wanted to have celebrations and we had the little chapels so we had more ritual things over in the small chapel, the School of Religion [at Howard University; Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], but then after 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family'] [Alex] Haley, that scene of holding him up, I'd bring him over to the chapel and I would hold him up in the chapel.  So those kinds of things begin to be registered, more and more black courses.  They got the African studies program so I think that, that may seem general but that's important in Howard because we were fortunate enough to have a larger spread of schools and colleges where some other schools may have had an engineering school.  We had engineering, nursing, law, so we began to go across th- so many more people began to be invited to the conference.  [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] would be invited, naturally as a minister, but sometimes when they have a special program at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], he would come to speak.  He was a minister but he began to speak in the larger area.  So that's the general climate.
Story_ID: 252903
Speaker 1: Did the number of students interested in theology, did it ever begin to drop?
Speaker 2: For a while, but basically what happened there is that we found that many students found a sense of focus in the Civil Rights Movement, and they wanted to come to seminaries.  One of the ways we found it here [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] was this.  Usually we could have a course in, we have conducting prayer, but many of the students, some of us had come like I had.  They had come from an active local church, they had been nurtured and go to school.  Some of these people wanted to come to theology studied the larger part of dimensions of world religion and so forth.  So what we found was, and we had the impact on curriculum, I know of one here.  One young lady was a lawyer and she had gone to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], one of these schools, so she came and so she wanted to come.  Even her parents weren't sure if you graduated from Harvard.  What are you doing going into theology now?  Now I'm up here dramatizing.  But to make the point and follow up and you're helping me to think about this, she came into the school and she had the forensic matters and the fellows would say, because she was (unclear), the only one in the class.  We had a class of twelve.  And they said, "Sister, you're all right." But she was, she was very much feeling away and using the task.  So she said to the dean, "I, I know what they're telling me about this, but they have something I don't have.  What am I doing?"  So we put in a course specifically for introduction because we're getting people whose not a whole lot, who are not nurtured say through the church, but who had come to the justice issues and they were coming to theology and, and asking for those dimensions that they wanted to see as a part of spirituality.
Story_ID: 252904
Speaker 1: So the courses were changing to, curriculum was to keep up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now when you say, they were changing, believe me they had to, how shall I put it?  They had to make it plain that they were interested and they wanted us to judge it.  For instance, some of us saying not only Howard [University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], some students want to have a course in black theology.  Well, many of us had been trained in, in Boston [Massachusetts], we, I think you should talk to Dr. [Benjamin] Mays used to come.  You know, he went up to New England and so forth.  We had that, but we didn't, we were suffered from those color labels, but they wanted to do it as, as a part of black is beautiful, and so, so they wanted to, so I remember in one instance here, they, when they got to some of the people who had been working all year long, scholars, Phi Beta Kappas, and so forth, and so we have a journal here.  You may want to check this out.  I don't know who else would be the legacy seeing as we've had several people who've gone on.  And they wanted, for instance, they said we want a course in black theology.  Well the other person just didn't put the color on it.  They been working in this area so, because they suffered from courses that were, you know, that perceptions that had that color label on it, you know, you had Spanish theology and so forth.  No I always say here as chaplain [of Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], then I say this humorously even under the prodding of this reflections here, I was chaplain and I just happened to be in a discussion.  So we called the course Theological Reflections Upon Black Experience, and I had to referee the course.  Now I say that with humor because that may point too much for me, but I think I can pick it up now, and I like to think that because I was trained in an area where I knew some of the larger issues, I was just learning, but you see, so it changed so far as our students wanted to have it.  And one of the questions that came out and it's not limited to Howard, but since you're here, one student raised the question, we had a person who happened to be a Caucasian and he was taking a course in black church history, and so the students asked very respectively in that area, and they were coming, you could tell they were coming from the movement because you could tell, they wore the bushes high in those days and that that the height of the bush indicated the nature of -- they used to have a pen you stick -- a pencil.  One person asked is it possible, I'm sure that mattered, is it possible, can a, can a Caucasian teach a course in black church history?  And so, I was refereeing the course as chaplain, you know.  They take pity on the chaplain and I happen to share with them, I asked them, for instance, do you know about one of the, they used to have these ministers' conferences in the summer and bishop.  I don't know if you heard of the one at Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  Well that's a famous one down in Hampton [Virginia].  They have developed and we have thousands who go there and bring preachers from all over the country.  A lot of people recruit there, and they come from all over the area.  Many of them have been through theology, some of them are in the process of studying it and they bring preachers from all ranges.  Dr. Mordecai [Johnson] spoken there, [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.].  So what we did one day, I talked to the person who taught that course.  He happened to get into it because he was studying some of the black ministers who were Presbyterian and so that was his thesis, and he'd gone to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and he, he told me, he said Hampton developed from the extension schools.
Story_ID: 252905
Speaker 1: Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in the summer used to have extension schools where everybody'd go out into the neighborhood and Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] at that time used to have one, so they did it for several summers and then they decided to do it together so they chose Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  Now, so I went to the class just because I had that encounter.  I said did you know about, they said oh yeah, we know Hampton, that where some of the persons come, we go hear them preach.  I said did you know where it came from. I said no.  I said, you know who told me?  What?  It happened to be the person that's teaching, right, and he happens to be white.  Here is the, here is the reply, what the reply is, that he said this, this is a part of my experience, he said well, he said I had to ask that question because Socrates, you know, said, what is the nature of knowing?  I said well now we're talking about epistemology.  That's a term, what's the nature of knowing, but he says that I asked the question from my own desire to know and he says, therefore, if that's epistemology, then I feel that this is what we're trying to do.  What is the nature of it?  So, we ended up, you know what we ended up with?  Now this still can be controversial, but it is kind of our sighted.  When we put the question that way, it was not a question of whether merely a white person could teach a course in black justice history, it may be that, may be because a black person is black, they may not necessarily qualify to preach.  But the idea was, that wasn't demeaning anybody, so I see that as a important thing that characterizes the changes.  We were trying to raise the question, it's not an African, it's not a Greek.  What is the nature of knowing, and when you realize that this would cost you that person and I think that characterizes what I saw in law and what our students were being exposed to, and wherever the question came from, you can see why they had to ask because they were really asking, you know, is it so moribund, have they included the invisibility of blacks in the history of America have included, they excluded women, so the question what is the nature of knowing?  Now I could raise that question anywhere, but particularly at a university because as soon as they mention the epistemology I'd go to the philosophy department and so I think that may be a little complicated but that certainly has been a revelation to us and I think that's the standard by which we're gonna acknowledge our particularity, but we want to raise universal questions through it.
Story_ID: 252906
Speaker 1: Of all the courses that you've taught here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], which has been your favorite?  Which did you enjoy the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think I enjoyed the, the hermeneutical aspects that's connected with preaching.  Hermeneutics means that interpretation because interpretation particularly the role the [U.S.] Constitution has played in our history, that's the problem when it comes to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  Many people would say, well, it's strict constitutionalism said some of the people from the southern states when we made the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision.  They said that's not a, that's not a legal, that's a sociological decision, and I heard them, sociological decision, but you, but what I always lift up here and I taught a lot of these people, ministered to them, married their children, and so I got a chance to not only read them, but to talk to them. What they were talking about is in that Supreme Court decision, they had among other things, a psychological brief and several of the people who supported that were of all groups, Jewish -- and they could almost take that down when they went before the Supreme Court.  In that process, there was the Clarks [Kenneth Clark and Mamie Clark], the Clarks were getting their master's [degrees] here in psychology, and they were working on play therapy, and many of the lawyers here used to go around and ask a lot of people in other fields, is there something in your field that would bear upon our trying to declare segregated education unconstitutional.  So, some people would give them the idea what was it a law, whether it was psychology, but they were doing their master's and in play therapy, and one of the things, they would take dolls and they would go to, say, a group of Caucasian kids, which is the good doll and which is the bad doll?  Have you heard about that experiment?
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: And you know which doll they chose for the bad doll.
Speaker 1: The black doll.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But they also took them to a group of African American, which is the good doll and the bad doll?  Which one did they choose?
Speaker 1: Same thing, black doll.
Speaker 2: So, so I bring it together in the Hebrew figures, Greeks and all that put that in there.  Yes, I said, I guess you could say it was a sociological decision, but I would say, no what they did was, that brief which was signed by professors, all colors, male.  It was just a brief you know.  They literally took the evidence from a little child and they put it in the midst of them and they saw the damage that it had done, then they really looked at the law, so therefore, now I raise my voice because I almost want to preach on that.  But I think your question to me, to reflect upon how have I seen it change?  I'd like to characterize.  It was only happening in the predominately African American school.  I think we need to identify the other areas.  It came out of our particular pain, but it's a question that's been raised in the philosophical area.  Socrates, what is the nature of God?  And what did [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] major in when he brought the group up?  He was majoring in philosophical theology.  We said, "Martin what is philosophical, you know that's a long ways.  What has that got to do with segregation in Georgia?"  Well, we'd have to go back into those situations to see where our parents have been, so Howard University has had a part in that.  It's not limited here--
Story_ID: 252907
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford, what is your opinion about the role that the black church is playing today, opposed to the role that it used to play.  Some have argued that it's become very political and bureaucratic and is not really serving the needs of the people as it once did.
Speaker 2: That's a question that particularly comes to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and since I'm here, I, I encountered it historically.  E. Franklin Frazier, a renowned sociologist, graduated from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and wrote on the black family, he wrote a book on the black church ['The Negro Church in America,' E. Franklin Frazier] and pretty much he picked up the theme that, you know, like many other churches, pie in the sky and so forth and we were not as pioneering, but there has been some study of that and reflection upon it.  One person I'm thinking of now, and you didn't ask me for names, but E. Blunt, Dr. Blunt Bailey [ph.], he's at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and he was taught by some of the people that Dr. [Cain Hope] Felder, who's here who was at the [Collegiate] Church of All Nations [Morgan Memorial, Boston, Massachusetts] went I went up there and I christened him because he was in the church and I was there, but at any rate, he says that what you were having it.  So they usually said the negro church and that characterized the early days of the church when we had to come out, we had to have in the early days, that we had to have a master, somebody from the master when they, the rebellions were taking place.  And so consequently it was the only organization, 'cause it didn't have just the religion, there were some political aspects, economic, I told you the situation with the church.
Speaker 1: What do you think about the role of the black church today?
Speaker 2: Well the important thing is to understand the difference that some of the scholars are saying now is that the Negro church is a term that you can use to characterize that stage of the history.  Black church now, the word that way, it is an acceptance of our particularity.  Black now is beautiful, the African heritage.  So they wanted to call that the black church.  The black church then would have to include the James Combs [sic. HistoryMaker James H. Cone] and the others, and they are much more prone to bring the full theological reflections up on in the field, so therefore, that's a distinction they make and what I simply find myself is I would defend, I seem to be defending Dr. Frazier when he talks about the Negro church, so things have happened now.  Black ministers now are in politics, also have influence upon politics.  I think they were in many ways, in those early days but we didn't have the structure where we could do it, so the difference now it's much more prophetic, the word meaning that they, they speak truth to power.  It's more institutionally organized.  Now there still is the tension here because some people think you shouldn't go into politics and that has been manifested here at the school.  Some of the people who's voiced this are not majoring in theology.
Story_ID: 252908
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evans] Crawford when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say, what stands out as much is that the, the heritage I was fortunate enough to have people who, who took their faith, such as it was, seriously.  They really felt that education, opportunity was a gift of God.  They kept some of us in schools even though they themselves did not have the opportunity.  So I- that's very important and I mentioned my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] and that's significant now because you see now we're in a situation that may not, that makes seem a non sequitur where with the drugs and so forth now, more grandmothers are rearing their children [sic. grandchildren], but stands out for me, but not only my grandmother, that was certainty, but they were not perfect, but they at least did what they could and some people got lost in the situation.  I was fortunate.  That stands out, the role of our heritage.  James Weldon Johnson has it in there, have we not "Come to the place for which our fathers sighed?"  That stands out and all along the railway I found it.  And now there may seem to be a with a down side but that stands out and I've been fortunate because some of the places I have gone, that some people would push you, there's a certain grace in it that I just happened to be there, so I'm no better than anybody who reasons socially are in the prisons.  I reared with some persons who went to the prisons.  But that to me is a, remembering that, is another swerve for me to use anything I have and to lift up people whatever their race is.  It made me more open to the feminine issue, so those are some of the things that stand out.
Story_ID: 252909
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I've heard this problem always with Barbara Walters and they would say, how do you like to be remembered and I listen to that.  I think I would like to be remembered as a person who was blessed, that's my favorite phrase, blessed to mean I want to be a person who became grateful as he went on and I include in that peoples from whom that passed.  It happened to be my grandmother [Rosie Crawford] but when you ask me about how I decided to go into graduate study, that person was Caucasian.  He was doing his job, he didn't overlook the fact that initially I might have some trouble.  He said try it and if you, your grades come on, go on for it.  So I been blessed, I worked in the [Collegiate] Church of All Nations [Morgan Memorial, Boston, Massachusetts] so I had a chance to see the symbol.  We had our individual places, but we always met together.  I'm not saying this is the way it should always be, so I, so many people have helped along the way and I regard any of us that have had a chance to go for higher education, says in James- our so-called national anthem ['Life Ev'ry Voice and Sing'], "Have we not come to the place for which our fathers sighed?"  I like to say we are on sighed territory.  I want to be remembered as one who was so blessed and it has motivated me to make sure that I would like to leave a legacy for other people to do it.
Story_ID: 252910
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy is?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the legacy is to be a person who has, through ministry, I've seen it expand into this prophetic role, and I see that it's not either/or but there's a place for priestly listening.  That's a term used by the famous (unclear) dean of, Dr. [Leander Earl] Keck up at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], priestly listening, so I see myself as going through my particular heritage and listening priestly in terms of its spirituality, but speaking prophetically, speaking truth to power, and encouraging those who can speak truth to power.
Story_ID: 252911
Speaker 1: Is that-? Yeah that's my first cousin.  Lela [Crawford Valdez], she's deceased.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother [Rosie Crawford].
Speaker 1: Any idea when this was taken?
Speaker 2: I'll have to guess because I told you, she would come in for marbles, so I would think probably this was taken, see I went to school [Samuel Huston College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas], it had to be maybe even before I even went to school.  I went to school in '39 [1939].  It could have been, it could have been around about '36 [1936], '37 [1937], '38 [1938].  Maybe moving along, WPA [Works Progress Administration] from Roosevelt- [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt was president forever but it was around probably -- taken probably sometime in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Rosie Crawford.  R-O-S-I-E is the way I spell it.  Some people think it may be Rosa.
Speaker 1: This is Rufus Crawford.  This is my father's [Evans Crawford, Sr.] brother.  He, I'm not quite sure when that was taken because he lived, he, he worked for the Sante Fe [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway] in Kansas City [Missouri] and I'm trying to think, it was cabinet, but he died at an age, he was about 96, 95, 96 and he died about five-ten years ago at that age and I tried to get that last night because I knew it was something like that and I will find it now.
Speaker 2: This is Clem, C-L-E-M, Crawford.  That's another brother.  My father-- my grandmother's son, Clem Crawford and his wife who is Hattie Crawford.  He died in Temple [Texas].  He died about eighty.  He was in his middle eighties or something like that.  I'm trying to think when that picture was taken.  I don't know, we got it I'm sure I can find it.  His wife is dead now, his stepdaughter is out in California, so I don't--you're probably not interested in it if I could find it later.  But anyway, that's a brother.
Speaker 1: This is Ruth Crawford.  She is the wife to Rufus Crawford.  She is in Kansas City, Kansas.  (Unclear) was he because he worked for the Santa Fe up there.  She is now, she's got to be in her late eighties.  And she now has, you know, she's kinda in the hospital, with Alzheimer's or something like that.  But she is the wife of Rufus Crawford who was very much a part of taking over some things when my grandmother died, because she kept all of the, she keeps all of the family treasurers, you know, but she has a daughter and I don't have her picture here who is now in Kansas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's another picture of my father [Evans Crawford, Sr.].  I'm not quite sure when that was taken.  My wife [Elizabeth Crawford] and I just pulled it off and we keep it around the house, but you can see, he died in the '70 [1970], I think, so it must have been taken probably, it could have been, I graduated in '46 [1946].  It could have been taken maybe in the middle '50s [1950s] or somewhere around in there. I'm trying to tell by that coat
Speaker 1: That a picture of me and my wife taken at, we tried to look at it this morning.  It had to be taken, I retired officially in '91 [1991] and I stayed around two or three years, so it's taken probably somewhere on an occasion in the '90s [1990s], early '90s [1990s].  I'm trying to see who it is, and it should be there, the middle '90s [1990s] really.
Speaker 2: Metropolitan Baptist [Church, Largo, Maryland], 2003.
Speaker 1: This one here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the last one we looked at.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I guess, then that was it.  It was taken at the Metropolitan.  That church gave me that and somebody took it at the table.  I'm glad she did put it on there 'cause she was rushing out. Thanks.
Speaker 2: This one here, I don't know whether she put anything on the back of this one here 'cause we were trying to save it-
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], Friends of Chapel.
Speaker 2: Friends of the Chapel, yes.  That's a support organization.  When I was dean of the chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and retiring, and they gave me a plaque and that is Friends of the Chapel.  This helps me coordinate.  We don't have membership per se of the chapel, but we have people who agree to work and they may belong to individual churches in the city or on that place, but chapel is a place where when they are away from school, or they may choose to be active in the chapel.
Speaker 1: Now that one there, when I was acting vice president for university development.  I don't know how I got into that.  He said well, I had longevity.  He said he wanted to send the president, he graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so he and the office has given me a prestige way beyond anything I deserve.  You know, I was just there as the dean of the chapel, so he--that he did.  He reorganized his department.  He's got about two or three provosts right now, but if you know of any school that's not in trouble financially, you let me know.
