Story_ID: 102930
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: William Alexander Clement, Jr. That's, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, middle name, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, C-L-E-M-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: And Junior, is that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: --right?  Okay and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: January 22nd, 1943.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an entrepreneur.  I started and manage a firm known as DOBBS, RAM & Company
Speaker 1: Okay, the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 27th, 2007.
Story_ID: 102931
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to begin by asking you what I call People Magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: (No audible response) (Nodding head, "yes").
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like fried chicken, collard greens, potatoes, and cornbread.
Speaker 1: All right, and what about a time of the year, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well my favorite time of the year is spring and summer.  I'm an outside person.
Speaker 1: All right, and when you go on vacation, is there a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: I like the Caribbean spots.  We've been all over the world.  My wife [R. Ressie Guy-Clement] is a former Delta flight attendant, so we have passes to anywhere that Delta goes, but I like Aruba in particular and places down in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, this comes from my pastor, and he says, "Don't give in, don't give up and don't give out."
Story_ID: 102932
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's begin by talking about your mother.  Okay, tell me her name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Josephine, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, Dobbs, D-O-B-B-S, Clement.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1918, in Atlanta, Georgia, February 9th.
Speaker 1: All right, now can you give me information about her parents?
Speaker 2: Her parents, her mother was Irene Thompson Dobbs, who was born in Mississippi but came to live in Atlanta.  Her father was John Wesley Dobbs, who was born in Kennesaw and eventually came all the way from Kennesaw, which is in Cobb County, to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you go back any further with their parents?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandfather had two other names that have been documented in a book called, "Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn", but Mr. Dobbs' grandfath--father was named Will and the first name was Josh, who was a slave and was identified on a deed along with other pieces of property by the slave owner.  And so that goes back at least four generations.  I would be the fifth generation to be born in Atlanta, or in the Atlanta area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about on Irene Thompson's side of the family?
Speaker 2: She was from Mississippi, we only have her mother's name and it was a very unusual name, and I'll have to give it to you later, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: All right, that's fine.  Now were there any stories from your grandparents about Josh Dobbs, in slavery?
Speaker 2: The stories were, were captured in the book done by Gary Pomerantz, and so I'm, I'm--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --telling you a combination of what I read and what I heard.  But the first Mr. Dobbs who was born into slave, was actually owned by a medical doctor, and he, once again, lived up in Cobb County in Marietta--Kennesaw up in that particular area.  He had several children and also took in a nephew who was very, very young and also became very close to my grandfather.  And I actually remember him, he was a great domino player and he and my grandfather would play dominos, and in fact, I have the actual domino set that I keep in the office at home just as a reminder.  But apparently they were great--and they talked a lot of smack at one another, but they were great friends, even though they were not actually contemporaries. My grandfather, John Wesley Dobbs, worked on the railroad as a, as a federal railroad clerk and got a chance to travel and was able to educate six girls that he and Mrs. Dobbs had; my mother was the fourth.  But then his really rise to prominence came probably in the 1940s when he was elected Grand Master of the Prince Hall Masons, and at this time the Prince Hall Masons was a national organization that was started in Boston [Massachusetts].  And each state had a Grand Master and the Grand Master, back in those days, was held in very, very, very high esteem and I can remember my grandfather in all of his regale.  He would go out and take--do, do speeches he would take us with us--with him quite often because we were his grandsons and he was a man who loved sports and ended up with six, six daughters and so when we came along it was a great joy for him to just have us to tag along.  But I remember him giving speeches.  He drove a Cadillac back in those days.  And one other fond memory I had was when I was ten years old, he took me and my next brother, Wesley, to New York City to Ebbets Field to see the Brooklyn Dodgers play, and that--I remember that vividly today.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me more about your Grandmother Irene.
Speaker 2: My grandmother had medical challenges and my earliest recollections of her were actually being somewhat confined to bed, in fact, they had a, a chair that would take her down from the second level down to the first level.  She was a very, very, strong woman, but was not as dominant as my grandfather, and so most of my memories are of him.  But she eventually came to live with us after he passed, and I got to know her just a little better.  But she was a very, very pleasant woman, very gracious and very pleasant and was probably the bearing that she gave to her six daughters, all of whom probably inherited some of her characteristics as well.
Story_ID: 102933
Speaker 1: How much education did your grandparents have?
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother, Mrs. Dobbs, apparently went to a finishing school in Mississippi and Mr. Dobbs went to--Grandpa Dobbs went to Morehouse Institute, which was comparable to, to high school, so that was the extent of their, their formal education.
Speaker 1: Did they own the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had a house I remember they had (unclear) 540 Houston Street, here in Atlanta [Georgia]. That street has now been named John Wesley Dobbs Avenue.  But the house as growing up was bigger than life. Once again Mr. Dobbs and Mrs. Dobbs had six daughters and back then we would have family reunions on a, on an annual basis, and so you could imagine each of the daughters bringing their families back. It was a lot of commotion and I remember my grandfather saying that, you know, his grandchildren made him happy twice, once when they came (laughter) and once when they left. But it was a very, very warm home and he was a, he was a central figure in that whole drama.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did he talk any about any land ownership or--from his, I guess it would be his father or grandfather, who was--when they--when he came out of slavery did he own land? Was it passed down or any stories like that?
Speaker 2: No there are no stories on my mother's side about the ownership of land.  The only real estate that I knew that he owned was the home that they lived on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, --(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: --or lived in.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right
Story_ID: 102934
Speaker 1: All right. We're going to come back and talk more about your mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] but--and her life.  But let me ask you about your father and your grandparents on your father's side.  Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: My father's name is William A. Clement.
Speaker 1: Is he a Senior?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Senior.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And, and we're able to go back two generations. His grandfather, which is my great-grandfather, was in Rowan County, which is in North Carolina, approximately fifteen, twenty miles from Charlotte [North Carolina].  And Rufus Alexander Clement was born eleven years before the Emancipation Proclamation so he was obviously a slave.  And he married a woman by the name of Emma.  And they had several businesses, but he was a sharecropper almost like an independent contractor now, but he and my great grandmother had a very interesting business.  They would do laundry, and as I understand it they would wash and pick-up laundry during the week and then on Saturdays their customers would drive by and my grandfather would, or my grandmother, would take the laundry out to the cars of the customers who were generally white, white, white customers.  But he was more entrepreneurial than my mother's side and he accumulated land.  And in fact, he donated land that became known as the Rufus Alexander Elementary School in Rowan County.  And had that name up until the 1950s when they did school integration and they named the school West Rowan County School, so forth and so on.  But I remember going back maybe ten years ago, we had a family reunion up in Rowan County to commemorate him and his legacy and he also gave land for the church.  He was an elder in the Episcopal Church.  But the pastor made just a great sermon, I remember that even today.  He said that here was a man who was born as a slave--he was actually a piece of property, that he had enough get up and go about him, entrepreneurial spirit where he accumulated land property during his lifetime from sharecropping and from this business and then had a sense of wanting to give back when he became somewhat secure and gave away property.  So he went through three cycles in one lifetime of being property, accumulating property and giving away property and that's always resonated with me and stayed with me for years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your grandfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Arthur John Howard Clement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the youngest of--from that union of Rufus and Emma.  And he worked for--well this is the story on--he walked from Rowan County to, to Charlotte to go to Biddle University, which is now known as Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina]. And my, my grandfa--my great grandfather obviously was not educated but he valued education and he encouraged all of his children and especially the youngest to go to college.  And so he walked to Biddle University and then after he finished Biddle he was employed by the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, and they assigned him a territory which was called a debit back in those days and that was in the whole state of South Carolina.  And so he relocated and went to South Carolina and became the, what they call the district danger for the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: Alright, and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Well, he met her there, her name was Sadie, Sadie [sic, Kathleen] Ophelia Clement [nee Jones].  And once again, she had health challenges and my only recollection of her was being bed-ridden.  And she passed when I was about seven or eight years old, and was not very, very active because of her medical challenges.  But Mr. Clement, this is my Grandpa Clement, was once again also very entrepreneurial accumulating land, he was not only in insurance but he also was accumulating real estate and he also was a bails bondsman, he would post bonds for anybody who was incarcerated and the story was there were only two black people that drove Cadillacs back in those days and that was the medical doctor in Charleston [South Carolina] and my, my grandfather.
Speaker 1: So they settled in Charleston to live?
Speaker 2: They settled in Charleston to live.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 102935
Speaker 1: So is that [Charleston, South Carolina] where your father [William Clement, Sr.] was born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Charleston, he was what we call a Geechee, or he called himself a Geechee.  And he had never been away from Charleston and they say when he went away to school he says, "My name is Willie Clement and I be's from Charleston."  And they had a very distinct dialect and--but he, he was the first graduate, I guess Biddle Univers--Biddle University which is now Johnson C. Smith [Charlotte, North Carolina].  But my father went to Talladega College [Talledega, Alabama] and graduated there and he stayed in South Carolina for a while.  And his first job was with the North Carolina Mutual [Life] Insurance Company and I'll tell you a little about him when we get to him.
Speaker 1: Your father?
Speaker 2: My father, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  You can tell me about that now.
Speaker 2: My, my, my, my, father was, was a college graduate.  The only job he ever had was with North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, his father [Arthur Clement] worked for them fifty years and he worked at the same company for fifty years himself.  And they had him start off in the field a debit, and he was an agent in Memphis [Tennessee], I understand, and then he came to Atlanta [Georgia] and it was in Atlanta that he met my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement], who lived here.  And we spent my first five years in Atlanta and then he was promoted to the home office for North Carolina Mutual which is in Durham, North Carolina, which is where my brothers and sisters and I really went to public schools and, you know, actually grew up.  But I'm a native of Atlanta.  I am the fifth generation to be born here.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Grew up in Kentu--So you grew up in, in Durham, North Carolina though?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah we went to public schools in Durham.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 102936
Speaker 1: Now, when you were living in Charleston [South Carolina], did your mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] and father [William Clement, Sr.] own a home there?
Speaker 2: Well, I never lived in Charleston, my, my grandparents lived there.  They owned, my grandfather and Mrs. Clement, owned their own home and also he had several other pieces of real estate that he owned.  Some was rental and he had a farm, which was called Edi--on Edisto Island.  And he would take us out to the farm, he was a big man, he was probably 6'3", 6'4" which back in those days was--and he actually raised livestock and had chickens and so forth and so on.  I remember as youngsters we would love going down to Charleston because we'd get a chance to go out to the farm, but after he died my, my father did not keep up the farm actually, he and his brother and sister actually sold, sold the land.  But they did own their home on Rutledge Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 102937
Speaker 1: So is there a story--I know that you said that your father [William Clement, Sr.] met your mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] in Atlanta [Georgia], is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, apparently my, my grandfather, Mr. [John] Dobbs was working--let me back up--the Grand--the Prince Hall Masons, owned a lot of property.  They owned whatever buildings they were in, they owned that particular building.  And so this was right on Auburn Avenue where the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] is now, that was their building and on the bottom floor was the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company.  And my father, at that time, was a widow, but had moved to Atlanta and my grandfather got a chance to meet him and was so taken with him that he actually introduced him to my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were great friends during all the time that my father was married, I remember they took several trips together, just the two of them.  And he got my father involved in Masons, so it was a, it was a, you know, unusual and close relationship.
Story_ID: 102938
Speaker 1: All right, do you remember the house that you lived in, in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it's, it's right on Angier Avenue.  It's not too far from where my brother lives now, it's, it's less than three minutes from Georgia Power.  Over in what they call Buttermilk Bottom.  And, it's a white house, it's still there and I ride by sometime to show it to my (laughter) you know, my, my, my daughters or anybody else that's in the car if we're close to that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about the neighborhood at that time because you didn't leave there until you were what, five?
Speaker 2: Denise, I was five and so I don't have, I mean I don't have any real vivid memories of the Angier Avenue experience, I mean I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: --maybe four and a half, five and I try to think of some, but I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --just don't have any real memories there, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 102939
Speaker 1: Well can you remember--think of your first childhood memory--what is your first childhood memory.
Speaker 2: Well my childhood memories revolve around the house and the neighborhood that we lived in, Durham, North Carolina.  Durham was a very unusual city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was unusual in many ways, it was relatively small, but it had several black businesses and a college.  It had the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company which was the largest business in the world for many, many years.  It had the Mechanics and Farmers Bank; it had a savings and loan association, had several other businesses, so it had a thriving black middle class entrepreneurial business-oriented class.  And then it had North Carolina College, which was one of the larger colleges in North Carolina.  And so it was, I didn't realize it, I mean it, was a middle class town because of the jobs and the educational opportunities there.  And one thing that I thought about was Durham was a mecca for tennis.  Because North Carolina College had tennis courts and kids who wanted to play tennis who were serious about it would all come through Durham during the summertime.  And one of the kids that came through Durham that we played against was Arthur Ashe.  And he and I were exactly the same age, but he lived in Virginia and I remember a physician who sponsored him brought him down so that he could play in these tournaments during the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102940
Speaker 1: Well, before we begin to talk about your youth in Durham [North Carolina] let me ask you about your relationship with your parents.  What was your relationship like with your mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement]?  What type of relationship did you have with her?
Speaker 2: Was a very warm relationship, I mean it's, it's, it's kinda hard for me even talk about her now, but, she was a very loving woman and, you know, just doted on her children and she really had two, two lives, Denise.  She, she was a, a homemaker and taught part-time because she was a graduate of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  All six of Mr. Dobbs' children went to Spelman College which was a very unique historical fact.  And all of them went on to get either Ph.D.s or master's degrees.  And my mother went to Columbia [University, New York City, New York] and she was well-educated, very articulate, intelligent, gracious, just a beautiful, beautiful woman.   But she devoted the first half of her life to these six children and at about age fifty-two, after all of us were gone, she got appointed to the Durham School Board because she had been so active in the PTA associations.  But a year later they changed the charter and required that you had to run as an elected official.  So here is my mother, who never had worked and--well she was an assistant professor North Carolina College, she had to run a campaign and she ran it, won, she eventually became President of the Durham School Board and then left that position and ran and became a Durham County Commissioner.  In fact, she was the vice-chair and her whole demeanor and persona and everything about her changed after we were gone. It was, it was her time and she became just a great advocate for women's issues, for education and was just--the Governor of North Caroline spoke at her, funeral because--his name was Jim Hunt, Gov--Governor Jim Hunt, because they had become such close friends and he was just a great admirer and she was a very gracious woman even in political life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said she went to Spelman and Columbia?
Speaker 2: She went to Spelman and then she had her master's degree from Columbia University.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the things that you even carry with you today that you learned from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it revolves around the children.  Education has always been important in our family and as I got older obviously you begin to understand that that's one of the ways that you lift yourself up and there was a saying that Mr. Dobbs had that we have used just down through the years, about the three B's.  He called it, "the book, the ballot and the buck."  And that was his formula for upgrading people of color and making sure that the term emancipation and freedom were, were actual words.  He was a big, you know, what they call a big race man, and he taught everybody or impressed upon everyone the, the need to be educated and read and to, to be entrepreneurial if you wanted to be.  And so all of his, all of his daughters were very academic-oriented, my mother was very academic-oriented and she just encouraged all of us to get as much education as we could.
Speaker 1: What, what characteristic or trait do you think you have gotten from your mother?
Speaker 2: Well she was very gracious, I, I, I think that I'm a gracious and giving and, you know, soft person.  Which, which comes from her most people think the people that are in business are, are hard and cold and so forth and so on, but in, in my case I think that I get those attributes from my mother of being involved about or concerned about other people.
Story_ID: 102941
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your father [William Clement, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was a business man; he encouraged us to, to be entrepreneurial.  I remember in Durham [North Carolina] we had the largest Pittsburgh Courier route which was one--you don't even know that was probably before your time, but there were black newspapers that--Jet Magazine and black newspapers that were--the, the Pittsburgh Courier was, was published in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And it would carry all of the black news, and, and they would have routes in North Carolina and South Carolina so people could read and, and we had distribution that included my two younger brothers and two other friends of mine.   And so I had a little, you know, little business and we did that for four years and then when I left to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] my brother took it over and I remember him, you know, helping us manage it.  We would bring the money in that we would collect and he would make sure that it got sent back to Pittsburgh to pay for the papers.  And whatever the profit was we got to keep and to use in a way that, you know, we, we felt important.
Story_ID: 102942
Speaker 1: Okay, so, when you get to Durham [North Carolina] you are what?
Speaker 2: Five--(simultaneous)--five and a half, six years old.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--five or--six years old.  So this is actually when you start school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your public school?
Speaker 2: W. G. Pearson [Elementary School].
Speaker 1: W.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hadn't thought about that, I had a favorite teacher there Mrs. Lee. (laughter).
Story_ID: 102943
Speaker 1: Okay, you wanted to tell me again how you thought it was a great feat for your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --grandfather [John Wesley Dobbs] to educate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one, one of the great attributes of my, my grandfather was his, his emphasis on education, he had six daughters, all of them went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], all were either salutatorian or valedictorian and three of them were Miss Maroon and White.  One of them was--went on to become an international opera singer, name was Mattiwilda Dobbs. They just celebrated her at the Metropolitan Opera here in--well not here but in, in New York, several, several years ago.  But it, it was a very--and it's the only family to have six children go to one college or go to Spelman and to be graduated in the school's history and that's over 125 years.
Speaker 1: Wooo, all right.  Do you know about the other four, you told me about your mother and the opera singer, what about the others?
Speaker 2: Well, my oldest aunt was the mother of Maynard Jackson and she got a Ph.D. in French literature in Toulouse [France].  The second was Willie Dobbs Blackburn who was a professor at Jackson State [University] in Jackson, Mississippi.  The third was Millicent Dobbs-Jordan who was a professor at Spelman, she taught African American Studies, so forth and so on.  My mother was the fourth, the fifth was Mattiwilda Dobbs who was the opera singer and then my youngest aunt or my mother's younger sister went on to get her Ph.D. and she lives--she worked for the CDC [Center for Disease Control and Prevention] she was in communicable diseases and so forth and so on.  And she and Mattiwilda are still, still alive.
Speaker 1: And what is her name?
Speaker 2: The youngest--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The youngest one?
Speaker 2: --is June Dobbs Butts.
Speaker 1: And Maynard's mother's name?
Speaker 2: Was Irene Dobbs Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 102944
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were going to talk about elementary school and you were telling me --(simultaneous)--(laughter) that you remember Mrs. Lee, or Miss Lee.
Speaker 2: I remember Miss Lee, she may have been my first grade or second year--grade teacher and my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] would tell me how I would come home every day and talk about Miss Lee.  But she is probably the only teacher I can remember (laughter) from W.G. Pearson which was my elementary school.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the activities at school that you enjoyed?
Speaker 2: I was a in the patrols, and in, in that time that was the safety patrol and that was a pretty big thing.  We, we would be responsible for the crossings of the children and then we would go to Washington [D.C.] each year for a parade.  I, I can't remember who the sponsor was, but that was a big thing and that--at that time, to go out of, out of town and go to Washington and get a chance to see all of that in Washington, D.C., so I do remember that activity.
Speaker 1: What part of town was it in, the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Denise, it was--you know, in the black neighborhood, Durham [North Carolina] was not a big town--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, we didn't have north, south, west --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --etcetera and it may have been one of two or three, you know, elementary schools and so everybody lived in the neighborhood.  We lived in the neighborhood and I walked to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102945
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your neighborhood, we'll go back and talk more about, about the school, but tell me about the neighborhood.  Who made up the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, there're two neighbors I can remember the first one that we lived in when we first moved to Durham [North Carolina] was--I, I, guess it was considered a middle class neighborhood--we, we didn't have--I mean there were no, you know, projects or urban areas or run down areas.  I mean just everything--if I remember Durham was, was relatively clean and this was a nice middle class neighborhood and we owned the home that we lived in and we were able to walk, you know, walk to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we moved to a, a different neighborhood and once again I was able to walk to--at that time it was called junior high school, which was a good little ways away but it was still within walking distance.  And then what I remember, really remember, were my high school days because the house was right around the corner from Hillside High School [Durham, North Carolina].  And so we could go to Hillside it had all the activities, outside tennis and basketball and we were also able to use the facilities at North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina, formerly North Carolina College at Durham] because of my, my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement].  And so, you know, my memories of Durham were just one around sports, you know, tennis, swimming, basketball, just anything that had a ball in it we were involved in because we were free to just go and participate.   And then when it got dark at night we, you know, we came back home and that was, that was the way we spent our summers primarily.
Story_ID: 102946
Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have two brothers and three sisters.
Speaker 1: Tell me their names and tell me where you fall in the progression.
Speaker 2: Well my older sister--oldest sister is named [HM] Alexine Clement Jackson who lives in Bethesda [Maryland], she graduated from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  She was valedictorian of her class.  She went on to University of Iowa, got a master's degree in speech therapy and she and her husband met when he was in Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she was at Spelman.  And she has gotten very, very active--he's a medical doctor and they now live in Potomac, Maryland.  And she just completed a five-year term as the chairperson of the Y--Young--YWCA.  She's a spokesman for the Sarah Koran [sic, Susan G. Komen] Breast Foundation; she's a breast cancer survivor and just a very, very active person in the community and a lot of things going on in Washington, D.C. area.  And she's been profiled; she received an honorary Ph.D. from Spelman because of her civic and community activities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I was the second and then my third--my, my next brother, his name is Wesley Dobbs Clement; he's named after my grandfather.  He went to Morehouse and went to Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and he practices medicine up in North Carolina and Charlotte, not too far from Rowan County.  And then my next brother is named Arthur John Howard Clement, who is named after one of my grandfathers.  He went to North Carolina State University in Raleigh and then he has a master's degree in urban design at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and he is an architect by training and has his own, own business.  And then there were two younger sisters who really came along after our brothers--my brothers and I left.  One--the first one is Kathleen Ophelia Clement--Ophelia and Kathleen are for two grandmothers.  She went to the University of North Carolina and also went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] where she got an MBA.  And she has worked for several corporate institutions like IBM and Digital, but she has her own business now called Confluent Systems where she does personal coaching.  And then my youngest sister [Josephine Clement Smart] went to Spelman and also to Howard University School of Dentistry [Washington, D.C.] and also to the Fuqua Business School at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] where she got an MBA.  And she worked for a while, never practiced dentistry and now she is a home person.  She's a mother, full-time mother and a home keeper.  She and her husband live in Poughkeepsie--New Rochelle, New York, up in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay. So now tell me with your brothers and sisters at home, what was it like on a day-to-day basis?
Speaker 2: Well even though there were six in the family my, my two younger sisters came--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They weren't there.
Speaker 2: --late, there was almost like two families.  But, you know, most of my activities revolved around my, my two brothers and me, we, we were always involved in some sports or out with my--my sister was a little more domesticated.  I mean, she played tennis but was not, you know, an avid tennis player or--but, it, it, was as I look back on it, I mean the word that I used--I mean it was a privileged up, upkeep. And my, my father [William Clement, Sr.] had a very, very, very good job and he and my mother [Josephine Dobbs, Clement] were pretty much centered around us and gave us all of the opportunities that we could have growing up.
Story_ID: 102947
Speaker 1: We--even growing up in, in, in the segregated south, I'd never been outside of the South, had a chance to go to camp for three years consecutively in Boston, Massachusetts which I will always remember because that was my first interaction with white people and I was ten, eleven, twelve years old at that time.
Speaker 2: What was that experience like?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was thinking about it, it, it was it was interesting because it was an integrated camp--when I say integrated I mean it was--we--that--we were just a few black kids there.  They, they made an effort to try to get some black kids in.  But there were kids from Washington, from New York, Boston [Massachusetts] and places like that and it was geared towards sports: archery, softball, swimming and that's where I actually learned how to swim there so I have, you know, just good memories about that camp.
Speaker 2: What about the interaction with the white children that were there?
Speaker 1: Denise, it, it, it's--I, I--it's hard to remember, I mean I don't know if--I always remembered us just being accepted.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and everybody got up in the morning we ate together we slept together we played ball together and we went to bed (laughter) together that night.  We slept in a cabin, eight to a cabin.  So there was no way of being singled out because of, of, of color I just felt, you know, one of the, one of the campers.
Story_ID: 102948
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  In school, were your teachers black or white?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: Okay, male or female?
Speaker 2: In the earlier schools they were female teachers, as we got into the middle school and upper schools they became both male and female.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, in elementary school that was W. G. Pearson, did you go to middle school or did you go straight from elementary school into high school?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Whitted, Whitted Junior High School, which was in those days seventh, eighth and ninth and then Hillside was tenth, eleventh and twelfth.
Speaker 1: And Whitted could you spell that for me?
Speaker 2: W-H-I-T-T-E-D, it's someone's name, I'll have to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Get the correct spelling on that.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was the junior high school was still in your community where you could walk?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Yes, it was a little longer, but we walked and we were all involved in--I want to specifically mention this--involved in Boy Scouts, my father [William Clement, Sr.] was active with us and I was in Boy Scouts, my middle brother and my youngest brother and all three of us became Eagle Scouts.  And my father got recognized for that because it was the only family black or white in the state of North Carolina that had three Eagle Scouts in, in that family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or in one family.
Speaker 1: What about any other organizations?
Speaker 2: We, we played organized, you know, softball.  I remember being in the Boys Club doing activities, but we were big sports--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: --people and so everything revolved around these leagues that played softball and we eventually got to baseball but it started off as softball.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now in junior high school what type of student were you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --A, and B or (laughter) no?
Speaker 2: --(laughter)--I was not a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear) tell me more (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And when I say I was not a good student I mean I was average, I mean I don't think--I, I mean I was not on honor roll or anything like that. I was not an honor student or honor society student and the same was for high school.  But I do remember in my senior year I was vice president of the student government association which, you know, looking back was, you know, a leadership position and I enjoyed, I enjoyed that.  But once again, I mean I was not an honor student in high school either.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about music, art, reading, (laughter) any of those things, did you play any instruments?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I played--my mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] forced us to take music, piano and we just rebelled and so she just finally gave in on that.  But, you know, I--we, we did read, I mean we had to, you know, had to read a book or two books or whatever it is, but, things like music and so--arts and all was not our focus.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay, what about church?
Speaker 2: We went to White Rock Baptist Church.  All of the years I was in Durham [North Carolina], we went to White Rock Baptist Church.  There were a lot of activities revolving around the church.  The Boy Scout troop that I mentioned earlier was part of the church.  We went to sum-summer bible classes, which was two weeks out of the summer and we were pretty regular going, you know, church family.
Story_ID: 102949
Speaker 1: Okay, now in high school or in junior high school is there a favorite teacher that you remember?
Speaker 2: Denise, I can't remember a favorite teacher in, in junior high school I, I just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What about high school?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in, in high school I had a science teacher that--and a math teacher that I, that I like and especially--the math teacher, his name was Mr. Thompson.  And the reason I, I remember him is because he had a activity that was after school and he would actually come by our homes and pick us up (laughter) and take us to an activity.  And, and we would get ice cream on the way back and he was just--I mean obviously that was beyond the call of duty.  I didn't realize it at the time, but it was a way, I think of getting us interested in math, which was one area that I showed some interest in and showed some potential in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102950
Speaker 1: Had you decided what you would become once you left high school--were you going to go to college, was that something that was a given or did someone tell you--lead you or encourage you to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well I think going to college was pretty much a given.  Most of the kids in my senior high went to college and I only applied to two places.  I applied to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and applied to Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama], and once I got accepted at Morehouse and found out I could come back to Atlanta, that was it.  And the reason because of that, is once again during the summertimes when we were out of school, we would always come back to Atlanta and we would be around Mr. [John Wesley] Dobbs and he was just a big integral part of my life and I'm sure that, as I think back on, a part of the reason wanted to come back to Morehouse was not because of the school but just to be in Atlanta and then Atlanta compared to, Atlanta, I mean compared to Durham, North Carolina was just like going to New York City, I mean it was a big metropolitan area and it had, you know, lots of kids and lots of things to do, movies and so forth and so on.  So I just really liked the city of Atlanta and I think that that had a lot to do with wanting to come back to Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you call your Grandfather Mr. Dobbs?
Speaker 2: Naw, no, (laughter) no, I called him Grandpa Dobbs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you graduate from Hillside High School--(simultaneous--
Speaker 2: In 1960.
Speaker 1: In 1960, okay.
Story_ID: 102951
Speaker 1: Now civil rights are heating up in Atlanta [Georgia], are your parents involved in civil rights?
Speaker 2: My father [William Clement, Sr.] was, my father was on the Durham Committee For [sic, On] The Affairs Of Black People which was a very, very strong activist organization in, in Durham [North Carolina].  And Durham was the second city in, in the 1960s for the sit-ins.  Greensboro [North Carolina] was the first and Durham was the second.  And we were in, involved in that, they took us down to Woolworth's or whatever the store, I can't even remember what it was and it, it, it, it just was--I hate to say this, but it was a thing to do.  It was not dangerous at that time even though the kids in Greensboro--but it was nothing, you know, like what [HM] John Lewis faced or people in Selma [Alabama], and once again, Durham was a relatively small town and so it was a really a non-event just going down to, you know, sit in a, a luncheon counter at, at, at one of the five-and-ten stores there.
Speaker 1: Were things turned around easily there?
Speaker 2: No, no, eventually it became--but, it was not--even though it started in Greensboro then, an, you know, the images we have of the dogs and the hoses and all, and that was in places like Birmingham [Alabama] and maybe some cities in Mississippi.  But that, for some reason just did not happen in North Carolina.  I think one reason is that North Carolina's always been a fairly progressive state relative to the other southern states.  We had a Governor, whose name was Luther Hodges, and he had a lot of industry there, a place called Research Triangle which had a lot of businesses there and so it was a, a different kind of place, it still is a, a more progressive place then some of the southern, you know, real southern states like Mississippi and Alabama.
Story_ID: 102952
Speaker 1: How did you deal with segregation personally, or did you have to deal with it at all?
Speaker 2: Well, it was all I knew (laughter) I mean up until I was twenty-one years old, other than the experience I had with summer camp, I had no interaction with white people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was through all of my public education.  At Morehouse, Morehouse was all black and my first year out of Morehouse I worked in Hartford, Connecticut which was all white (laughter) and so that was a, a change and a, and a challenge and it may have been, in retrospect, sort of a turning point but up until then I had no, no interaction.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's what I think what I meant by how did you deal with it because you really didn't have to deal with it because everything surrounding you, all the people were black at that time.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102953
Speaker 1: Is there a senior prom when you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Oh yes, oh yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: --graduate?  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well there was a senior prom, I--my father [William Clement, Sr.] allowed me to, you know, to use car.  Which a lot of--I guess parents didn't do.  But--and once again, Durham [North Carolina] is a relatively small town and, and, relatively safe.  But we had a, a prom and I drove and had a date and, you know, we stayed out a little while and got home safely.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 102954
Speaker 1: So now graduation and you know that you're, you're going to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you're glad to be going to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, besides summer camp, staying away from home, did you have to make a big transition to--did you live on the campus at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, went Denise, the summer before my freshman year which was very, very, very, very important.  And we were there six weeks maybe eight weeks but it really gave me an advantage over the freshman class when you knew where to go, you knew this and that and then they help you with, you know, reading, writing and arithmetic.  That was the basic curriculum and, and they actually, you know, strengthen your, your skills in that particular area so when the freshman year came, you know, I, I felt that I was ready and was not intimidated and look forward and, and, and enjoyed all four years at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what classes interest you the most while you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, I started out in math, that apparently was one of my stronger points, but my junior and sophomore--I mean my junior and senior year I, I began to take economics, life insurance, business law and these are the things that I had been accustomed to and knew a little about and really begin to excel there more so than in, in math.  And so I decided that I would have a--at that time I was still a math major.  I changed--I flipped to business and had math as a minor and then a lot of the business courses that you take at Morehouse were taught at Atlanta University in the Business School at Atlanta University.  So we had money and banking and corporate finance, I mean we had fairly sophisticated courses for a predominantly black school in the South.
Story_ID: 102955
Speaker 1: Who was the President of Morehouse at the time you were there [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Benny Mays, Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays.
Speaker 1: And tell me what the experience was like just being around him--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Oh he was awesome.
Speaker 1: --and interacting with him?
Speaker 2: --He was just awesome.  He was a theologian and an educator; he was the Reverend Doctor Benjamin E. Mays.  Very eloquent in his speech, I remember having to go to chapel as a freshman and he would speak, not every day, but, you know, and he was just very eloqu--eloquent in his speech and also in his de-demeanor and he stressed, you know, the Morehouse Man.  I mean he was the quintessential advocate of Morehouse Man and he would just tell you that you could do this, you could do that and it just permeated throughout the campus with the teachers and all but he was there for the four years that I was there and he, he's just--I can remember him today.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the professors that you had?
Speaker 2: I had Dr. E.B. Williams who's my economics professor.  He has two sons that still live here in Atlanta.  I had a freshman English teacher his name was G.L. Chandler and I use some of the things he taught me even with my daughter and he talked about organizing a paper.  He said if you had to write a paper just think about it being a fruit garden, you'd have some apples and some oranges, he said, he said, just put down all of your ideas, just, you know, and then you'd have a--and then you go back and you put all of the apples together and then you put all of the oranges together and that's where you develop your paper and you have themes.  And, and, and so I still use that today when I, do a speech and even when I work with my daughter who, is fifteen to--and my oldest daughter who is, is, is older--but to help them in, in, in editing their papers or, or whenever they ask me to use some of those same techniques, so I remember him. And then I remember Johnnie Clark, who is my accounting professor.  I had accounting and I really liked accounting.  One time I, I thought about going into accounting and--but she was a Ph.D. and a CPA which was very unusual, black female, and she's still around.  And she's followed my career and, and, you know, we talk about debits and credits, that, that was what we talked about in accounting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102956
Speaker 1: Did you work at all, did you have a job?
Speaker 2: I had a job.  My cousin, whose name was Wesley Dobbs, was a sales representative for R.J. Reynolds and believe it or not, they allowed these representatives to come on campus and you, would actually try to encourage students to smoke.  And I was his college--for the entire AU Center [Atlanta University Center], I was his representative and so when he came on campus we went with him over to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--when I say we just--he and I--Clark Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], so forth and so on, and I did that my first two years and then my junior year I actually was licensed as a life insurance agent.  And so I actually sold two or three contracts in addition to keeping up my, you know, contract with, with him and, you know, it was not a lot of money but in those days any incremental income was, was yours and so I, you know, I felt that I was in the money.
Speaker 1: When did you take the--was there a course that you had to take for--to lic--get licensed for your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, I had to--in the state of Georgia you had to be--you had to pass--to be licensed.  And I had taken a course in life insurance at--it was taught, once again, at Atlanta University in their business school and--so based on that I was, was--had some materials to read and I able to pass the exam and I worked out of the Atlanta district office for North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, I was an agent my junior and senior year.
Story_ID: 102957
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me more about your senior year and--your selling life insurance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, in retrospect Denise, this idea probably was planted by my father [William Clement, Sr.] (laughter) who saw me coming back to North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance] and being a third generation to work for that same particular company.  But it, it was it, was something that I knew and I understood and I gravitated toward it and, and I sold, once again, I mean, I sold, you know, three or four contracts.  One of them was to a, a man who I saw several years ago who had maintained it over, you know, over the years and, so I felt good about that.  He didn't cash it in or did, didn't let it lapse.  But it did, did provide me--on the two or three contracts they pay you a commission not, not a salary, a check that I had not seen before that size.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was this how you paid for college?
Speaker 2: No, my father paid--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Your father paid for your college-
Speaker 2: --for my college yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 102958
Speaker 1: Now we're still in the era of civil rights and now that you're in Atlanta [Georgia] what's going on cam--on the campus [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well, in my freshman year was when there was the big push for Rich's [Department Store], the desegregation of Rich's in particular.  And they would take busloads of us from the Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University] campus down to, you know, demonstrate.  I never got, never got locked up, and there may have been one or two, but once again, it was not the dogs and, and the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --hoses and the images that we saw on television.  So they eventually, as you know, desegregated Rich's and, and that was really the beginning of the civil rights legislation '64 [1964] and '67 [1967] civil rights legislation that was passed by Lyndon, Lyndon Johnson.  That was--well, right after I finished Morehouse was the, the March on More--on Washington.  So all of that was in the mid, in the mid '60s [1960].  King, [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] had really not come to prominence yet, Mrs. Parks, Rosa Parks was the first person and then the Reverend Dr. King got involved in the late '60s [1960s] and that's when he became very well-known and actually moved from Alabama to Atlanta as his, as his headquarters.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you hear Dr. King speak?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Did he ever come to Morehouse while you were there?
Speaker 2: He spoke at Morehouse and then he was, he was the associate pastor at Ebenezer [Baptist Church] with his father [Martin Luther King, Sr.] and I think we went over there once, but, you know, we were not big, you know, church-going people that--senior in high school, but he did come back to Morehouse and speak so we got a chance to, to hear him.
Story_ID: 102959
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you actually graduate, you graduated in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you had--you received your bachelor's in what?
Speaker 2: In, in, business administration with a minor in math (cough).
Speaker 1: So now what were your plans after, after graduation?
Speaker 2: Well, I was encouraged by both my parents and my faculty advisor at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to, you know, to, to consider going to business school.  And I applied to the Wharton Business School which was at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They required that you work before you could come to school and so I, I worked for a year up in Connecticut with the Connecticut General Life Insurance Company which was in Hartford, Connecticut and, you know, that was a, a interesting experience because I'd go from Atlanta to a northern city and at that time Hartford was a pretty sophisticated city.  They had a lot of insurance companies that were based in, in Hartford and, it, it, still is advertised as the insurance capital of the world
Speaker 1: So tell me about that experience.  Why was it different from the insurance company here in Atlanta that you were working for?
Speaker 2: Well, now when I was working for North Carolina Mutual [Life Insuarance] I was living on campus, I mean I was just a part-time agent.  I was a full-time student, part--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I mean even about the operation itself?
Speaker 2: --yeah, well Connecticut General was a huge Fortune 500 company.  I mean it was huge (laughter) and, once again, I was thrown into a majority environment there are very, very few blacks there.  And it was, it was challenging, I mean it was challenging and that was my first opportunity to, to operate in an environment where, you know, you're--and I don't want to say competing, but you--they had classes and all, I mean you actually competing with graduates from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and other schools and it was little--I found it a little challenging.
Speaker 1: And so you were there for a year?
Speaker 2: I stayed for a year and they accepted me after that one year's experience and I moved down to Philadelphia, which is where the University Pennsylvania is located.
Speaker 1: Where did you live while you were in Connecticut?
Speaker 2: I had a housing--I lived with a--it was a room in a family's house. It was no fancy apartment and all that, and that, that's where I lived--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the same thing when I went to Philadelphia, I lived my first year in a--(clears throat)--excuse me--in a rooming house.
Story_ID: 102960
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about the experience at Wharton [School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]
Speaker 2: Well Denise, Wharton was an eye opener because it was, it was well-known, it was an Ivy League school, and once again, the level of competition in the classroom was very, very intense.  The caliber of the teachers was just off the chart.  And what blew me away the first year when I was taking accounting was that my, my accounting professor had written the textbook and, I mean, I just, it was just hard for me to understand that, I always thought that the author was somewhere up, up here, up north and here it was actually teaching the class.  And I was the only person of, of, of African American--they had some Indians and had some Af--you know, truly Africans there, but I was the only Afro-American in, in my class.  A class of 1,500 students and that was a little daunting.  But, to leapfrog it's now they, they have many, many African American students at Penn, at Wharton in particular and it's just--I mean to think when I tell people that--I tell my daughter who went there about that, I mean it's just hard for her to believe.  But that was in 1966 and 1967.
Speaker 1: Now this is also the first time you experienced having teachers who were white, who were white?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did that make a difference to you?
Speaker 2: Once again I, I, I thought that the level of, of, of competition was much higher, I mean it's just like going from the minor leagues to the major leagues.  The class work was more demanding, I mean, I ended up, you know, actually having to, you know, study  a lot--spending time in the library, writing papers.  And, the, competition in, in the classroom was pretty high.  And I was probably a B, you know, B or B minus student and did not have any academic honors but I finished, and so, that I was proud of.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 102961
Speaker 1: So what happens after Wharton [School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I have--at Wharton I get interested in finance.  I, I start of in insurance but I, I really begin to gravitate toward the corporate finance classes.  I had a money banking class and so forth and so on, and so when it came time to graduate you--I had decided I was going to try to go to New York, and work in New York City.  I mean that was just--it sounded great and I interviewed with a couple of banking institutions, investment banking firms.  But I didn't get any offers; I mean I just did not get any offers.  One of the banks that came to Philadelphia was called, NCNB Corp., the North-- the old North Carolina National Bank, and when they found out that I had North Carolina roots and I went down an visited them, I got an offer and it was, you know, come right out of school it was a nice offer.  And so by that time I had married, my second year at Wharton, and my wife [Patricia Homes-Washington] was from Atlanta [Georgia], she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I met her when I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], so we moved to North Carolina and worked in Charlotte, North Carolina for two years.  And worked for, at that time it was called, NCNB Corp.  And I'll just tell you this story, NCNB Corp., as well as the other banks in, in the state of North Carolina, were what they call state-wide banks.  But North Carolina, the state legislature allowed them to go out of state and NCNB Corp. begin its move to be a national bank and it acquired banks in Texas, other states.  And then it acquired the old C&S bank [Citizens and Southern National Banks of Georgia], here, in, in, in Atlanta, which was--well in the state of Georgia, which was a huge bank and they changed its name to NationsBank and then they operated like that for years and they then acquired the Bank of America.  But the gentleman that I--not worked for directly but who's two levels ahead of me and I knew him, his name was Hugh McColl and he ended up being the driving force for that whole NCNB Corp.  And he's got a book out and I'm mentioned in the book as being the first black officer at North Carolina National Bank.  They promoted me after one year and I became a banking officer.  But he wrote the whole story about how that small state-wide bank became now the Bank of America which has a, a, a nat--national footprint.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the book that you're mentioned in?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: It's, it's called "McColl America's Banker." Okay.
Speaker 1: I have it right in my, my desk and he signed it for me, Hugh McColl, he's, he's now regarded as one of the former--he's retired now, but at that time one of the most aggressive, you know, bankers in the country.
Story_ID: 102962
Speaker 1: Now you also mention that you got married, tell me about your wife?
Speaker 2: Well my wife was from Atlanta [Georgia]--or is from Atlanta.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Patricia Homes-Washington was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and after I left she stayed and went to Atlanta University [now Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], got her master's degree, and when she finished, that's when we got married because she was able to get a job and we lived in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for just one year.
Story_ID: 102963
Speaker 1: And then you came to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, came to North Carolina and lived in Charlotte for two years.  And Charlotte was a very, very nice city, it was not as large as Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York, but it was a community-oriented type city and we enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, (clears throat) and this is where you will become the banking officer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, I decide I want to get into the brokerage business, I want to be a stock broker.  I mean I, I had become infatuated with these classes in finance and securities and so forth and so on, and so I, I got an opportunity with a company called Bache & Company which is no longer in business they are now Prudential.  But, they trained us we went to New York and trained, I eventually got to New York as, as what is called a registered representative.  You have to pass the test for the New York Stock Exchange and then we come back and I worked with them for about a year in Atlanta [Georgia] and then I go to another firm called, The Robinson-Humphrey Company, which is a, regional firm, but I had an, had an opportunity to call on, on what they call institutions and I traveled the country.  I called on Prudential and eventually I begin to call on some of the black life insurance companies like North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance] and Atlanta Life [Insurance] became customers of mine. And so for a period of time, which was about four and a half, maybe five years I was a stock broker and dealing in securities and, and, and, and both, both companies were member companies of New York Stock Exchange.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the Robinson-Humphrey Company, tell me what that company--it's, it's--first of all is it a black firm?
Speaker 2: No, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's, it's, it's a member firm of the New York Stock Exchange.  It's a brokerage house. And it's a--it--at that time it was an old Atlanta firm that had been in Atlanta for a number of years.  They have since been bought by SunTrust; it is now called SunTrust Robinson-Humphrey
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and it's something else about Robinson-Humphrey the company that they--what they do, it's just a brokerage firm?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, just stocks, bonds--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --commodities.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so for--you say four and a half years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about four and a half years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that takes, takes us up to the early '70s [1970].
Story_ID: 102964
Speaker 1: During this time Maynard Jackson moves back to Atlanta [Georgia] and we grew up together, even though he was a little older--from the reunions and all, but when he gets back to Atlanta we kind of bound again and it was in the early '70s [1970] that he started talking about running for mayor.  And so he called four of us together one Saturday--well, including him, four including him, David Franklin, who was married to Shirley Franklin at one time; gentleman by the name of Chuck Williams, who is dead now; and Maynard.  And he talked about wanting to run for mayor, he had run now for the United States Senate against [Herman] Talmadge and then was the sitting vice chair, or vice chairman of the Aldermanic Board which is almost like President of the Atlanta City Council today.  And he was still only his thirties, and people thought that he would wait until his, his turn, but he had noticed that the demographics in Atlanta changed and that the Atlan--the city of Atlanta registered voters become predominately black, and he thought that with the right campaign that he could win.  And so I tell that because it was really a turning point of my life.  I, I, I really got directly engaged in politics.  David Franklin and I put up the first $40,000, I mean, back in the '70s [1970], that was a lot of money and we actually lent it to the campaign and he developed a staff and campaign staff and the election was next year and, you know, he won and the rest is, the rest is history.
Story_ID: 102965
Speaker 1: And in the early '70s [1970], also your first son is born, is that right?
Speaker 2: No, my, my daughter.
Speaker 1: Your daughter, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first daughter is born.  She's born in 1972.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Anika Patrice Clement Wharton.  She's now married.  She is now married and has two young children of her own.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But, also during the time that I was involved in the campaign, I got a chance to meet Herman Russell, and, and, and Jesse Hill who were, you know, the most powerful black men in, in Atlanta [Georgia].  Her, Herman Russell had his own construction company called H.J. Russell & Company.  And Jesse Hill was the president of the Atlanta Life Insurance Company.  And so they were well-established and they eventually became--Mr. Hill was the chairman of the campaign and Mr. Russell was the chairman of the finance committee and so, I, I got a chance to work with him, it was almost day-to-day, raising money for the campaign, being involved in it and, and actually being--just, you know, giving (unclear) and the significance of that is that it, it was my first opportunity to network and to get involved in the Atlanta power structure and when we went around we went to these meetings where the president of C&S Bank was there and the president of the gas light company was there and here Maynard was showing up with these two young guys, David Franklin and myself primarily, and this young staff.  And it was real interest because he hadn't even turned thirty-five yet.  But out of that came a relationship with Herman Russell, and at the end of the campaign he offered me a job to be vice president of the Citizens Trust Bank, which was his bank, he was the largest single shareholder.  And so I, I left the brokerage business and came back into banking.
Story_ID: 102966
Speaker 1: Okay.  An--now tell me about--give me a little history about Citizens Trust Bank?
Speaker 2: Citizens Trust Bank was, was actually formed and started by Herman Perry who was just a great story; he's a great story in himself.  He had a life insurance company, he had a construction company and then he had this bank called Citizens Trust Bank.  And, he hired a young man by the name of L.D. Milton, who had finished Brown University, to be an officer.  Mr. Milton eventually became president of the bank and he was the one that actually ran it for a number of years.  And then they ran into problems, they ran into financial problems and Herman Russell, at that time, had become a very successful entrepreneur and had enough capital where he bought in and became the single largest stockholder and that was in the '70s [1970].  He--well I'm sorry in the late '60s [1960] and he became the moving and the dominant force in the bank and is still a majority shareholder as of today.
Speaker 1: What's the history with--wasn't there Citizens & Southern [National Bank] that also became a part of Citizens Trust?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, C&S--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --was--Citizens & Southern was the largest bank in the state of Georgia.  Mills B. Lane was the president and they were just huge.  Citizens Trust Bank was very, very small and there was no relationship, business relationship between the two.
Speaker 1: Okay, how were the Barancos, weren't they involved in Citizens Trust Bank somehow?
Speaker 2: Well, Mr. Baranco became a direct--well, let me take Citizens Trust forward.  Citizens Trust Bank in the late 1990s had a president by the name of Bill Gibbs, who left the bank and so Citizens Trust Bank did not have a president, but there was a new bank that had been started in the Cab County called, First Southern that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: First Southern, okay I got Citizens Trust and First Southern, that's what I was thinking--(simultaneous)--(unclear)
Speaker 2: --that was started by Greg Baranco and Jim Young and several other people, and so Greg approached Herman Russell about merging the two banks and he became the vice chairman of the board of Citizens Trust Bank, Herman was the chairman and they brought their president in from First Southern and so they kept the name Citizens Trust because it had more history and cache than First Southern.
Speaker 1: Okay. There was someone else that worked for Citizens Trust, [HM Willard] Chuck Lewis?
Speaker 2: Yes!
Speaker 1: Okay, did you work with him at all?
Speaker 2: No, I was many, many years before Chuck--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --before him, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, Mr. Lewis is a relatively young man, even, even now.  But he was the number two person at Citizens Trust Bank for years, behind Jim Young.  And two years ago he got an opportunity to start his own bank, or be an equity--have an equity position and become president and he is still the president of that bank as of today.
Story_ID: 102967
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me more about leaving Robinson-Humphrey as a stockbroker to come to work in this black bank [Citizens Trust Bank] as a vice president--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what was that like?
Speaker 2: It was intense.  I had never work for a black institution before.  Every time that I worked for a company up until that point it was a majority firm.  And, the culture is different; I mean the culture is different.  And there was a lot of resentment toward me coming in as an outsider, as a vice president, up until that time everybody had been promoted from within, I mean, you started off as a teller and, you know, you do this and you do that and I was the second example of that.  They had brought in this president, his name will come to me, and then they brought in me as a part of a, kind of a restructuring and there, there was a lot of, lot of resentment, a lot of resentment, but eventually because of being really into it and I really enjoyed working there that, you know, I eventually ended up as the number two, number, number two person and when he [Herman Russell] left I was the acting chief operating officer for about six months while the bank went out and did a search for a new president, whose name was Owen Funderburg.  And Owen really took the bank to a new level, he was a seasoned banker and had been in banking all of his life, I really learned a lot from him.  As a, as a professional, I mean, he was just the consummate banker and a manager and he was there many, many years until he retired and then died.
Speaker 1: Well, you were fairly young also in this position.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was the other thing, I was a young--and I was from the outside and I come in as a vice president.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you initiated as a V.P.?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my area was credit, was loans.  And we had a high delinquency ratio (laughter) and so we, we set up a re, re, repossession section.  And actually became very, very aggressive, and repoing cars and, and other pieces of collateral like that, that had been pledged against loans because up until that point, you know, the bank only lent money to people that they knew, but as you began to get bigger and, and you were making loans to people that you, quote, didn't know, if they didn't pay then you had to go get your collateral.  And so we were very aggressive and that section is still there, in fact, they have it in all the banks, repo sections for cars primarily automobile loans.
Speaker 1: What about for home ownership, was there anything done to help the people in the community to own homes?
Speaker 2: Yes, Atlanta [Georgia], once again, was special in that it had a life insurance company, Atlanta Life, it had the banks, Citizens Trust Bank and it had a mutual savings and loan.  Banks by nature do not make long term commitments, but what we did was to originate loans.  We'd have people come into the bank and we would originate the loans and then we would sell of the loan to Atlanta Life and to Mutual Sa--Save-Savings and Loan and they were institutions that were designed to take mortgages.  And so Atlanta Life and Mutual Federal [Savings Bank] and Citizens Trust Bank were really responsible for the development on the real estate side of all of these beautiful homes that you see in, in sections that you see in Atlanta.  Now they were making loans to black people when they could not get mortgages from any traditional institution and so, I mean, that, that was a legacy that, that a lot of people don't appreciate.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how long do you stay at Citizens Trust Bank?
Speaker 2: I stayed until 1977.
Story_ID: 102968
Speaker 1: I went through a divorce Denise, in 1976 and that was the year that--well the next year was the year that Jimmy Carter ran for president, he was the governor of Georgia and once again, Mr. [Jesse] Hill and Mr. [Herman] Russell were very active in his campaign.  They put up--they were one of twenty-five people who put up $25,000 when Jimmy Carter first announced and one of the fruits of being early on is that you get to name people to some of the cabinet, sub-cabinet positions in the new administration.  And so Mr. Hill, in this case, who really kinda developed as my mentor, approached me because at that time I was single--or divorced, whatever the correct word is, if I'd be interested in going to Washington [D.C.].  Well I thought that was the greatest thing to happen, and so this was another turning point of my life.  I, I, I, I, I left Atlanta, I mean, I'd, I'd been here, I'd been comfortable and, had been married and I, I moved to Washington, D.C. now that was a very intense four years, very intense four years.  Once again the competition, the level of, of, of duties and responsibilities, the scope of responsibilities, the caliber of people, the education of people, everybody in Washington was a lawyer or, or, you know, business school, just well-trained and so in order to really just keep up, I mean you had to run, you know, fast.  And I ended up at the U.S. Small Business Administration, which is a federal agency.  I was the associate administrator which was one level down from the administrator and I ended up in a program that was called, Capital Ownership and--Business Ownership and Capital Development, which was geared toward trying to get larger and more successful black businesses across the country by using federal contracts as a means of generating revenue.  So I really got into this--I mean, I, I, I thought that this was--and with my background I found that a lot of people didn't have backgrounds of working in black businesses or having a family that had been involved in a life insurance company. So I became, you know, really a, an advocate for black capitalism
Story_ID: 103281
Speaker 1: Okay, so continue telling me about the four years in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Well, well this is, in retrospect, was just a big growth period for me, it, it, was a national stage, people were very, very interesting.  You got a chance to talk to people in New York and Boston [Massachusetts], California, I mean I just traveled all over the country and it was the contacts, it was the network that you put together that I have kept over the years that has just been--you can't put a dollar amount on that type of contacts and, and I've done business with people and actually started my business as a result of being in Washington.  But we, we had an opportunity to understand the legislative process, we had to go testify up on the Hill [Capitol Hill] I, I read the Washington Post, I mean, that was the local paper and it was just national, international, so it was a, a real growth period for me.  But, once again, the two things that stand out, I, I, I became a real advocate for creating a larger an, and more viable entrepreneurial class because as you look at it and you begin to look at the numbers, we had, you know, begun to make some improvements in--as a result of the civil rights legislation.  But there was not the ownership aspect, there were not businesses that we owned that were large of scale and employed a lot of people or created wealth.  And so that really got into my mind.  And the second decision I made was that when I came out, since I was still single that I would go into business for myself.  I'd been talking about it for four years and I said I'm going to actually do it.  And I had a scheme--had a strategy for really developing this business which was around the program that I had administered when I was in Washington, which was called 8(a) Business Development Program, trying to get federal contracts and using that as a base for growing your business and developing it going forward.
Story_ID: 103282
Speaker 1: And that's exactly what I did, it took a little longer than I had anticipated but one, one of the interesting things that really got me--caught my attention was the there was a colleague of mine who was about my same age, he was he was white, he was from Seattle and Denise he, every morning he would open up the paper and turn to the Wall Street Journal and I said well is, you know, is there a particular reason for it I said do you own a lot of stocks, he says, no I just own one.  He said, I, I started a company and did it as a leverage buyout and then I sold it to another firm and they gave me X number of dollars of cash and then so much in stock and the stock is listed.  He made more money in four years just from the appreciation of his stock than we all did in just salary.  And I said, I can do this and so what my strategy was coming out was to try to find an existing business to buy it, to make sure that the product, or service was one that the federal government bought because I knew that there were a lot of federal contracting opportunities, I knew how to write proposals and so I started off in, in 1981, when Mr. [Jimmy] Carter did not get re-elected and I just setup a company called it The Dobbs Corporation, it was basically a management consulting company.  And it actually took me five years before I could find the type of firm that I was looking for that could provide the type of service that I thought was universal enough where you could grow a business on it.  But in the meanwhile, one of my first contracts right after Carter got--was not elected was with the Coca-Cola Company and that was an opportunity for me to come back to Atlanta [Georgia], I had this daughter here and, and, you know, I liked Atlanta, I mean, I--of all places I went to, Atlanta was still home to me.  And so I got a change to come back and we operated as a management consulting firm, finance advisor for five years between 1981 and 1986.
Story_ID: 103283
Speaker 1: And in 1986 I, I met two gentleman who were technical, you know, information, IT types and I'd been reading about this new information technology highway.  My mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement], whom I talked about earlier, gave me a book to read called "The Third Wave" by Alvin Toffler, and in "The Third Wave" he talked about--he was a futurist, and he talked about where the opportunities were going to be in the next twenty, twenty-five years.  And he said, you know, computing, information technology the super highway, so forth and so on.  And so I acquired this firm and we kept the corporate name The Dobbs Corporation but we picked up a trade name calling--doing business as, DOBBS, RAM & Company.  And RAM was their acronym, they were known as---well their former name was Resource Account Management, but everyone would refer to them as RAM.  And so we had, you know, technical people, I was kind of of an outside person, the marketing person, the business development person, helping--responsible for getting of bank loans and, and so over the next--well last year was our twenty-fifth year.  We have grown in size and revenue and have, I think, demonstrated what I talked about during the four years that, that the, you know, people of color can manage and run businesses and that--I think that the next leg of this whole struggle for equality is we've made, made it socially, you know, there's a big black middle class.  But when you look at the so--the economic standards that the net worth of people of color is 10 percent of white families, we're about 66 percent of income, we've done well on the income side, but only 10 percent of net worth, and what is net worth, that includes business home--I mean business assets from businesses that you own, homes and other types of securities and investments that, that we have.  So that's really gotten to be a focal point for me to make sure that, that, that this can be a role model for other, upcoming entrepreneurs, would be entrepreneurs to, to , to be an entrepreneur own your own business and then you become independent and you can become wealthy or do reasonably well.
Speaker 2: So, Dodge RAM [sic, DOBBS, RAM] Corporation, the primary contract that you have are with who?
Speaker 1: Are with governmental agencies, we do business with the federal government, with the Internal Revenue Services (IRS), our prime customer.  We do the city of Atlanta, Fulton County, State of Georgia, mostly public sector governmental units.
Speaker 2: And so you do the technical--let me understand, what it is that you do exactly?
Speaker 1: Well, we're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For those comp--for those agencies?
Speaker 1: --we, are today, I mean, what we were when we got started we would take any kind of job that we could get.  But right now we are what is called a systems integration firm.  Which is a general contractor and that is that you put together the computing systems, you do the software, you do the hardware, you get them all integrated, you do the burns, the data transfers and what is the most lucrative part of these contracts is what is called maintenance, I mean, once a new system is up then most governmental units will outsource that or contract with a outside vendor to maintain the data, maintain the system so if it goes down within four hours or twenty-four hours depending on what the contract is they call one person and we are responsible for the hardware, the software, for the telecommunications etcetera, so we really act as a, a general contractor or what is called a systems integration firm for computing an, an, an, and data and information.
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's what you do now?
Speaker 1: Yes, an, an and--(simultaneous--)
Speaker 2: --but you started off?
Speaker 1: We started off just as management consulting an, and once again, I want to mention this that the name the Dobbs Corporation again, was for my grandfather, John Wesley Dobbs, whom I just had the highest admiration for and had a big impact on my life and so, we have incorporated his name into the business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 103284
Speaker 1: So you get married again?
Speaker 2: I get married again, when I, when I come back to Atlanta [Georgia], you know, I'm, I'm, I'm single and Atlanta had a lot of lovely, (laughter) lovely ladies and so in 1986 I married my present wife whose name is Ressie, R-E-S-S-I-E, Guy and she at that time is working for Delta Airlines.  She was from North Carolina; she was from Greensboro and a real southern, gracious, Christian woman.  And so we have now been married twenty-one, twenty-one years and we have one daughter from that marriage, whose name is Jeanetta, J-E-A-N-E-T-T-A, who's age fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 103285
Speaker 1: And do you once again get involved in life insurance?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mr. Hill, Jesse Hill, who I met during the--Maynard Ja[ckson]--you know, I keep relationships, I keep my relationships up with him and so in the mid '90s [1990s] he is expanding the board of the Atlanta Life Insurance Company because they need what they--what is called outside directors.  And I am named one of the outside directors and one of the ironies here is that early on, right after I finished the Wharton School [of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my, my father [William Clement, Sr.] who, was pushing me (laughter) towards life insurance encouraged me to get my, what is called my CLU designation, this is the highest professional designation that you can get in life insurance is Chartered Life Underwriter.  He was also a Chartered Life Underwriter and I got credit for the years that I sold insurance when I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], plus I passed all five exams right out of Wharton, so I had the CLU designation and had never used it, and so when Mr. Hill called and he didn't know about it because I had never used it, I mean, it was an extra, because I was one of the few people that, you know, knew about life insurance.  And so I, I had been a director of, of Atlanta Life since 1993 and in the year 2001 following Greg Baranco, you mentioned Mr. Baranco earlier, Greg was the chair prior to that and I was vice-chair and then when he left, he wanted to devote most of the time to the banking merger, I became the chairman of the Atlanta Life, and so even though I didn't go back to North Carolina, I, I, I was the third generation in my family to be involved in a life insurance company and this has been one of the great experiences--because in addition to Citizens Trust Bank, which was a historically black institution and I was involved in the transformation there--I'm involved now at a much higher level in the transformation of Atlanta Life because we were selling life insurance contracts, what they call home service contracts through debit agents, people who walk up to your home and collect your pennies.  And that kind of business was just absolutely going away and so we had to find a new niche to kind of make over Atlanta Life and so Atlanta Life today is changed its name to Atlanta Life Financial Group.  Which was one of the projects that I was involved in and we now have three business units, we have a life insurance company which is the old Atlanta Life Insurance Company, we have a registered investment advisor, which is five years old, it has a billion dollars of assets under management, they manage pension funds and monies from Metropolitan Life and City of Atlanta, firefighters and, and police department and money, you know, money like that.  And then last December, Atlanta Life acquired Jackson Securities, which was Mr. [Maynard] Jackson's investment banking firm, and he actually had thought of that concept or idea back in 2002 or 2003 before his un, untimely demise.
Speaker 1: You're talking about Maynard Jackson?
Speaker 2: Maynard Jackson, that's correct.  And so with his wife, [HM] Valerie [Richardson Jackson] and the people that will run it, we thought it was in the best interest to do the merger this year.  Atlanta Life put some money in it, gave it some additional capital.  And so that's now the third component of it and it's probably the only institution like that in the country now that has a investment banking firm, a registered investment advisor and a life insurance company to, I think, pave the way for it being viable for another 100 years.  Atlanta Life celebrated its 100th anniversary in the year 2005.  And so now we're in the second century with a makeover, with a transformation and I think the chances for being viable again, you know, very, very, very good.
Speaker 1: How much is that company [Atlanta Life Financial Group] holding in assets?
Speaker 2: Well, in different units, like in the life insurance company, it's like 16 million dollars of insurance enforced, in the registered investment advisor there's a billion dollars under management.  I mean these are not your funds that you're managing, but that's the way that they are measured.  And then in investment banking business, [Maynard] Jackson was the fourth highest ranked investment banker by Black Enterprise Magazine.  So, each of these niches, you know, are used to quantify a measure, but I think by having all of them in the same entity now that we can help cross sell products and services and that it will be a matter of time before we'll be number one in each of those, each of those particular categories.
Story_ID: 103286
Speaker 1: So I, I'm very pleased about that, we changed the board and out of this experience Denise, came another opportunity for me and that is corporations, especially public companies now have active outside directors and I was--had an opportunity to become an outside director of a publicly traded company, it's traded on the NASDAQ, it's called the Radiant Systems [Inc.].  And part of the reason I was attracted to them is that I had been on the Atlanta Life [Insurance] Board, in fact had been the chair had been involved in issues around governance and compliance and setting strategy and, you know, had my entrepreneurial twenty-five year track record with DOBBS, RAM & Company, so now, I've completed my third year and I see the next chapter of my life really being a full-time outside director.  And I'd like to do that on, on a full-time basis, also work with my church and also to be a mentor through the Atlanta Business League, and through another organization called, Opportunity Funding [Corporation] to make sure that, that young people that are coming along are, are encouraged to become entrepreneurs and to share with them experiences that we've had and where to go to get money, where to get capitol, how to capitalize a company etcetera, I mean, because I think that that's my mission, is to help increase the number and the size of larger, viable minority business enterprises.
Speaker 2: Okay, talk to me a little bit more about Radiant Systems and the appointment. Explain to me a little bit more about what this company, what it does?
Speaker 1: Well, Radiant Systems sells, what is called end-to-end solutions to retail establishments and hospitality establishments.  They developed asoftware, they also developed a hardware for systems that have replaced old cash registers.  You remember when you'd go a retail outlet or--Chick--well--Chick-fil-A is a customer of Radiant, they do the cash register, they do what they call point-of-sale where they capture all of the information when you order your Chick-fil-A or whatever it is that you're ordering and also to keep up with the inventory.  Now everything is computerized, and Radiant is one of the few companies in Atlanta that is, you know, once again called a publicly traded company and they're traded on the NASDAQ.  And it also blended in with my experience of having worked for two member firms of the New York Stock Exchange, once again.  But we, we have five, five directors--six directors and four of us are what is called outside directors and it's, it's, you know, fairly prestigious to, to be considered an outside director, but they do business all over the world, I mean, they have Chick-fil-A, they do business with Burger King, and then last year--two years ago they acquired a company in, in, in what is called retail and so they trying to make a footprint now, once again, in retail doing the same thing they did in hospitality.
Story_ID: 103287
Speaker 1: Okay. And Atlanta Life [Financial Group] operates in different states also?
Speaker 2: Sixteen, sixteen states, that was, that was the, the scope of the insurance company--the registered investment advisor and the investment broker, you know, work all over the country.  So, you know, we, we, we, are a national--we have a national footprint with Atlanta Life now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 103288
Speaker 1: And you talk about your church, what church do you attend?
Speaker 2: I, I'm a member of Antioch Baptist Church North. I've been a member there over twenty years--Reverend Cameron Alexander.  And they have a ministry called Antioch Urban Ministries where they have housed or put everything around housing, clothes, food, substance abuse programs, women who've been domestically abused.  And we actually provide housing and almost act as a half-way house in terms of helping people get back on track.  Obviously the spiritual counseling is a, is an, integral part of it, but, I mean, it, it, just makes a real difference in the lives of real, real people.  And, and quite often they'll come up and testify about how the church has made a, a difference in their lives. And then physically, the church is located in, in a urban neighborhood right across the street from the Herndon Homes, which is a, you know, is a project.  And it has a lot of the challenges that you find in any urban projects with drugs and things like that, but church is right across the street and we have a, facility there where people can come for counseling and assistance and is usually, is a, is a, is a, is a gateway to these programs that are housed under the Antioch Urban Ministries.
Story_ID: 103289
Speaker 1: Now, other organizations, charter member of the 100 Black Men?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you worked with Mr. [HM Nathaniel] Goldston?
Speaker 2: Yes, Nate Goldston was the founder.  He was the one that called the first meeting.  I just saw him last night, we were at a reception for [HM] Barack Obama and Nate was there.  And, we are no longer active, I mean, they've got another group that's running it, but I was a charter member of the 100 Black Men.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about other organizations that you belong to?
Speaker 2: Well, I am still involved in the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation.  Mr. Jackson was, other than my parents, probably had as great a influence on me as anyone.  And when he passed in 2003, I, I became the executor of his estate.  And that job, you know, to me was beyond just his businesses, it also involved this, you know, Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation.  I'd been an original director when he founded it back in 1992.  But what his vision was that he was going to take ten to fifteen kids twice a month and teach 'em salesmanship, teach 'em self-esteem, teach 'em black history and that over a period of time the number of kids that went through the program would, would, would, would, produce college graduates and they would come back and help the new kids.  So, this is our thirteenth class.  Fellow by the name of John Holly, who's a retired military colonel, is the president.  But I, I, I worked very, very, closely with him, Mrs. [HM Valerie Richardson] Jackson is now the chair of the board.  And he has underneath him, now four full-time volunteers, two of them were from the first class and two from the second class who've come back and they are now working with kids from backgrounds where there are social and economic challenges and you'd be surprised at how well these kids--I mean, we've got one medical doctor, we've got two or three that have gone on to the ministry.  We've got others that have gone on to be successful so, it's just rewarding, I mean, it's, it's  not a lot, there are only 200 kids who have graduated over the last--and that's not enough to make a big dent, but at least you have changed those lives.  And, you know, who knows, they're, they're touching other people.  He thought it was like throwing a pebble in a brook.  He used to use that analogy where you have the waves going out and the effects, he thinks it-- this is a legacy that--way to keep his name, keep his name alive.
Speaker 1: How are the youth selected for this program?
Speaker 2: Well they have to apply--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Holly actually goes out and interviews them along with their parents because you have to make a commitment.  These classes are on Saturday and then some of the programs are on during the summer.  They got to New York and to the--visit a New York Stock Exchange.  And so the parents have to be committed as well as the kids because they have to get there at 8 o'clock on Saturday mornings which is their non-school day.
Speaker 1: And what age group?
Speaker 2: These are all juniors.
Speaker 1: Juniors in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school.  And we are very instrumental in getting them college loans and, and scholarships etcetera.  And, and the kids keep in touch with John, I have two or three that keep in touch with me.  They primarily keep in touch with John Holly but I have two or three one of whom I, I, I, got help to get into Morehouse [College, Atlanta, University].  There was another one that's gone on now to, to graduate school so it's just, you know, it's just gratifying to, you know, it's almost like a mentoring, you know, a mentoring project.
Story_ID: 103290
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the other project that I'm very involved in that, in fact, is going to be in Atlanta [Georgia], is a project that Jesse Hill started (laughter).  I'm still involved with Mr. Hill.  But, seven years ago he started what is called a business competition plan under a for-profit company called, Opportunity Funding Corporation, and, and, we have now twenty-three historical black colleges and universities that give an MBA degree and they come to Atlanta for a weekend in April, it will be the second weekend in April this year, and the students present a business plan for starting a business.  And they do this at, at the majority schools and they've been going much longer but they've had an actual launch.  That is out of the business plan there has been an actual business that has been started and it's up and running and that's what our goal is, our vision is to actually have a launch.  We, we have not had one to date, but each year the business plans become more substantive, more in-depth and I, I just think it's a matter of time before you'll see a, a student become an entrepreneur as a result of writing his business plan and telling in detail how he's going to develop his strategy, his marketing strategy, his, his business management team and the product and, and actually get the business up and running.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you are involved--how are you involved with that are you the person--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I am on the board.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --I , I am on the board of Opportunity Funding Corporation and I am the chairman, the board person who is the committee chair of what is called the OFC Venture Challenge Campaign--competition.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.   And Friends of Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a fundraising group for Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and it's just a mechanism raising money and it's discretionary capital for the school to use either for athletics or for scholarships or whatever it is.  We just finished up a very successful campaign, [HM] Dr. Walter Massey, who's retiring this year, but it was $128 Million dollars, the largest capital fund campaign in the history of--in Morehouse.  And I think Walter, after he (laughter) raised it, then he decided he was going to retire.  He said he was going to go out on top and Morehouse is in the process now of selecting a new, a brand new president who will come in for next year's academic year.
Speaker 1: And, let's see, the Atlanta Project?
Speaker 2: That was the Jimmy Carter project.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah that project is come and gone, it's not, it's not active anymore.
Story_ID: 103291
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you talked about being the executor for Maynard [Jackson]'s estate and your mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] and father [William Clement] both pass away also, did you want to talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the executor of their estates, both of their estates.  My father, you know, talked that out among the children, everybody knew ahead of time.  It was not a secret, he shared the will and it was pretty well laid out.  In Maynard's case, it was unexpected, untimely and his affairs were not as buttoned up.  And so has been much more intense and extensive and that's, that's about all I want to say about that.
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, actually I just wanted to document the dates of your parents passing.
Speaker 2: Well my mother passed in 1998, March 23rd and my father passed in 2001, right before his birthday which would have been the later part of April.  He was eighty-eight and my mother was nine--eighty and he was eighty-eight.
Story_ID: 103292
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that we have not spoken--(simultaneous)--(laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --about that you would like to speak about--speak too?
Speaker 2: I mean I think we've hit all the highlights.  But you know, it, it, it, it really, you know, my mind still revolves around the three B's, you know, the book, education, the ballot, politics, being involved.  My mother [Josephine Dobbs Clement] was an elected official.  Maynard [Jackson] was an elected official.  I have a cousin on my other side who is the mayor pro tempore of Durham [North Carolina].  His name is Arthur John Howard Clement IV.  He is the--you know I talked about my original grandfa--great grandfather's name was Arthur John Howard Clement, who went to Biddle, well this is, you know--and he's, he's a politician.  And then business, you know, the buck, and I, I think once again, that's, in my mind the next big challenge--the next big hurdle is to, is to make sure that, you know, that we achieve social and economic parity and that was the standard that the [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] set when he said that economic injustice was the evil twin of social injustice.  And so we've got to work on making sure that we close the gap between net worth and--in, in our community, compared to net worth in the majority community.
Story_ID: 102981
Speaker 1: So now, you have grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Well, this is a, this is another phase that is brand new.  My daughter [Anika Clement Wharton] named our, our first grandchild after her mother and her name is Patricia Holmes Wharton and that is a, is a family name.  She's three now and she'll be four in, in July 16th.  And it's just a, you know, just a special thrill there.  And then last year she gave birth to a son and she named him Alexander, his first name is Alexander which goes all the way back to Rufus Alexander, William Alexander, William Alexander Jr. and she often heard me say that if I had a son I would've named him Alexander.  I wouldn't have named him the third, but I would have named him Alexander and so it was--you know I, I thought that that was very, very moving.  So he's named Alexander Steven, after his father, Wharton; and he'll be one.  And, and so I hope that if, if, if they and their offsprings get a chance to watch this that they know that I was thinking about them at that time and sharing this oral history, which hopefully they will find useful and beneficial.
Story_ID: 102982
Speaker 1: Okay, well, speaking about the future generations, since this information is going to be made available to, not only your grandchildren, but to people, generations to come, what one message would you want to send to the future generations?  What do you want to tell them?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I, think the challenge for us as people of color is to have each generation do better than their parents and their forefathers.  And I think that that's the measure for me is that I want both of my daughters to do better than I did in terms of education, in terms of success in whatever field they go into.  It doesn't have to be business; in fact, my younger daughter is not interested in business.  My older daughter is, she's a CPA and a, and a MBA from the Wharton School [of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and she's in corporate America doing very, very well going and doing things that I, didn't, didn't even think about.  So, for me, I'd like to see each generation do better, and also I'd like for us to focus on intergenerational wealth.  That is, to be able to pass on from each generation to the next so that we all don't start from zero and that way we're, we are increasing the ability of having nuclear families, of having both the father and the mother in the home.  And, just to help us as, as, as, as a race and just help the country as general.  Of having something to start with when you actually are getting married or starting out in business.
Story_ID: 102983
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for a person starting out in business?  What's, what's three things that should stay in their mind?
Speaker 2: Well I think it's the three E's: I think it's education, experience and exposure.  I mean you should try to get as much of that as you can.  Education alone is not enough to, in my opinion, to just start out in a business.  I mean you need to have some exposure; you need to have some experience and education.  So, we're looking at a good mix there.  If I was starting to open a business again I would try to do an acquisition, and LBO or some type of merger an, an acquisition where you would build on a base where there was some existing customer base and to build on that as opposed to having start from ground zero again.  And I would look to team with people that had skills that are different from yours because one person, this is a team sport when you're running a business, and one person doesn't have it all.  And I've just found in twenty-five years that if you have a team and everybody brings something to the table and the sum of the parts is greater than the whole.
Story_ID: 102984
Speaker 1: What legacy do you want to leave behind?  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I'd like for my legacy to be several things, one is that I, I think I moved a, a level higher than my father [William Clement, Sr.].  I think that side of the family, the Clement side was more entrepreneurial, I think the Dobbs side of the family was definitely more civic-oriented, community and, and political and I've tried to incorporate that in my life to have a, a balance and to be remembered as a person who did good and did well.  And that I was a model as, as an entrepreneur and an inspiration for those yet to come.
Story_ID: 102985
Speaker 1: Okay.  The African American community, if you could just think about, about the African American community and tell me what your hopes and dreams are for the African amunity--community in the future years to come.  What, what do you hope will happen for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well part of it was embodied last night when I took my fifteen-year-old daughter with me to go to a fundraising reception for [HM] Senator Barack Obama.  Here was a young forty-five-year-old African American who has come to embody the dreams and aspirations, I think, of our community to run for the highest elected office in the country.  And even though he is not the first, and I don't want to make the same mistake Senator [Joe] Biden made, but he is certainly one who has a very, very reasonable chance to get elected to the highest office in this country and that just says many, many things about where we have come from.  The other, of course, is my same thing about developing larger more viable businesses where we control our own fate, that we create jobs, we creating wealth that we're independent and that we can just be an entrepreneurial class, and to finally begin to meld in and to not be identified as a black person but just to be an American.  And I think Senator Obama--I read his book called the, "The Audacity of Hope," and it just struck me that he, you know, views America in a different prism.  He grew up in a different era than I did and he just looks at it as a land of opportunity.  And he looks at people as people and not, you know, black, white or Italian, he is--and last night's crowd just reflected it, I mean, he--it was about half and half.  And he, I think, just embodies the next generation of elected official who shows what can be done when given the opportunity in this country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102986
Speaker 1: Have we spoken about everything you'd like to, (laughter) speak about?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you think back over your life, is there anything that you would change or anything that you regret?
Speaker 2: Well, I believe, you know, that God has a, has a plan for all of us and that some things are not beyond our control and planning that we're all just part of a bigger picture and that we have a purpose.  Just like the book that was written a couple of years ago, "The Purpose Driven Life," that, you know, you really want to find out what God's purpose is for you in this life and to work within that confines and make a contribution as you pass this way and let it be said when you leave that you did pass this way and that you made a positive impact on society and your community and especially your family.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you haven't done that you want to do?  Is there any place that you haven't been that you would like to go?
Speaker 2: Well, In terms of travel I have not been to Africa, I have not been to the Far East.  I've been to the other continents; I have not been to Australia.  In terms of jobs, I would have liked to have been the CEO of General Motors (laughter), or Microsoft, I would have liked to had a larger platform to operate on.  But those opportunities were not there in, in, in the '60s [1960s].  But looking back on it as I did in preparation for this interview I, I, I think that I achieved one milestone, major milestone and that is I look at the evolution of my families on both sides that, that I went one notch beyond and I think that if each generation can do that individually that collectively we will be a stronger community and a stronger nation.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I want to thank you for taking the time to give us your story.  You know that it will be a inspiration to the generations to come
Speaker 2: Well I've really enjoyed it, I mean it's probably been more beneficial to me to even put all of this together and think about it ahead of time and kind of weave it into a story and, you know, I thank you and HistoryMakers for allowing me the privilege of being cataloged and to have this preserved for generations to come.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 102987
Speaker 1: Picture of Ronald McCrae who is my partner and is the RAM in DOBBS, RAM & Company.  I am on the left and this was on the celebration of our 25th year in business, which was in 2006.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Now we should be able to roll through on these.
Speaker 1: I can easily remember that one, that's February 14, 1986 when I married my wife, whose name is Ressie Guy [R. Ressie Guy-Clement] and that was taken here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: [OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: This is a picture with the Honorable Shirley Franklin who is the first female, black or white, to be elected Mayor of Atlanta.  It was taken at a reception given by the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter, whose name is Anika [Clement Wharton] and her husband, Steve and my two grandchildren, Patricia Holmes Wharton and Alexander Steven Wharton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Did she go to Wharton when she was a Wharton [School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or afterwards? (laughter)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: She was not married at the time, yes.
Speaker 2: That would have been something.
Speaker 1: That would have been too much, yes.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife Ressie and our fifteen-year-old daughter, daughter Jeanetta, who is a 9th grader at Whitfield Academy.  This was taken at the Atlanta Life Insurance Company during the 100th Centennial Celebration in 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife Reesie and me at a formal dance.  I can't remember the year or the occasion, but, that's one of my favorite photos of her.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Tilt it forward just a little, just like you did with that other one.  Good, hold steady, got it, okay next.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my paternal ant, paternal grandparents and also my mother and father, but seated left to right is John Wesley Dobbs.  Seated to his left is my grandmother Irene Thompson Dobbs.  Seated to her left is Kathleen Ophelia Clement, and seated to her left is my paternal Grandfather, Arthur John Howard Clement.  At the top, from left to right is my mother, Josephine Dobbs Clement and my father, William Alexander Clement Sr.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right then.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and father and my two brothers and three sisters. Starting clockwise at the bottom is my father, me, Jody, my youngest sister, my brother Wesley, Wesley Dobbs Clement, my brother Arthur John Howard Clement, [HM] Alexine Clement Jackson, Kathleen Clement Johnson and then my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do that tilt for me, Denise, (unclear) good, okay, next.  Okay, this picture?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Maynard Jackson and myself.  This was taken while I was in Washington [D.C.]; in fact, it was taken at the U.S. Small Business Administration.  Maynard was the incumbent Mayor and this picture was probably taken in 1978 or 1979.  He was in Washington and came by to say hello.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Maynard Jackson, [HM] Valerie Jackson.  The gentleman sitting at the table is Buck Riddle, myself.  And this may have been a fundraiser for Maynard during one of his campaigns.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of an award that I was receiving for the Atlanta--from the Atlanta Tribune into their entrepreneurial hall of fame.  The gentleman at the far left, who is 6'8, is Magic--Earvin Magic Johnson.  Who is the NBA superstar and the gentleman to the far right is my mentor and, a gentleman that great, greatly influenced my life is Jesse Hill, Jr. who's the president--the president and CEO of Atlanta Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture, there are several gentlemen in the background, but the gentlemen at the forefront is [HM] Mayor Andrew Young and I am standing there to his left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a very, very special picture this was taken in the oval office in the White House.  I'm shaking hands with, then President, Jimmy Carter.  And the gentleman hidden in the background is my administrator, U.S. Small Business Administration, A. Vernon Weaver.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do that magic tilt again, Denise.  Just a little more, good, got it.
Speaker 2: Denise has to work, you're making her work.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA voice):  This is her Vanna White moment here--(simultaneous)--(laughter)
Speaker 2: This, this is the board of the Atlanta Life Financial Group, which appeared in the annual report from left to right is Felker Ward, Jesse Spikes, Ron Brown [HM Ronald Brown] who you're going to interview tomorrow he's the president CEO, M. Alexis--[HM] M. Alexis Scott, Egbert Perry. Ike Harris, [HM] Dr. Edward Irons, myself and Roosevelt Giles.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is the book that talks about your family right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  This is a book written by Gary Pomerantz called, "Where Peachtree Meets Sweet Auburn" and he profiles two Atlanta families.  The Ivan Allen family, which produced one Mayor, Ivan Allen Jr. and the Dobbs family which produced the first African Amer--African American Mayor, Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 1: We gotta (Unclear) I didn't--this one was underneath the other ones.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) stick it in there, we'll get it
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my parents, Josephine and Bill Clement.
