Story_ID: 196403
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Nick Cave.  N-I-C-K, C-A-V-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Eugene.  E-U-G-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a nickname or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  Nick.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now Cave is an interesting name.  Do you know the origin of that at all?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't actually know the origin of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And a--an artist?
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.  An artist too, right?
Speaker 2: And a full-time artist. I do a lot of performance work and also I'm a fashion designer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 2-4-59 [February 4, 1959].  Place of birth is Fulton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 22nd, '04 [2004].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently in my living space, 2251 South Michigan [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 196404
Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth there are like five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that only deserve a short answer.  So we'll start with those.  The first one is, sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is soft shell crabs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.  And last, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is it no, or is it the answer no?
Speaker 2: It's no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right (laughter).
Story_ID: 196405
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your family history and I wanna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Cave] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Sharron Kelly, S-H-A-R-R-O-N, K-E-L-L-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Jefferson City, Missouri.  Her date of birth okay let's see, she's sixty-five right now so that's twenty years--
Speaker 1: That's 1939.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Sounds good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And okay, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace 'em?
Speaker 2: I really oh God, I can go as far back as my great-grandfather, who was a painter and poet.  And--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I really don't remember his name in terms of Papa, that's the only name that I was ever told.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I haven't really sort of investigated that much any further in terms of that's what I knew and that sort of what I sort of embraced as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he was a painter and a poet?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did he do that full-time or did, did he do that part-time or?
Speaker 2: He, that's all I knew that he did.  So I wasn't really aware whether or not he worked as a kid as I was growing up probably about eight he had passed away so, but from my experience it was this amazing sort of man that had this incredible sort of spirit and you know I was told by my grandmother who's still alive today.  My grandparents are that I had Papa's, I have Papa's soul so you know to me that was sort of the, the sort of protective sort of coating that I've sort of that's been present in my life in terms of me moving forward with my own sort of ambitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you found inspiration in the fact that your grand--great-grandfather was an artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he also was someone that sort of brought this sort of sense of clarity to the family.  And those are things that I sort of have and that's sort of the way in which I sort of live my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Any, any other any stories or any other personalities from your mother's side of the family that you can tell us about?
Speaker 2: She comes from a family of thirteen.  My grandmother is an amazing seamstress and you know finding just recently I just found just recognized that she basically design and made all of the costumes for, for theater groups when the kids were growing up, her kids were growing up.  So you know she, there was this sort of an innate sort of drafting ability that she had in reference to garment and, and, and costume that I wasn't really aware of and now that I do that now that sort of these are sort of things that are interesting in terms of me linking the dots together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so she actually designed costumes for theatrical productions?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For?
Speaker 2: For the kids in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For the entire community not just for her children, but for the entire community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then also my grandparents, my grandmothers both were raised and her other family which were these white--this white family.  So they never were really present during the day.  And yet so it was this whole other sort of dynamics and sort of through life that they sort of lived and sort of which was interesting too--to for them to have that sort of ability to be that strong to raise one family and then come home and have to raise their own.
Speaker 1: So they actually were able to come home on every night?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know sometimes there, there was a time when black women could not even come home you know they had to--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --only see their kids on the weekend.
Speaker 2: Right.  I know they came home every night.
Story_ID: 196406
Speaker 1: Anything else?
Speaker 2: You know a very religious sort of upbringing.  Raised Methodist.  And that sort of was the--a very sort of important part of my existence.  And--
Speaker 1: Is this, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] or the, or the?
Speaker 2: C.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so you know it was just sort of raised in this sort of very unconditional sort of family structure.  There was you know being raised with you know thirteen aunts and uncles.  And but there was just an extraordinary camaraderie of, of love and unconditional love that I can't even explain and it's still that way today.  So--
Speaker 1: Did you lot--I supposed you had a lot of cousins on that [maternal] side?
Speaker 2: Oh I've got cousins, cousins, cousins.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did your mother [Sharron Kelly] talk about growing up at all to you?  Did you know very much about how she grew up and, and what she was interested in?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up she went to the university of, of Lincoln University in Jefferson City [Missouri].  She got--and so she grew up raising eight boys.  She was the mother of eight boys.  Two have now since passed.  And she was an amazing sort of mother sort of father figure.  My father [John Cave] was not really present in my life.  And so she was able to sort of raise these, and she had all boys so was able to raise this sort of family in a very sort of constructive way.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a, a receptionist at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri].  And that's what she did and raised her kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Did she have any stories about college or, or growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I think what she shared with, with her kids the most was, was just sort of believing in yourself and, and being sort of supportive and being behind us regardless what choices we make for our lives and just sort of again this sort of unconditional sort of love that I don't think a lot of people sort of received.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she really was just sort of this amazing force behind what my beliefs were as a creative person.  You know just you know with this extraordinary sort of encouragement to just you know continue to pursue what your dreams are.  And I think she sort of did that because perhaps she sort of gave up those dreams and, and, and ambitions to raise her kids.  So it was a, a way for her to sort of to, for a better word, hand over the torch in order for us to sort of lead in her sort of down this pathway that she wasn't able to do.
Story_ID: 196407
Speaker 1: Okay now you've got seven brothers--
Speaker 2: I have six now.
Speaker 1: --or had--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay yes, but you had there were like eight of you originally.  So you have six now.  Can you give us their names and--tell us where you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're all one year apart.  There's Jackie Cave, there's Timothy Cave, Don Cave, Kip Cave, and Stacy [Cave], Kelly [Cave] and then myself and I was second to the oldest.
Speaker 1: Oh you're second to the oldest okay.  All right.  So you're the second child?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I was really the third, her first child died--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --his name was William [Cave].
Story_ID: 196408
Speaker 1: On your father's side, you said--do you know very much about his side of the family at all?
Speaker 2: Well my father's side of the family, my father was unemployed.  He was the only child.
Speaker 1: What was his name?  I'm sorry.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name is John Cave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: John was two years older than my mom [Sharron Kelly] so what does that make him?
Speaker 1: Okay so that makes him--
Speaker 2: Thirty-seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Thirty-seven.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Was, was he born in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 1: He was born in Fulton, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: And he's deceased.
Speaker 2: --all right.  When did he die?
Speaker 1: And he died in '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 1: Just recently actually the last couple of years I was there visiting my grandparents and asked them where did they get their last name, which is Navens [ph.], Ernest [ph.] and Roseman [ph.] Navens.  And they told me that it was the name that was given to their great-grandparents as slaves.  It was the slave owners' actual names and so that's how they--the name Navens came about.
Speaker 2: Now these are your, your father's parents?
Speaker 1: My father's parents' parents.
Speaker 2: Oh so your great, great?
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So they were Navens?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And again which was interesting to me because I never even knew that, that was a part of my sort of history.  So it was interesting sort of knowing that and sort of like all of a sudden like thinking differently about, about you know just their sort of again that sort of inner strength to sort of create that sort of pathway to sort of you know from that build up on that as a, as a platform so it was interesting sort of knowing this sort of information in terms of where I am with my life today.
Story_ID: 196409
Speaker 1: My grandfather worked at a brick plant.  My grandmother she was head of University of Northeast State Hospital [ph.].  She was head of maintenance there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just sort of really sort of down to earth sort of you know working sort of citizens.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean they, I mean she, and grandmother is about 4'6".  She's sort of like this major monarchy within the family which is on both sides of the family but you know she's extremely a strong woman and, and basically still runs the town.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So she just has these stories that are outrageous but they're like amazing and, and she's amazing just her dynamic sort of sensibility is just sort of wonderful to sort of experience and to see.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I, I don't know, it seem like everybody's great-grandmother is short for some reason.  (Laughter)  I don't know, I don't know I guess (simultaneous) there's some tall ones back there.  But it seems like a lot of them are very short.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: She was she was a force huh?
Speaker 1: Right.  I mean just amazing.  She's still amazing today I mean.  She's just intense.  And so you know to me that is sort of like this sort of in word sort of, sort of dynamics that I feel that her that sort of empowers sort of me to be to sort of gravitate toward that in some form or another.
Speaker 2: Now you said she was a good storyteller, teller and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yes, she's kind of amazing.
Speaker 2: Kind of a dominating kind of force but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --do you remember any of her stories that you can tell?
Speaker 1: Yeah I don't know if there are stories I wanna sort of get into.  They were pretty sort of intense.
Speaker 2: Was there any one of the story or can you, or can you maybe give us the Disney version of one of those stories?  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: You know, well you know it's--I think I learned more about my father [John Cave] through my grandparents.  Why he was the way that he was and then was able to sort of bring closure to you know his death and, and him not sort of being able to be this sort of father figure in my life.  And you know being raised as the only child and really sort of not being given the tools to sort of fit into society sort of made me understand him a lot better.
Story_ID: 196410
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Sharron Kelly and John Cave] met?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure how they actually met.  I never even asked my mother that.  I don't know.  I don't know if I've ever been interested or I, or I've always sort of felt that that was sort of territory that I really didn't sort of cross. I'm sure I can.  I just never felt the, the need at this point in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well go on you were telling us about his personality.
Speaker 2: And so I think you know being able to sort of learn about him and though why he was the way that he was, you know made me sort of understand him a lot better and understand his sort of disposition in terms of being this sort of father figure for the children.  And so.
Speaker 1: Okay now.  Okay I'm just trying to figure out now your father was a, he was, was, was he around some of the time when you?
Speaker 2: He was around some of the time.  The majority of the time he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Did he live with you all?
Speaker 2: Some of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of the time he didn't.  Yeah.  I really didn't call him dad.  I called him John as well as all of my other brothers did as well.  And I guess the reason why he just wasn't--we didn't know what role he played in our lives so we really didn't sort of build any sort of bond with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think our father figures for most of my brothers and myself were my grandfathers and my uncles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they did provide some sort of (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, I mean being raised you know around there's thirteen aunts and uncles I mean that really was the sort of community that sort of raised--helped to raise us as opposed to our mother.
Speaker 1: And they were all in the same town of Missouri?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Around the same place?  And you were raised in what, what town?
Speaker 2: I was raised in most of the part of my life I was raised in Columbia, Missouri, through my sort of early teens and through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were raised in Columbia, Missouri and you have this huge extended family there.
Story_ID: 196411
Speaker 1: What was your first memory?
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of anything, I guess.
Speaker 2: I think the thing that I think about a lot right now and it's just this sort of sense of community and, and when we all sort of get together and, and sort of, sort of celebrate this sort of reunion type of, of, of, of connection so it's when you know for me it's like the pig roast.  You know that my grandfather on my father's [John Cave] side they sort of raised pigs and, and that's how they sort of raised money.  My great, great-grandfathers they had a pig farm and, and so that was always part of my upbringing.  And so we would have these amazing pig roasts and you know.   I think that's when I really started to sort of you know look at dance differently because that we would have these sort of little dance contests and you know there was money involved and so--
Speaker 1: Well, what--
Speaker 2: --that was my sort of first time sort of looking at it on a competitive level.
Speaker 1: --what, what was the music?
Speaker 2: Just sort of soul music that was you know happening back then rhythm and blues [R&B] so.  And so that was really sort of like this amazing sort of wonderful sort of experience for me that I sort of longed to sort of stay connected to.
Speaker 1: So you would compete with your cousins?
Speaker 2: Cousins, brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so you know and but at the same time I, I was always involved in the arts.  I was always doing art.  I was always in art school or taking art classes and you know continuing to be encouraged by grandparents, mother [Sharron Kelly], relatives.
Story_ID: 196412
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me like, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I think the sights were like going to the farm.  My grandparents' farm and sitting in the back of the truck.  And you know this sort of sense of innocence as a kid.  And you know being complacent.  Being there and just sort of being around people that just sort of loved you unconditionally.  Smells would be like you know my grandmother on my mother's [Sharron Kelly] side you know cooking and baking in the kitchen.  I mean she would like be--she was like one of the top sort of she would win these amazing awards at the state fairs for her baked, baked goods.  So it's you know that was sort of like this sort of again this sort of platform that was a nurturing sort of environment that was--you know it sort of opened my eyes up in terms of you know again these sort of very sort of subtle sort of conditions that were based around product that were based around some sort of creativity being honored and, and rewarded for these goods and things of that sorts, sort of taught me a lot about you know this sort of competitive sort of world.  Being raised with seven brothers I mean you know we could have had--we created you know basketball teams.  I mean so it was always around me.  You know I had an uncle that played pro football.  You know so it's--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: --Tony Galbreath.  He played for the [New Orleans] Saints as well as [New York] Giants.  And so and again just sort of watching my grandparents sort of collect all of this sort of data about his career and watching them put together these amazing sort of scrapbooks of this sort of timetable of his sort of history was again just sort of for me was this amazing sort of sense of support and respect for you know the work that the kids did.
Story_ID: 196413
Speaker 1: Now what did your neighborhood look like?  Did you live in a, was it an all-black neighborhood or mixed neighborhood?  Or was it?
Speaker 2: I lived in an all-black neighborhood from when I was a young boy 'til thirteen when we moved to Columbia [Missouri].  But as a young kid we lived in the projects in, in Fulton, Missouri.  And then when we moved to Columbia, that's when we then moved into our first house.  And but we were primarily still living in black neighborhood when I moved to Columbia but then at the age of seventeen when I--eighteen when I went off to college my mother [Sharron Kelly] had moved in a primarily white neighborhood.  And so and yeah so it was but you know my education was pretty diverse.  It was sort of a mixed sort of school.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were growing up and, you had all brothers and what kind of a kid were, were you?  What did you like to do?  I know you like you say, say you liked art?
Speaker 2: You know I played sports you know we're on basketball, baseball teams.  But I think I was pretty, I was pretty, I was a pretty good kid.  You know I didn't sort of--I wasn't rebellious I was really sort of; I was literally the only child that was completely the opposite of all my other brothers.  They sort of really sort of sent my mother through a lot of stuff.  I sort of was very sort of quiet, complacent.  Just had a different type of spirit altogether.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't the troublemaker of the family?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not at all--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so you know it was yeah I just had a different type of spirit.
Speaker 1: Did you read a lot?
Speaker 2: I would read a lot.  I would, I was taking art classes in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] when I was like sixteen years old.  So you know I was exposed to that side of, of, of you know my creativity that it was interested in that was interested in dance at that time.  So and I was just encouraged to, to pursue that.  So I was always sort of doing that but I was also doing that in a very sort of I would think a very sort of underground way.  It's like I really didn't share that a lot with what was going on within the neighborhood in terms of the kids in the neighborhood.  They--it was nothing I don't think that they would understand.
Story_ID: 196414
Speaker 1: You said you read a lot.  What kind of books did you read?  Or what do you like to read?
Speaker 2: Then I think as a kid I was--I think what I was reading the most were sort of short sort of novels that were--reading a lot about doing a lot art history reading.  About just artists and how artists work.  Yeah that's what I was really sort of reading.
Speaker 1: Did you like comic books when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know like--
Speaker 1: --when you were growing?
Speaker 2: What comic?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Comic books and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Comics, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Not really.  (Laughter)  You know I would read like Ebony and Jet magazines, things like that.  But yeah I wasn't really sort of into comic books and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Television influence you much?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No.  I looked at it but I think what influenced me the most was sort of you know just being around you know taking classes at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], you know art classes.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm trying to get when you are smaller.  When you're running around in (unclear).
Speaker 2: I think what influenced me the most as a kid was just the--having the ability to sort of draw and just paint.  And you know being told that everything was like amazing and fantastic so.  And I think I had an--and you know I have an uncle that's a painter.  I mean I think he influenced me.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of work did he do?  Did he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: He did sort of realistic sort of oil paintings, yeah.  And also was you know working within the arts worked for a design company.  And so I think that influenced me but I don't really I just think that you know I really believe that I was just sort of a gifted kid.
Speaker 1: Now, what's your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: And once I knew that--Donnie Galbreath and I think that I--that's what it was.  You know I remember looking at Michael Jackson as a kid and saying to my mother [Sharron Kelly] you know I'm gonna be a famous artist like Michael Jackson but not what I'm thinking was artist not a performing artist.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So it was this sort of you know--I could, I could connect to that, but I was small and I sort of, sort of looking at it for me as a visual artist that paints and draws.  But using it--
Speaker 1: You, you're the same age as Michael Jackson, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Close (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 196415
Speaker 1: Were you influenced a lot by popular music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I was in--you know I was influenced probably by I think music as I was growing up was a, was a way out for me.  I think it was a way in which I was able to sort of my sort of emotions and a way for me to express myself.  So I think it was sort of somewhat a savior for me in terms of my way of sort of, of sort of releasing sort of anger and despair as I was growing up.
Speaker 1: What kind of music did you like?
Speaker 2: Growing up it was it went from you know soul to (laughter) disco to classical.  And then when I started to moving into dance and, and modern dance I would then start listening to a lot of sort of African sort of music so.  You know it, it--and today I'm very interested in sort of this very broad scope of music.  But really sort of listening to you know music that I sort of you know I just sort of connect--connected with on many different levels depending on where I was with myself at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell me about, about school.  What grade school did you attend?  You, you were first before you went to Columbia [Missouri] you were in--
Speaker 2: I was in--
Speaker 1: --Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: --I was in Fulton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Yeah Fulton, okay.  So you started school [simultaneous]--
Speaker 2: Then I went to [George Washington] Carver School [Fulton, Missouri].
Speaker 1: --Okay.  All right.  George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Carver School.  Now what was Carver like?
Speaker 2: Carver School well you know according to my mother [Sharron Kelly] I was like completely inhibited by the entire concept of school but that's from her perspective.  For me it was like fine I'm there with my brothers so it's you know you have that sense of security and, and family there so it was not you know.  She said I was a very, very shy, extremely shy kid you know, completely sort of unable to sort of like be on my own.  But I didn't know any difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, were there any, any teachers in school that influenced you or have an impact on you that you remember?
Speaker 2: No.  I think the person that had more of an impact on me was the principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know in terms of like, you know.  I knew that if I didn't behave I would get in serious trouble so I think you know knowing that, that was such a fear that was sort of placed in me that I think she sort of is the one that sort of kept me sort of grounded and focused on school and doing what it was I needed to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the principal?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: The principal of the school is a scary figure.
Speaker 2: --Yeah.  Yes, you know so yeah grade school for me was I don't know I guess it was I just sort of went through it.  It's not that I can really sort of remember anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  While you were in grade school, did you have opportunities in, in the arts and that sort of thing outside of school or, or in school?
Speaker 2: In school yeah.  I mean I took art classes like all the other students did.  Yeah and at that time I didn't know that I was serious about it.  I knew that I did my best when I was doing it but you know and was encouraged and sort of was like rewarded and praised in ways that I think has influenced me to continue with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did they have any plays at school or anything like that, that you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: They had plays and things.  I don't think I participated.  (Laughter)  I didn't really participate--I didn't really sort of to become really more active and sort of establish myself and sort of individual personality until I was sort of in sort of sixth grade and up.
Story_ID: 196416
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as a little kid you--just kind of a quiet little kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was just sort of quiet and you know yeah just sort of blended in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so well, what happened in the sixth grade?  What, what happened then?
Speaker 2: Well you know again just sort of having these sort of platforms presented to you where you know there was plays and other sort of social activities that sort of allowed me to sort of find a place within, within you know my studies to sort of explore and, and so that was sort of an opportunity and that's when I started entering sort of art contests and things of that sort.  And you know my oldest brother whose also an artist so Jackie [Cave] and I would be you know involved in these art contests and all--we would be in these compete towards each other and so I think that really sort of built this sort of camaraderie.  It sort of taught me how to be competitive, taught me how to sort of deal with you know getting second place or honorable mention or something of the sort.  And to been able to, to you know take that out with pride.  So it was you know these sort of things that were sort of coming at me but yet you know there was you know, it was my brother that I was you know that I was also competing against so there was already this sort of unconditional love that's no matter what it doesn't mean that you're not good.  So it was all these sort of things that was sort of nurturing me to sort of you know pursue my dream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your favorite subject matter for art?  'Cause I know for instance when I was a kid I drew horses all the time, that's what I did.  But, but you know what did you--what, what inspired you?
Speaker 2: I mean what sort of was sort of not subject but I think I was a realist sort of artist.  So when it came to subject matters you know I was more interested in, in sort of the you know drawing and painting from a realist sort of perspective seeing it for what it is.  And, and really focusing on detail and, and trying to translate that into painting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what would you draw?  What would be your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: It could be--
Speaker 1: As a kid (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well me and me and my brothers what we would do is like we would set up these still lives in our house and we would draw that or we would watercolor it or we would paint it.  So you know it was not any one thing.  I wasn't interested in--I--you know one thing that I never was ever interested in was sort of this sort of afrocentric sort of sensibility.  I just never was--I, I think that I wasn't raised in an environment where that was sort of like you know this sort of one sort of thing to necessarily to be proud of only.  You know it became part of oneself as a whole so it was not--so we basically would set up still lives may it be fruit and we're painting and a set of flowers or, or may it be three other types of objects.  Or we would go outside and watercolor, landscape.  It really wasn't one thing or we would turn to craft and you know macrame or you know.  It was really sort of a very diverse sort of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --way of working which now that I think about it, it's like completely fits into what I'm doing today so.
Speaker 1: This seems a little--it seems well, most kids and I guess, and I'm talking about, still talking, talking about when you were a little kid you know probably wouldn't, most little kids would not paint a still life you know.  So I was just wondering what the subject matter was when you were little what, what you were trying to then?
Speaker 2: I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I can't--
Speaker 1: I think you're taking me to when you're older.  'Cause I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a kid I don't know if I was really doing, I think I was just doing what was told to do in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know which was you know a card for my mother [Sharron Kelly], things of that sort.  But it wasn't really portraits or, or things like that.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't guess it would be I you know most kids draw, they, they get a joy out of drawing I think when they draw and draw different things that they like you know.
Speaker 2: I actually wasn't drawing anything.  I don't know.  I was not focused on any one thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a kid, ever.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 196417
Speaker 1: You were in Fulton [Missouri] until sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you moved to Columbia [Missouri] and that's where your mother [Sharron Kelly] was working for the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, now--
Speaker 2: And then she, she had remarried at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is a big change?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know in your life you know.  And how, how do like your new stepfather?
Speaker 2: Owen Kelly [ph.].  I liked him okay you know.  You know I think that you know I liked him okay.  I don't know if I respected him but I liked him okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you know, how was Columbia different from Fulton?
Speaker 2: Well Columbia was so much--it was such a much bigger city so it was that and you know I was going to a different school you know kids I didn't know.  But again, there was never a time where I wasn't in school with at least two to three other brothers 'cause we were all one year apart.  So no matter what, we--it never was a situation where it was that uncomfortable because we had each other.
Speaker 1: Okay so you never felt like, like a complete stranger?
Speaker 2: An outsider, right.  So you know that was really sort of what sort of got us all through.  We always knew that we had each other there even though we were in separate--in different grades but you know that was really sort of this sort of amazing sort of force.
Story_ID: 196418
Speaker 1: I was just gonna ask you about you know school in Columbia [Missouri] you know.  What was--how was school different and were you introduced to new things in school you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was much more demanding you know.  There was subject matters that were you know presented to us that we weren't familiar with so it was a different type of task to take on, a different level of responsibility.  But again you know we were raised where you know school didn't end at school.  We would come home; my mother [Sharron Kelly] would work with us with our homework until eight at night.  So and we were sort of required to sort of make a certain level in terms of grades.  So you know there was amazing sort of family structure in my house and you know we had to step up to the plate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how'd you do in school?
Speaker 2: I did good.  Yeah.  You know I stepped up to the plate and you know delivered what I was just sort of more interested in moving to the next grade.  So in order to move to the next grade you had to keep your grades up.  So these are sort of things that we're all thinking about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that you know we're also being told that you know you've gotta get an education in order get a better job or you know things of this sort.  So these are sort of things of encouragement that sort of again grounded us and sort of you know kept this sort of foundation under our feet.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I think at that in--again no.  From the sixth grade until probably sixth grade not really.  Seventh was--is when I really started to like focus in on art.  And I think that was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what was the catalyst for you focusing in on art?  Is there anything that you can think of that, that was like the catalyst for you, for that change and that in, in focus?
Speaker 2: I think that when I was taking art classes as I continue to take them as I got--had gotten older in my teens I just realized that it was sort of this thing that was really natural for me.  It just sort of was something that I felt you know very comfortable doing.  I just felt more sort of complete within that environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, you were apparently pretty good.  You were getting rewarded for you know I guess for being good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think as I went into the arts from seventh until high--you know through high school, I think that I was came in sort of prepared.  'Cause I al--you know there was my brother [Jackie Cave] that you know we would sort of create these sort of art projects in the house or you know who can watercolor this the fastest or who can draw this the best.  So there was already this sort of dynamic in terms of you know of competitiveness and, and structure that was sort of set into place in terms of, of you know meeting the challenge.  And but so in school it was sort of you know my instructor that encouraged me to sort of pursue it further and, and sort of introduced to me a lot of artist sort of opportunities.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well who, who were some of the--can, can you give us the names of some of the instructors that were, were important?
Speaker 2: I think probably the most important person for me in high school was her name was Ms. Mickret [ph.].  She was my art teacher.  And she was the one that sort of encouraged me to go to art school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me back track a little bit.  Now what was the name of your grade school you attended in Columbia?
Speaker 2: Columbia, it was West Junior High School [later, West Middle School, Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: There.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, West Junior High School from seventh all the way to twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay but it, it would have to be West Senior High School I guess after a certain point right?  Because it was just West High School or is it junior high school was there too? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh no, no, no.  West Junior High School then high school I went to [David H.] Hickman High School [Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Hickman High School.  Okay (background noise).
Speaker 2: And she was at Hickman High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 196419
Speaker 1: So you were in high school [David H. Hickman High School, Columbia, Missouri] in the '70s [1970s], right basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --mid-'70s [1970s] to late '70s [1970s] I guess.  That was a time when on the popular culture scene you have disco got big then I guess and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know I was--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Big special effects movies were starting to come out like 'Star Wars' and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I guess earlier they were like in the early '70s [1970s] is Black Arts Movement a lot of stuff going on but it started to fade by then I guess by late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay go ahead yeah go on.
Speaker 2: You know as you're talking about all of that I'm thinking I realize that you know I think I was very protected.  I had a very protected upbringing.  You know it was not--there was not a lot of TV.  We were not--there was a lot of things that we were not really exposed to.  Now that give--you're saying all this stuff and I'm thinking wow, was I really protected from a lot of stuff as opposed to today it's a whole different sort of world.  So I think that, that I was really protected from a lot of visual sort of stimulation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean it was--
Speaker 2: At all.
Speaker 1: --what do you think there is a reason for that?  I mean you think your mother [Sharron Kelly] was intentionally keeping you away from pop, pop and culture and mainstream stuff?
Speaker 2: I think she probably was you know doing what she needed to do in order to raise these boys.  And it's a lot to raise you know six boys don't you think? (Laughter) And to sort of keep them sort of focused.  I mean you know my TV time was like Friday.  Otherwise we were doing homework or playing outside or so and just her as being focused around us.  I mean we were her priorities so it was not that she--and I think just her being present, my grandparents being present, my aunts and uncles being present and being--showing interest in us as, as, as individuals I think sort of kept us from a lot of persuasion to sort of think differently.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For me any way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what was high school like?  You went to?
Speaker 2: High school was great.  It was you know.  You know I was involved in theater and the arts.  It was a time where I really sort of came into my own you know.  Again my brothers were there.  But we sort of all sort of really sort of just separate and then you know sort of develop ourselves in, in different ways and sort of established our own set of friends and so and it not--it was when I you know again first had my first job and you know became a little bit more responsible.  And so it was all these sort of things that you know I would consider to be normal.  (Laughter)  You know I was working at the university [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] in the mailroom there, it was my first job and you know was able to you know get my first paycheck and was able to buy things that I wanted.  So it was you know that type of thing.  Again it was you know being very focused on the arts much more seriously at this point.  And sort of structuring my sort of class sort of my school responsibilities to where you know at my senior level I was able to just take a half load and was able then to go to work after twelve o'clock, you know girlfriends, things of that sort.  But still doing the arts you know.  Still you know totally committed, totally sort of like sort of seeing this sort of pathway.  For some reasons it was sort of--I was just sort of placed solid on the ground at that point and was sort of like no matter what, that's where I'm headed.
Story_ID: 196420
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were involved in theatre.  Did you sing too?  Were you in a chorus or choir?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was in the choir.  I was in the choir as a kid and in the church as well.  So sort of singing you know acting.
Speaker 1: You got the visual art right?
Speaker 2: Prop, design yeah, visual arts.  You know so it was sort of.
Speaker 1: Did you start dancing at this point too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Involved in you know being you know was a you know part of art organizations, yearbook organizations, things of that sort.  So again starting to sort of identify myself as.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you play an instrument too?
Speaker 2: I did in school, but in grade school, but not in high school [David H. Hickman High School, Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were basically doing, doing well you know visual art and performance well okay.  And what was your--I guess was your favorite subject art in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you have any teachers in high school that really influenced you or really made a difference?
Speaker 2: I think you know the teacher that influenced me as I said was Ms. Mickret [ph.] and she was the one who introduced me to the Kansas City Art Institute [Kansas City, Missouri] and said that you know I wanna work with you in developing your portfolio so that you can go and interview there and you know and be accepted into the program.  My oldest brother Jack [Jackie Cave] went to the Kansas City Art Institute.  And of course I didn't wanna go there because he was there.  I wanted to go to a different school.  And but I went there.
Story_ID: 196421
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're taking classes even as a high school student at the Art Institute in Kansas City [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: No, I was taking classes at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] in high school [David H. Hickman High School, Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when I went to the art institute that was my sort of first little step outside of the house and being independent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did you have a--did you know when you were in school that you were gonna go to college or did you have a sense that you, you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I knew I was going to college.  It was like no option for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I thought yeah I, I have to.  You know I have to.  Yeah, but it was just something that I knew that I had to do and I think it had a lot to do with you know my mother [Sharron Kelly] you know working so hard to take care of these kids you know.  I've got to somehow like become responsible for myself.  The fact that my father [John Cave] you know was you know not really doing anything and didn't have the tools to do anything so I felt I didn't wanna be like that either.  So it was something that but of course art school my mother was like art school.  Now my mother was completely behind it.  But I think as she was more concerned what are you gonna do with an art degree?  But she was like if that's where you wanna go.  You know you can go.
Speaker 1: I think a lot of people probably today but I know in times past, had no idea what you would do with an art degree.
Speaker 2: Right, my mother had no idea but at the same time she had no idea what you could do with any degree 'cause she you know again was raising the kids and sort of had to put all that on hold for the family.  So she probably was sort of looking at it from you know the most important thing is that you're happy and that you're doing what you wanna do.
Story_ID: 196422
Speaker 1: How would you characterize your art in high school [David H. Hickman High School, Columbia, Missouri]?  I mean what--were you--is that when you were painting the still lifes that sort of thing?  Were you trying to do representational art exclusively?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well basically in high school it's really sort of all based around sort of assignments that were sort of presented to you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know from self-portraits to still lifes to watercolor to sculpture so it's really what was sort of asked of you to do.  I mean there was some sort of within the context of that you did have independence to sort of approach it however you chose but yeah.  So it was again sort of this very sort of all sort of disciplinary sort of approach to the arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did, did people ask you to do work for them?  Art work or anything in particular--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when, when you, you were in high school?
Speaker 2: And nor did I even pursue any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I mean in high school I knew that I wasn't you know a portrait painter.  I just sort of did what--whatever I did.  I've always been this sort of creative person that sort of didn't sort of work within these boundaries or based around these limitations.  I sort of did what I did at that given time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did--what plays were you involved in in high school?  Do you remember the plays?
Speaker 2: You know I was involved in plays such as 'Grease,' 'West Side Story,' 'Othello,' things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what role did you play in 'Othello?'
Speaker 2: You know I can't even remember.
Speaker 1: I'm kind of joking with you here 'cause there's only one black part--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --in that but that that doesn't mean you can't have other people on stage though.
Speaker 2: Right I really can't, can't remember.  It wasn't that part.  And so and then I was involved in you know set design and things of that sort too with a lot of the plays and things in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you enjoy you know set design?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was sort of a key factor within the art program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was president of the art league.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--okay, that's a key thing yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so yeah I was sort of you know finding my sort of place and--
Story_ID: 196423
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior [at David H. Hickman High School, Columbia, Missouri], were you offered any scholarships?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was offered a number of scholarships to go to the Art Institute, Kansas City Art Institute [Kansas City, Missouri].  Minority scholarships so that really helped me a lot--
Speaker 1: Okay now why did you--
Speaker 2: --where were allowed me to go there.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to go to the Kansas City Art Institute?  Is it because of the scholarship or?
Speaker 2: No.  It was recognized as one of the top art schools in the country.  And I was good enough to go there so I wanted to go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I just noticed it was right in Missouri and did you--were you concerned about moving too far away from your family 'cause you had this--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have no problem you know with that.  It was again, it was you know one of the top schools to go to and, and I really wanted to go to the best school and it happened to be right there.  So it was you know great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't dream of going to New York [New York] or Chicago [Illinois] or?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: And I wasn't really sort of aware of New York and Philadelphia in that sort of sense.  Yeah, I knew that they existed but it was not something that was sort of, sort of thrown in my face as an option.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well how did you like the Kansas City Art Institute?
Speaker 2: God, it was so liberating, it was sort of like just changed my life.  It was you know just being--you know going to a private art school versus a university is completely two different worlds.  You know in art school you're--the camaraderie of just being surrounded by artists that's it.  I mean everyone is involved and connected to the arts.  And so it just sort of presented this sort of incredible sort of environment to be exposed to artists that would come in as visit--visiting artists and to be able to work (background noises) with them setting up exhibitions or collaborating with them on their performance work.  You know just sort of like being able to work in studios and just sort of be as expressive as you wanna be was like extraordinary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who are some of the artists you worked with in terms of those kind of exhibitions I mean that, that would come in?  Can you remember some of the people that come?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I worked with you know artists such as Dale Chihuly.  I worked with Karen Finley.  I worked with--
Speaker 1: Chihuly does the glass--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --art, right?
Speaker 2: You know I was working you know--that's when I started to really focus on dance to--through the University of Kansas City--University of Missouri-Kansas City [Kansas City, Missouri] and so that's when I was--started to get involved with Alvin Ailey [American Dance Theater] at that point in my career.
Story_ID: 196424
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were able to get involved with Alvin Ailey's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --dance team [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theatre]?  Okay.  All the way in Kansas City [Missouri] from?
Speaker 2: Yeah so I was in Kansas City.  He started the program there and then I was in New York [New York] doing the program there in the summer.  So that's when dance really sort of started to set in and then, then again this whole other world started to open up where okay I'm, I'm interested in dance, I'm interested in the visual arts.  And so I was sort of like playing sort of in both fields and was thinking more about you know how can I start to bridge the two together?  And so I started doing works in dance with this sort of other component which was more visual arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were, were, were you inspired by any, any of--well what inspire--were there any performances or artists that, that inspired you in terms of?
Speaker 2: I think what inspired me in terms of dance was when I first saw Alvin Ailey, Judith James [sic. Judith Jaminson] and, and you know and just sort of the intensity of dance was just like extraordinary to me.
Speaker 1: When did you first see Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 2: I think I--when I first saw Alvin Ailey, I was nineteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in art school [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in art school in Kansas City and you know and I think the thing that I was thinking about the most was (background noise) thinking about you know being on stage and, and being part of that, that sort of world you know.  That you know I saw that as, as entertainment.  So I think for me that's when that sort of started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alvin Ailey, Judith Jamison was like the, the associate director then I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think was, was, was Donna Wood the principal dancer when you were, when you were involved?
Speaker 2: I can't re--I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So but you had a chance to go to, to New York?  Were you, were you--how old were you when you went, went to New York?
Speaker 2: I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right and you get a chance to spend the summer in New York--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to dance?  Okay.  Must have been quite an experience.
Speaker 2: Well you know when you're in art school, I mean you're--you know you're like exposed you know the city, New York, you know well New York were definitely was I mean in terms of the, the size and the sort of the--so I think the thing that was just amazing was just the energy and just, just being exposed to so much.  But you know again, I was completely sort of committed to the whole practice of, of visual and performing arts.  You know I would be hanging out at the clubs and partying with my friends but you know alcohol free, drug free none of that was ever a part of my life.  And even though I--you know I was you know as close as we are right now to it, I just was never interested.  I was just not--it just wasn't what turned me on.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay so you never got into it, to the philosophy that you have to be all of your kindness to do--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I'm not--I'm not in or a video the whole notion of starving artist and all that kind of nonsense.  I'm not--that's not part of my reality.  You know I'm trying to look at it as a way of making a living.  You know so you know but just being around just all these creative people with you know their ambitions and dreams and talking about that and sort of like living out these sort of concepts and ideas it's really what was stimulating and fulfilling and sort of and sort of still grounded me with you know the sense of where I am today.
Story_ID: 196425
Speaker 1: So do you have any stories about your stay in New York [New York] for the first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's all sort of stories of let's see.  I remember being there and, and living in a sort of studio apartment with like four other people.  And you know that was reality.  You know you sort of all sort of had your little sleeping quarters which were like you know the left corner here and just sort of like you know--I think that it was just so for me it was just sort of amazing to be there and again you know you just start you start to think about you know how do you live with four people in a studio?  And you know right and making that work and still being able to stay focus and driven and, and not persuaded in one way or another.  So for me it was just sort of fun you know I sort of like you know it was just you know again it was you know this sort of sense of, of independence and, and I don't know it's not really--I never was really, you know I just didn't abuse my time there or myself there.  So it was you know, you know I would come in dragging from a bar at seven in the morning but so what.  A lot of people did.  But I was able to you know get up the next morning and continue with my day.  It was not that I had a hangover 'cause I didn't drink and I didn't get high so it was not you know these sort of things that were sort of blocking what it was that I was doing--you know I had opportunities to work with Keith Haring (background noise) on performance work in New York.  You know my thing there was sort of like being involved in you know within the art community getting out there and being available to, to be part of all of these sort of experiences.  I mean for me that was really sort of what I was interested in.  You know I had to--my first job opportunity was working with a number of designers in the city, Stephen Sprouse and, and helping him design his collection.
Speaker 1: Okay these are clothing designers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay that same summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stephen Sprouse was that same summer.  So.
Speaker 1: This, this is the summer, this is '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you know what's interesting for me to be there and, and you know making those sort of connections and being on the inside of and seeing how these setup operations work and you know.  And I've always been that way.  Was--always been quiet, but when I need to sort of like hit it, I, I would, that's what I would do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I would come home and hang out with my mom [Sharron Kelly] and brothers, throw on my slides and stuff on the table.  They weren't interested but at least they could see it if they wanted to.  It was there you know.  So and you know I think with that was it wasn't that I cared if my brothers or my mother understood my work, it was just as long as they respected what I did was really all that I could really ask for so.  And they did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did--with so many brothers I guess you're all involved in different things you know different diverse activities--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --amongst all of you.  But she accepted everybody's you know, work--
Speaker 2: Lifestyles, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 196426
Speaker 1: Now what was Alvin Ailey [American Dance Theater] like?  I mean, did you--
Speaker 2: Hard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just hard damn work (laughter).  Physically it was just hard and it was, it was hard but at the, you know at the end it was extremely rewarding.  It was sort of like this extraordinary sort of discipline to like you know to be physically able to move your body and to perform in, in, in this sort of rigorous sort of environment.  So you know again it was sort of like you know as an artist you know meeting the challenge.  And it was extremely competitive.  I mean you're not there solo, you're there with you know twenty, thirty other people that are sort of trying for the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was great.  I mean it is definitely set things into place now in terms of how I look at performance and dance and when I'm working with dancers and what I expect from a--but as a dancer your, your work is your dance, is the dance.  It's very different than visual arts.  You--
Speaker 1: Do you have any--I'm, I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --you know your physical body is what makes the art.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that tougher than sports I mean to you at that point.  'Cause you were involved in sports when you were younger.
Speaker 2: Not necessarily tougher, it was about the same to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like you know.
Speaker 1: Now do you have any stories of, of Alvin Ailey himself or Judith Jamison or any of the people in the company you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know there was times where you know I wasn't working up to the standards and was, was asked to leave.
Speaker 1: They would just ask you to leave?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  They would just say you know, "You're not working up to the level in which we need you to, to be working up to so we're gonna ask you to, to leave."  Yeah, those are--that's normal.  That's normal in anything in the arts just like you know today.  You know it's like if somebody looks at your portfolio if they give you one minute, that's a great interview as opposed to five seconds.  So you know these are things that you sort of like you know things that you remember that are sort of placed within, within you know your brain that within the arts it's a different type of you know the level of responsibility, the level of, of sort of work is, is, is an acceptance.  It's very, very different.
Speaker 1: What do you have to do internally to be able to withstand criticism like that where somebody just tell you to get up and leave you know?
Speaker 2: Well you have to like be honest with yourself.  I think that's really the, the real key thing is that you know, you know how does honesty sort of fit within the context of, of your being, what you want to achieve.  'Cause we all know the truth, right?
Speaker 1: Well some of us (laughter).
Speaker 2: I think we all do.
Speaker 1: Sometime you know, sometimes people, people lie to themselves or are lied to you know about what's really going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think deep down inside you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you spent the summer--that's the summer of '79 [1979]--
Speaker 2: I spent like the four summers.
Speaker 1: Four summers?
Speaker 2: Four summers there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So I was in dance for like eight years.
Speaker 1: That's something.  So did you pursue dance again when you--during the regular school year?  Did you take dance--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --courses too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would be my elective while in school [at Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri].
Story_ID: 196427
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to perform with the Alvin Ailey group [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: All right.  You get chance to travel with them that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I traveled with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you, were you considered like a adjunct part of the group or?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's good.  That's, that's, that's quite--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --an experience you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah and it's amazing.
Speaker 1: Not everybody gets a chance to dance with Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 2: Right.  And you know all of the--you know it's, it all, it makes sense now to me.  And see what I did when I was in school [at Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri] then I decided to make a choice.  Either I was gonna go completely into dance or I was gonna go into the visual arts.  And so as a senior in college, I had to make a decision so I chose visual arts and, and then at that point realized that I could bring dance to my work.  And so that's how I made that sort of transition.
Story_ID: 196428
Speaker 1: Okay now when you were in college [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri], had you begun to think about how to incorporate the visual art--wait well I guess you're say--you're saying that now but how did you think about--
Speaker 2: Well I started doing a lot of performance work about the--about the, you know the City of Kansas City [Missouri].  So I would create performances that would take place throughout the city, these happenings working with groups of people and creating these events and sort of these performance pieces all over the city that's what I did all the time, planned, not planned.  We would just sort of create performance work on the streets.
Speaker 1: Give me an example of how such a work--I mean how such a work would unfold?  I mean what would it consist of?
Speaker 2: Well what I did one piece that I did in Kansas City was I created a parade where I made thirty costumes and then worked with thirty performances, gathered thirty performers in Kansas City through dance and theater.  And so we created this performance piece that took place down on the plaza.  And so we sort of created these happenings you know in various locations on the plaza and documented it.  So this was my sort of first encounter of, of you know performance collaborating dance with, with the visual arts and then also video work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we just started doing, making these sort of things happen you know and then it moved from that into where we would then sort of create shows and, and to send out an invitation and.
Speaker 1: Okay now this all while, while you're in school?
Speaker 2: I mean this is all--yeah.  This is what was going on with my life.  I mean this is what I was doing.  I would make--but at the school at the time, there was so much performance work happening all over the school.  I mean like Friday nights at the art institute was like a big performance night so you know you got all of the departments and all of--that would just move, we would move from one studio to a different studio throughout the campus to look at a performance piece.  So there was always these happenings and performance related work happening all the time.  So that was really sort of like the beginning of, of that type of work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of the titles of some of the--did they have titles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had titles.  You know there was a piece titled 'Channel' where we were--where there was this performance piece that we were doing out in the gardens and yeah some pieces had titles, some pieces, pieces didn't (laughter).  We just sort of did stuff I mean.  I don't know if it was about titling (background noise) anything it was more just about you know maybe it was responding to some political sort of issues at the time.  So it's all this type--you know we would sort of base it around maybe an idea or a theme or--so there was all of this sort of type of, of work that was happening.
Speaker 1: Now what would be a, a theme I guess a political theme that you would tackle?
Speaker 2: You know, it--I mean there was some work that was based around racism.  There was work that was based around--yeah I mean.  Well, you know again, ever can't really so you know I don't really sort of know, I can't really pinpoint things at this point, but-- Well for instance racism, what would you do to--
Speaker 1: Well you know it depends on what you know we would do.  It could be a performance piece based on sort of identity and, and sort of role playing and, and I think there was this one piece titled 'Many Faces, Many Hats' and it was a piece where it was, it was sort of about role playing and wherein that as minority you know we felt, a group of us sort of felt that in order to sort of fit in, we had to wear all these different types of hats and so we were then at that point sort of a role play with these sort of various sort of may it be headdresses that we made or may it be just sort of traditional hats from anywhere from a concierge sort of a role to you know a pimp so all of this was all integrated within a performance context, yeah.
Story_ID: 196429
Speaker 1: What's the most significant thing that happened to you in school [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri]?  Can you think of any outstanding thing or one of the series of outstanding things that happened to you when you were in school?  I know getting with Alvin Ailey [American Dance Theater] was one thing, I know I'm sure, but.
Speaker 2: Well see I don't know if that was one thing.  It was just sort of like to me that was just like going to art school.  Again it's like well this is what I wanna do so in order for this to happen this is what I have to do.  And things that sort of changed my life was I think significant thing was you know being accepted to this school, to the Kansas City Art Institute on a full scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To me that's significant to me because you know it was like wow.  You know I worked hard and this is what I was able to, to gain from it.  I think one significant thing for me in, in school and undergraduate school was you know I did this you know I did a group of some clothing pieces and one of the department stores asked me to do a small collection of thirty pieces based on these five pieces that I did.  You know that was significant because you know all of a sudden sort of gave me an, an opportunity to sort of put my clothing into a retail store, which for me that was like again like wow.  You know they like this work enough to ask me to do this collection.  So things like that, that are sort of like again--
Speaker 1: It takes it out of the realm of practice to actually have--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah it puts it out there in the real world--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --and brings that whole other sort of like element of success or business or component to the, to this sort of.
Story_ID: 196430
Speaker 1: When you finish up at the Art Institute of Kansas City [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I just sort of bummed around in Kansas City [Missouri]. My mother [Sharron Kelly] came to graduation.  She brought the truck.  She thought I was gonna come back home and I told her, "I'm not coming home."  She goes, "Well you don't have a job," and I said, "So I'll figure it out."  So I stayed in Kansas City basically did nothing for like six months.
Speaker 1: Well you did something didn't you?
Speaker 2: I just--what I did is that we--I sort of got together with a group of maybe six other artists and we created fashion shows, performance pieces throughout the city that's what we did.  And then I just became so irresponsible.  You know would just like if somebody was going to New York [New York], I would just jump a ride and just go.  Lights turned out you know in my apartment, phone disconnected just, just nonsense.  Just being completely like irresponsible.  And then just one day I woke up and said I've gotta find a job (laughter).
Story_ID: 196431
Speaker 1: After school [Kansas City Art Institute, Kansas City, Missouri] I just really didn't do anything.  I was just sort of hanging out bumming around you know not being responsible.  No electricity in my apartment, stuff, nonsense, just stuff that you go through 'cause you're just trying to like I don't know what I was trying to do but then all of a sudden just one day I decided to--'cause I needed to find a job and so I just put my port--portfolio together and I went to Macy's department store and applied for a visual job and got the job that day.
Speaker 2: This is in New York City [New York, New York] now?
Speaker 1: No, this is in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Okay, they have a Macy's there?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I didn't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah and so I got the job literally that day.  And they said can you start today?  And I said no, tomorrow.  And so that's what I did.  I was a visual director for Macy's which was really great.  And then after two years of that I quit and then I got a studio.  And so I just started doing my work in my studio.  And continued to do performance work and started making clothing for clients.  So I started to sort of you know find myself a little bit.
Story_ID: 196432
Speaker 1: Can you describe your clothing?  I mean or the clothing you were making at this period of time?
Speaker 2: Well the clothing that I would do for the--I would work--again I was working with a group of artists that also did clothing and art as well.  And so what I did primarily was just really outrageous costumes.  I would always close our show because all my stuff was always just outrageous and just crazy.  But I was the only one that would get the clients.  And the stuff that I'd make for my clients would be very conservative.  You know beautiful, but very conservative clothing but you know I just always did just crazy stuff, but that's what I was interested in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  By crazy what, what would you mean, would you give us an example of a crazy piece?
Speaker 2: Well you know like my Soundsuits.  You--just sort of stuff out of like I may take, I don't even know what I can't really describe it.  It's something; you know I don't know how to describe it.
Speaker 1: Well, well just start with the shoes and work your way up or start with a hat and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh we just like make you know I would make let's see sometimes I would make a dress---let's say I would make this dress and you know it would be, it would be more about architect.  So it would be like more three-dimensional.  And all of a sudden you may have like a chicken sitting on the top of this box that's attached to the back of your dress.  And then the butt may be cut out.  So just all of this sort of stuff that would be more about reaction and, and--
Speaker 1: That's outrageous.  I'd, I'd say that's outrageous.
Speaker 2: I mean so that's the kind of stuff that I did you know statements based around fashion and, and, and you know concerns in that, in that manner or things that wouldn't be practical things that you necessarily couldn't really walk in, so limited movement.  But you know again sort of you know these puns on fashion and, and things of that sorts.  So that's what I would do.  I sort of did what I wanted to do.  I didn't give a shit at what type of response I would get or whether or not it was negative or positive.  I just want a response.  So I just sort of did things that would allow people to talk about or that would put my name in the paper.  But not for that reason but that's what would happen.  That's because based on that type of work.  But then my clients were like amazing.  They were just like very conservative and I would just do very conservative stuff for them.  But people you know, we live in a world where you know people are not necessarily sort of stimulated by much.  So the fantastic people are drawn to that.  So they were drawn to me based on the way that I, that, that I would think.  And yet what I would make for them would be totally the opposite, but you know that was great and fine too.  So I did you know work for Dillard, I mean for Macy's for about thirty years.  Quit the job because then I was able to find--to do freelance window display for two stores in Kansas City [Missouri] that paid three times as much as my salary was at Macy's.  So basically I just worked two days out of a month and then the rest of the time I was just in my studio working.
Speaker 1: Well you can't beat that can you?
Speaker 2: So that was fantastic.  But then that wasn't enough for me and then I decided that it was time to go to graduate school.
Story_ID: 196433
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you decide to go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: When or where?
Speaker 1: I mean where.  And when, what year?  This gotta be 1984 by now right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was like '85 [1985] maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985], '86 [1986].  I decided that it was time for me to go to graduate school.  So you know I told my mom [Sharron Kelly] I wanna apply for graduate school and she says well, you're gonna have to do it on your own because financially I can't help you.  And so I decided to go to graduate school.
Speaker 1: So you went to Cranbrook [Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan] which is near Detroit [Michigan] is an art school?  [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.] went there, some other people but what was--how did you choose Cranbrook?
Speaker 2: Well I chose Cranbrook because all of my professors from Kansas City Art Institute [Kansas City, Missouri] all went to Cranbrook.  So I sort of like had a sense of, of what it was about.  And that's the only place I wanted to go, I didn't wanna go anywhere else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was one of those--it's probably if not the first or the second most prestigious art school (background noises) to go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how, how did you like it?  Were you, were you satisfied?
Speaker 2: Well you know I didn't go visit the school or anything.  And in order to get in you have to, you have an interview and you know there's all this paperwork.  So the, the professor that was teaching in the program actually was in Kansas City [Missouri] at the time that I was interested in applying.  He interviewed me there.  Well and when I, and so you know he liked what I was doing and you know was happy for me to go there and I was able to go on a full scholarship.
Speaker 1: Well that's helpful.
Speaker 2: You know so.  That's how I was able to go there.  It was completely a culture shock when I went there.  You know I was the only minority there.  So there was an entire--well the interesting thing when we drove up it was me, my mother and my brother as we were driving up toward Bloomfield Hills [Michigan], which is where Cranbrook is, we were all of a sudden at one point surrounded by ten police cars.  And they were--and they asked what are we doing in this area?
Speaker 1: Hmmm.
Speaker 2: So that was just not, was not a very good first impression.
Speaker 1: Cranbrook probably had not changed then in about thirty years when Woodie King was there in the '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s], he was the only black student there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hear it's not changed much now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's, that's something you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Something to stay that static that long you know.
Speaker 2: Well, I think you know for us I think for a lot of minorities and blacks as well as you know others you know sometimes we don't dream that big you know.  And I think that has a large sort of, sort of effect on, on those type of environments.  I didn't give a shit.  I wanted to go there.  It's not about dreaming anything.  I just needed to be at that school for what I needed to do.  So it was very strange for me though there the beginning because being the only minority I just felt so disconnected from everything.  You know there was, there was more diversity at the Art Institute, Kansas City Art Institute.  Although there was probably about ten of us there.  But at least there was some sort of sense of you know.
Story_ID: 196434
Speaker 1: And did you stay on campus there in--
Speaker 2: At Cranbrook [Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: --Yep, Bloomfield Hills [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I stayed on campus.  And then there was Bloomfield Hills is one of the most wealthiest areas of the United States.  So you know I'm dealing with a whole bunch of stuff right now.  So I'm walking you know the campus grounds were like extraordinary.  I felt like I was in Europe.  They were, they're amazing.  So just adjusting to all of that you know.  We hit one bus tour into Detroit [Michigan].  You know I'm on this bus with all these white people and you know they're freaking out and I'm just like freaking out because they're freaking out and I'm feeling inadequate and just a whole bunch of stuff, but you know I just sort of--
Speaker 1: They're freaking out because they're going into Detroit.
Speaker 2: Right and told that you know it's not safe and I'm just looking at and they're like what are you people talking about you know.  But you know again you're sur--you know you're surrounded by you know individuals that have never been in that type of environment or that type or sort of setting whatsoever.  So it didn't take me long to get into Detroit to make a connection there.  So it provided me with an amazing balance to be at Cranbrook.  Because when I needed to get away, I was like out of there.  But the time there was probably the most extraordinary time in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, why?
Speaker 2: Because of the isolation I was not, I was able to really focus and I was able to find a way to trust myself in terms of my beliefs and in terms of art making.  So you know I could have went to school anywhere.  But being in that environment forced me to really look into myself and to, and to sort of build this trust that that I needed to do within a two year period of time in order for me to move forward with where I am today with my career.  It was hard because it was hard for and that's when I started to then start to really sort of focus on me as a minority and, and that became part of my subject matter.  And yet I felt it was my responsibility to educate these young people about that.  So it was--there was a lot of tension there and critiques and things but it was very, very satisfying.
Speaker 1: So you were absolutely were the only black person--
Speaker 2: Only when, when I was there.
Speaker 1: --black male on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Female too, period.
Speaker 1: No females, no teachers?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or any staff, no, no black staff?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, but you know I really wasn't associating with the staff that much.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was really intense for me.  But you know again I sort of had to sort of find my own sort of way of, of integrating myself into the program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't hinder me in any way whatsoever.
Speaker 1: What was your graduate thesis?  What was that, what was that?
Speaker 2: My graduate thesis really was about the whole--was really sort of talking about the whole idea of transformation.  So that's really what it was based, based about, around.  And again, I think it was the whole idea of that and relationship to you know, you know role playing and, and sort of you know I think that it's something that is like critical today in my own sort of existence.  You know it's interesting how you can live--leave your environment that you live in and the moment you walk outside the door, your identity at that point is erased.  So to me that's interesting to me that you know teaching as a professor at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] then walking home you know one evening and being surrounded by ten police cars and being told to lay on the ground because the convenience store was robbed down the street, to me that is exactly what I'm talking about the whole idea that you know you're not what you appear to be out of the context of your own sort of living environment.  So--
Story_ID: 196435
Speaker 1: You know I think at Cranbrook [Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan] it really forced me to look at myself as a black male for the first time ever in my life.  You know being in that environment and not being surrounded by minorities just, just all of a sudden you're just like forced to deal with yourself as a individual.  So it opened up a lot of you know a lot of those concerns that you know for me I've always sort of--I don't know what it's like being raised in you know in so despair or, or, or you know around a, a lack of having not a lot.  I didn't have a lot, but you know as interestingly as a kid there was this family that my mother [Sharron Kelly] would give them our leftovers.  And I used to just feel so sorry for them.  So I didn't even know that you know we were--there was times we had popcorn for dinners but big deal my mother turned it into a party and do you know what I mean?  So you know all of these sort of things that to me were sort of very normal but so I don't even understand that type of--I don't understand--there's a lot that I completely was abandoned from experiencing.  Yeah I didn't know what it was like being the only minority anywhere until I went there.  So it was just like all of these things that I think a lot of people have been dealing with or dealt with as, as children being raised I never really was around that or experienced any of that.
Speaker 2: So this, this experience caused you to look a little deeper into--
Speaker 1: Well it caused me to like I mean even today it's like I don't know what it--I mean I don't have a lot of this anger that a lot of my friends have because I you know I was always raised with you know there are good people, there good people of all other color period.  It's you know and that these are things you have to do in order to maintain a place within this world.  It was always as a matter of fact it was not like you know (unclear) and watch out or you know.  So for me it's all so I feel very much like an outsider for the most part.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Within the context of all that.  I don't know what it's like to be raised in Cabrini Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois].  I wasn't raised in the projects, but we're talking you know there was no shooting.  There was a whole--it's just a whole different world altogether.  I had no concept of what that's like.  So it's a different, so the dynamics are so totally foreign to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so Cranbrook was like fantastic.  It was like, it was great that I was in an environment that was very isolated.  I wasn't able to be distracted by other things that could influence my work or influence my direction of what I wanted to do with my career and kept me very grounded and, and I was able to come full circle with that two year experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you finished Cranbrook in eighty--
Speaker 1: I finished Cranbrook in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: --Eighty-eight [1988]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 196436
Speaker 1: And--but before I finished Cranbrook [Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan], my professor came to me and said to me I have a job offer for you, which was here at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So I never even applied for--I didn't even have to apply for a job.  I was--
Speaker 2: So you got your M.F.A., that's an M.F.A., right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You got it at Cranbrook, all right.  And that's, that's really what artists get right, they really don't go to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they get an M.F.A.
Speaker 2: M.F.A. and that--
Speaker 1: Master's.
Speaker 2: --qualifies you to teach in art right?
Speaker 1: Right.  And so then I was teaching so that's really how my life has been going.  Yeah I mean this, this is that's why I'm saying that it's not like I don't have any like things I just sort of have been on this path that you know that I've you know been blessed to be connected with.  And so you know the school called Cranbrook and said who you, who would you consider you know as a wonderful instructor here at the school?  We're looking for some people and they told them me and so I went from Cranbrook to the Kansas City, I mean the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you--
Speaker 1: But I worked my ass off for Cranbrook let me tell you.  This point I'm working probably eighty hours a week.  I just work.  I love to do my work.  So I would get maybe five hours of sleep and I would be so excited about getting up the next day just look at the work that you know that was my commitment.  I'm completely committed to this.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you, you made it to the Art Institute of Chicago, you been here ever since?
Speaker 1: I've been there ever since off and on.
Speaker 2: Ever since '88 [1988]?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 196437
Speaker 1: All right.  Now let's talk about, you know, university, I mean the [School of the] Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and some of your work and your professional career that sort of thing.  I don't know where to start.  I know about some of the highlights of the Soundsuits.  I know about that.  But like where, where, where should we start?  What did you first start doing when you got there?
Speaker 2: Well when I finished graduate school, what I was doing in graduate school were these large paintings that were like 8 x 16 feet.  That's what I did in, in--at Cranbrook [Academy of Art, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan].  And, and then I was doing installation work and some performance work.  But when I left Cranbrook, my entire life just completely took a 90 degree turn.  Then I started doing these Soundsuits based on--there were really sort of came out of being a black male in America and how we're viewed within society.  So what I was then doing was gathering materials that were sort of discarded, viewed as less than, and with these materials, I was then transforming them giving them a sense of new life, changing the role in which they play within, within the context of the work and then started to then to make these Soundsuits.  And so Soundsuits actually come about from the fact that as people, we tend to not listen to one another and in order to be heard, we have to either be aggressive or we have to you know through physical or through voice.  And so this is how the Soundsuits came about.
Story_ID: 196438
Speaker 1: About what year did you come up with the idea for the Soundsuits?
Speaker 2: About a year after I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: So in 1989 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then the Soundsuits all of a sudden was getting all this attention and I completely pulled out of the race probably in '92 [1992] 'cause I didn't--was not--I didn't wanna go down, I didn't wanna be necessarily recognized at that point in my career as this is the work that I do.  So I completely pulled out.  Stopped doing them.  Completely.  And, and now I have come back to complete this project that I'm working on which consists of ninety Soundsuits.  But so when I pulled out, I started then to do more sort of small object based work, some performance work and moved again back into doing these assemblage type of paintings.  And then doing--was doing a lot of work community work within the school [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and, and building up that relationship.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Back, back to the Soundsuits for a minute and I know this is a bigger project you're working on now, but what, but can you describe a Soundsuit for someone who?
Speaker 2: Yeah like for example, a Soundsuit is a, a garment that is worn on the body that without physical movement it makes no sound.  And the sound is orchestrated by using materials such as twigs or bottle caps, or let's say plastic anything that, that can generate a sound.  There are sort of these big sort of enormous in scale and in their presence.  But that also comes about as how a lot of black men are viewed.  You know there's this sort of set--there's this sense of fear that's set in or you know we're bigger than life.  You think about the Rodney King incident you know, just you know.  What, what was written about that incident in terms of like you know it's like this bigger than life figure that they felt that they had to protect themselves.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  His mere presence being an imposition almost.
Speaker 2: You know right and so you know that whole sort of thing was also part of this whole sort of notion of making these Soundsuits that we're sort of that were but at the same time there was this sense of seduction, the sense of--you know sometimes we're attracted to fear.  So it's you know really playing on all of these sort of concerns and issues that are based around power and being empowered by something other than so that's really sort of again this sort of nemesis of, of you know this whole body of work.
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you inspired by--I know when, when you see the Soundsuits and, and the materials they're made out of, they're very colorful, they're made out of--they're--they, they cover the body from head to toe.  You have musical devices--
Speaker 2: Components right.  Well you know--
Speaker 1: --The concept device is attached to 'em.
Speaker 2: --Right so you know and what the Soundsuits are you know I really basically was looking at the whole you know again the whole idea of recycling and redefining material and really sort of focused everything really around this sort of (background noise) western sort of culture.  And then as time went on, I started to then look at other cultural sort of costume and ceremonial, sort of garments and then started to bridge and link the two worlds together.  So for me it's really about bridging the past with the present.  Sort of looking at African and, and Tibetan as well as looking at Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil] and at Carnival and bridging all of this sort of these worlds together and, and celebrating sort of diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now some of your suits remind me of Yoruba Egungun you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --outfits and the other, other cultures all over Africa that use like a full suit and person usually in the suit dances you know.
Story_ID: 196439
Speaker 1: --We were talking about this performance for 2007. With the ninety Soundsuits and it's gonna be a collaboration between yourself and several dance groups you were mentioning off camera I don't think we were rolling when we were talking about--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Well actually the project is actually in process right now.  The first exhibition is just opened this summer in Helena, Montana, which is an exhibition that consists of forty Soundsuits which is then coming here in '06 [2006] to the [Chicago] Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] which will then be an exhibition of fifty Soundsuits and so what I'm working on right now is a two part project.  One part being a fifty Soundsuit exhibition that then will be supported by ninety Soundsuit performance.  So in total it will be 140 costumes and the reason for that is that when I do performance work, my audience always wants to have this closer encounter with the Soundsuits or if I'm doing an exhibition, they wanna see the performance side.  So what I decided to do was create this project where there's these two components under one umbrella which is Soundsuits.  I know that this project is the foundation for my future but my mission for this project is for me to provide a platform for other artists within the performing arts to meet their endeavors.  So for me it's not really about me.  It's really about me creating opportunities for other people using my work as a vehicle for that.  So, so that's really sort of my sort of goal in this project.  The purpose for this project is that it's a project that will speak about diversity.  It will touch on a broad range of cultures from around the world based on shapes, form, the way in which surfaces are embellished, based on the particular types of performances that will be established.  So it's really a performance piece that's really about sort of celebrating diversity and bringing us together as a nation.  You know my audience for this performance will be you know people from south side to north side to east to west under one sort of in one arena and that's really my goal.  That's really what I wanted my work to do.  So it's on a much higher, my purpose is so much greater than being an artist.  It's not, I just been chosen to do this work.  I mean I truly feel that this is my next assignment.
Speaker 1: Okay so.
Speaker 2: Where I have to deliver this deed in order to move on to the next assignment so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So art is a vehicle towards a larger end?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Of cooperation and participation?
Speaker 2: Well I think art is my--art for me is, is the vehicle for me to deliver messages that are of a greater purpose.
Story_ID: 196440
Speaker 1: You're planning to work with Joffrey Ballet [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm gonna be--
Speaker 1: --Muntu Dance Theatre [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna be working with a number of dance companies here in the city [Chicago, Illinois] from Joffrey to Next Level [Dance Company, Detroit, Michigan] to Muntu.  Then working with a number of public schools that have visual and performing arts programs in addition to working with just musicians off the streets.  For example, there's you know this group of kids that beat on these buckets.  I'm going to be working with them.  I'm also going to collaborate dancers, performers that don't necessarily have background in dance but understand their bodies and understand movement.  The reason for all of that is that it brings a different type of edge to the performance.  It opens up this camaraderie of, of what takes place within the context of, of putting this event together.  It will be an event that will be documented from the beginning--we're documenting now as we're working in the studio from beginning stage all the way to the end of the entire performance piece.  And so eventually that will then move into a documentary.
Speaker 1: Now will the big performance in 2007 be outdoors or indoors?
Speaker 2: Well we would love for it to be outdoors, but you know Chicago [Illinois] weather prohibits a lot of.  It's on and off so.  There are a number of indoors venues that we're looking at right now that will accommodate the performance piece.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what, what else you working on in addition?
Speaker 2: Well you know I have, I--in addition to my living space, I also have my studio in the same sort of facility.  I have three times a year a, a couple of sales in the studio which consist of clothing, art, and objects.  So I open up the studio and have clients come here and shop for art, for clothing, for accessories, for objects, what have you.  And eventually I will--I would like to open a store here in Chicago that's really about a lifestyle.
Story_ID: 196441
Speaker 1: Let's see.  As a teacher at the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], what's the name of your course?  What do you teach?
Speaker 2: Well I teach, I am co-chair of the fashion department.  And so what I'm working on right now is I'm developing a program that will be our first graduate program in the fashion department.  Classes that I teach right now are conceptual classes based around body and garment.  So they're classes that address body and garment and performance.  So it's not really a class that's working from a traditional sort of place as opposed to more a conceptual place about clothing and body.  And then I teach design, fashion design.
Story_ID: 196442
Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of art?
Speaker 2: What is my philosophy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Of art?  I don't know if I have a philosophy.  But I think that my role as a teacher I think is to help individuals reach revelations through the practice of art-making.  My philosophy is I think just truth will set you free.  I think that's my philosophy and being, being true to what you believe in and, and, and allowing yourself permission to pursue it.
Story_ID: 196443
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well I think that there's a lot of us--I think there are individuals that are out there that are making a difference and there are those of us that are coming up to that platform to continue that, that commitment to bringing it back to the community.  I think that we have to assess black artists as black people continue to fight for having a voice.  And again connecting to what it is that you believe in with conviction and, and finding ways to getting it out to the public at large.  You know my goal is that I'm not interested in sort of keeping it contained within one particular environment.  It's about getting it out there at large and, and, and letting people become aware that I exist and that I'm doing something that is sort of bringing and unifying us together as a nation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I want to be able to bring this to the children especially minority children to know that there is you know, this too as a possibility to be creative is also an avenue that you can pursue.
Story_ID: 196444
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you do your performance art, do you perform in the Soundsuit?
Speaker 2: Oh I used to do all--I used to perform in them all the time.  I do not--a lot of my Soundsuits are part of private collections.  They're also are a part of museum collections.  I do not release a Soundsuit out of my hands unless it's been involved in performance, a performance of, of sorts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there has to be that history there.  It is not just an object that just sits in a space.  There has to be a purpose that it served.
Speaker 1: You know sounds very African you know if you know, you understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Well you know and also when you look at you know I'm always in museums around the world and I'm thinking you know look at all this art.  You know look at all these costumes that are not on exhibit as sculptural objects but yet they all served a role and a purpose in people's lives.  And you know so it's interesting to be able to read about a particular garment and the role in which it played within a particular culture to be able to sort of link it to you know a place and also a purpose.  So you know to me that's really important.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I--have you looked beyond the 2007 and the, the?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah I have looked beyond you know with a [Chicago] Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] show they're gonna produce an amazing catalog that will consist of thirty Soundsuits.  I just finished a new catalog that has eighty in it.  What I see down the road is series of tabletop books.  My personal sort of mission is that I have written down as--has this statement and that is working toward what I'm leaving behind.  So that's really my, that's really it for me.  When I am no longer here, what am I--what is left here in my existence?  So that's really my goal.  And so what I see down the road is this performance piece traveling around the world where part of it is brought to the city in terms of some of the dance aspects of it but then a large portion of it is me going into the community and working with the dance community within various cities and making them part of this project because I know as a kid I never ever wanted to ever have that experience of God I wished I could have done.  I don't know that.  So I don't want an opportunity for someone else to, to have to say that when I can provide an opportunity for them to be a part of something.
Story_ID: 196445
Speaker 1: Did your father [John Cave] get a chance to or--look at your work before he died?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.  And what does your mother [Sharron Kelly] think?  You said that she, she pretty much supports you but--
Speaker 2: She was just here.
Speaker 1: --does, does she have an opinion about any of the work?
Speaker 2: She was just here the other--last week and she still doesn't get it.  You know I take her to the museums and she doesn't even get half the stuff in the museums, but she--I know that my mother lives vicariously through me.  And if I can, if I can make that a reality for her, that's an amazing gift I think.  You know and then she, and she connects to my passion and commitment and I mean these things that you know I can provide for her.  She loves what I'm doing.  She loves my sort of again my passion, my sort of like beliefs and I mean you know she told me at Christmas she goes you know you are an extraordinary man.  And for my mother to say that to me, that is like, well for any mother to say that to their kid.  I'm thinking wow.  You know she is seeing so beyond this mother-son relationship.  So I mean to me that is like extraordinary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's a cool mother.  I mean she's very modern, she's very current you know.  She travels with all of us all over the world so it's not like she's not seeing it and not exposed to it, you know.
Story_ID: 196446
Speaker 1: Is there anything when you look back on what you've done and you're still very young.  So when you look back at what you've done, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  Nothing.  You know I think the most, the most difficult thing that I've sort of been struggling with lately is just giving myself permission to, to stand in the light.  I've always sort of made sure everybody else around me is or will because I always knew that I was gifted or something extraordinary.  I mean it's like Michael Jordan playing for the [Chicago] Bulls.  It's not that they're all aren't fabulous and amazing players, but he has just been blessed with something else.  You know it's just that thing.  It's not, you can't--it's--you can't describe it.  It's just that thing and so you know I'm just now giving myself permission to really stand in the light and not have the sense of guilt about it or--and sort of just working through that and realizing that I don't really have much control over it.  I have to like embrace it and, and accept it and let it happen and stay very clear about that path.  So that's what's happening.
Story_ID: 196447
Speaker 1: Now, what would you see if you--at this stage as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  You know for me to do this interview it was very you know I told a--I can't remember who I was speaking to on the phone, this--
Speaker 1: Lauren.
Speaker 2: Lauren.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And I said this is not the time for me to do this because I haven't really made any history yet.  I'm working toward that but I don't feel that I've done it yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know you know when you've done it or if it's ever gonna happen.  That's what I you know that's where I'm coming from.  I'm not you know it's yeah I can say whatever, but purely for my soul I haven't yet.  It's getting ready to happen but and I'll let you know when that happens, but.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know in doing this interview also indicates to me that since I've done it now and I really gotta make it happen.  So there's that other side to it too.
Story_ID: 196448
Speaker 1: In that regard, this is similar to legacy but how, we always ask everybody how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered someone who has made a major contribution to the arts.  Someone who has made--was able to bring and bridge us closer together as a nation to unify us as a nation and to celebrate diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: That's it.  Cool.
