Story_ID: 227934
Speaker 1: We're gonna get started by slating that my name is Jodi Merriday, and I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and there are no observers.  Ma'am, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: My name is Pearl Michelle Cleage, P-E-A-R-L, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E, C-L-E-A-G-E.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: December 7, 1948, Springfield, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Is September 23rd, 2004.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview and the address.
Speaker 2: 476 Auburn Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a writer.
Story_ID: 227935
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask five People magazine-ish types of questions just to warm the interview a bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Just bear with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ah, my favorite food?  Wow, that's probably the hardest question you'll ask me.  I love pasta.  I would have to say pasta.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Winter.  I like cold weather.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Beach, definitely beach.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a favorite phrase or saying.  Um, a favorite phrase or saying.  I don't think I have one.  I say thank you a lot, 'cause I think I have (laughter) such a fortunate life, so that's probably the thing I kind of mutter to myself more than anything else.
Story_ID: 227936
Speaker 1: Next, we're going to explore your family background and I'd like to begin by asking for you to tell me about your mother.  What was her name?  Where was she born? And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Doris Juanita Graham Cleage.  She was born in Detroit, Michigan and grew up in Detroit, Michigan, went to Detroit Public Schools.  When she graduated from Eastern High School [Martin Luther King, Jr. Senior High School, Detroit, Michigan], she went to Wayne University [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] also in Detroit, majored in sociology, became a teacher and taught in the Detroit Public Schools for all of her professional life, never really wanted to be a teacher.  She wanted to be an archeologist and go to Egypt, but that was not possible for her at that time in her life, but that's what she always wanted to do.  So she always taught school but she never really liked it.  She was the youngest daughter of a family of four children.  She has an older sister [Mary Virginia Graham], and then she had two brothers, both of whom died in childhood.  One [Howard Graham] whom died of scarlet fever when he was three and her older brother Mershell [Graham], who died, hit by a car, and died when he was eight years old.  So of the four siblings in that family, the two girls survived to adulthood, the two brothers both died in childhood.  My mother married my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] when she was twenty-one, I think and they were divorced when I was six years old.
Story_ID: 227937
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Doris Graham Cleage]?
Speaker 2: I think my mother was a very bright woman, a very curious woman.  Read a lot all the time, was very much involved in freedom struggle in the Civil Rights Movement, my whole family was.  I think my mother was not as happy as she wanted to be.  I think that she never liked her job.  She was always very angry at the Detroit Public Schools for the way they treated the students in the schools that she was teaching.  Mostly working class black neighborhoods and she was always fighting for more books, better books, smaller classes, all of that.  So I think that she was living a life that she was very committed to but I know that she would have liked to have an existence that allowed her more travel, more creativity, more chance to see more and do more.  She wanted to travel internationally.  Never really had a chance to do much of that until she got much older.  So I think that she was a person who never got to do all of the things that she could imagine.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you of her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh lots, absolutely.  And we knew my grandparents so that we spent lots of time with her parents.  Her parents were Mershell C. Graham and Fannie Mae Turner Graham, both from Alabama.  They used to tease each other, my maternal grandparents, about who was really from Montgomery [Alabama] and who was from the small town outside of Montgomery, but they were both Alabama people.  My mother was very fond of her parents isn't the right word because she of course loved her parents, but she was always very much in search of their approval, especially her father.  Wanted to be perfect, wanted to do everything right.  And a lot of that she later said to me was because she felt so sorry for her father because he had lost both his sons [Howard Graham and Mershell Graham].  So she was very anxious to kind of make up for that by doing everything that he would have wanted his sons to do by going to college, by getting good grades, all of those kinds of things.  She had a fairly protected growing up, they were very active in their church.  My grandfather was a trustee in Plymouth Congregational Church [Plymouth United Church of Christ] in Detroit [Michigan], so they were very active in the church, very active with the youth activities in the church.  She grew up in a house that was across the street from a small factory and there my grandmother was always fond of saying, we lived in the house, we don't live on the street.  So we don't bother with the fact that there's a factory right across the street from us.  You know, in our little house we do whatever we're gonna do and the factory is gonna be making the parts for the automobiles, which is what that factory did.  But she had I think a fairly conservative upbringing in that my grandfather was a very straight laced kind of man, very nice to all of us as grandchildren but a very straight kind of a man, didn't like a lot of noise and confusion.  Came to Detroit from Montgomery when Ford's [Ford Motor Company] factory came to recruit people in the South to say, you know, "If you come up to Detroit we've got jobs for you," because the war was going on.  And the factories needed people to come and work.  So my grandfather said that a recruiter came and said, "Anybody who's here at four o'clock on the train going to Detroit, we have a ticket for you and we'll get you settled up north."  And my grandfather was so anxious to get out of Alabama he went home, packed his bag, went back to the train station, got on the train and came to Detroit and worked actually for Ford's factory for the next forty years.  That was the only job he ever had when he came north.  Worked for a little while in Detroit, got enough money to come and get my grandmother.  They got married and then they both were in Detroit for the rest of their lives.  My grandmother once she got married, didn't work outside of her house at my grandfather's request.  My grandmother wanted to be a teacher, wanted to be teaching math.  She was good at math, but my grandfather felt that it would reflect badly on him if his wife was working, but he wanted to be able to take care of his wife in that very conservative definition of what a man should be to his family.  He wanted to be the person who worked outside of their house.  So my mother grew up with a very traditional family, in the sense that her mother was at home, but her mother was at home and not really happy to be in that role.  She wanted to be out working.  So that I think my mother has from her mother, did inherit that feeling of not being able to do all that you wanted to do as a human being, that there were certain things that restricted both of them, and I think that they both felt that strongly in their lives.
Story_ID: 227938
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: I have a father and a stepfather.  I'll talk about my father first.  My father is Albert Buford Cleage, Jr., the oldest of seven children.  Dr. Albert Cleage and Pearl [Reed] Cleage of Detroit, Michigan at the time that my father--my father was actually born in Indianapolis [Indiana], because my grandfather had gone to medical school in Indiana, and they were there.  That's where he met--my grandfather met my grandmother who was singing in the church choir, and he always would say she sounded like an angel.  And my grandmother, the one I'm named after, is the one who was singing like an angel, was a mean little woman, rest in peace.  I love her madly, but she was a kind of a mean little woman.  So that it was always funny to us as kids that he would talk about how angelic she was when she was singing in the choir because we could not imagine my mean little grandmother being so angelic.  But I also think that what I perceived as mean when I was a little kid, was just the fact of a woman who had you know a lot on her plate, a lot to do, seven children to raise, all of those things so that I think now at fifty-five, looking at her and thinking about her, now I have much less feeling of her being someone mean and more of a feeling of her being more overwhelmed sometimes with what was going on, but very committed to her family as my grandfather was.  My father's siblings are--he was the oldest--Louis Jacob Cleage, the brother right under him, Henry Wadsworth Cleage, the brother under him, Hugh Clarence Cleage, Barbara Pearl Cleage, Gladys Helen Cleage and Anna Cecelia Cleage, who was the baby, also known as "Pee Wee."  So they were a very close family, very active in their community.  My grandfather was a doctor and worked with some other black doctors to start the first black hospital in Detroit, Dunbar Hospital [Detroit, Michigan].  My grandmother did not work outside of her house when she got married either but was very active in the things my grandfather was doing, very active in the church, and very active in the raising of her children, of her seven children.  My father became a minister.  Went to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] to seminary and then had a church for a while in Los Angeles [California] and then had a church for a while in Springfield, Massachusetts.  But my father was a very radical person and Springfield, Massachusetts, St. John's [Congregational] Church [Springfield, Massachusetts] was not really ready for my father's brand of Christianity, so he stayed there for four years.  My sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] and I were both born in Springfield because he had a church there and the church finally asked him to leave.  They told him he was not really what they had in mind.  Although he had built a tremendous youth group, had added to the congregation and all of that, he was a little too radical in the racial questions for them.  So we came back to Detroit and he had a church there for a while was St. Mark's Presbyterian Church [Detroit, Michigan].  He was a little too radical for them as well, so they asked him to leave.  And he founded Central Congregational Church [Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan] and it was at that point that we became Congregational, because my father was always very popular with the congregations of his churches but the boards were always afraid of him, because he was such a radical presence so that in the Congregational church there is no board that can put the pastor out.  The congregation makes the decisions about who the pastor is and what goes on in the church.  So we became Congregational largely for that reason that my father felt like this would be a way for him to build the kind of church that he was interested in building.
Story_ID: 227939
Speaker 1: What kind of radical thoughts was he [Cleage's father, Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] having that made him stand out within these communities?
Speaker 2: He was a black nationalist.  He was always for black people building black institutions.  He was very outspoken about segregation, about race issues in whatever community we were in, and a wonderful charismatic speaker who did not bite his tongue so that my father was always fussing about segregation, was always fussing about inequal opportunities for black children in public schools.  All of the things that fueled the Civil Rights Movement were very important to my father, and he felt that the black church which is such a strong institution in black communities, should be at the forefront of not only defining these issues but of doing something about them, and many churches during the Civil Rights Movement did take that role but several of the churches that he was on--that he was pastoring early in his career were not prepared to do that, so that once he became congregational, Central Congregational Church [Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan] became a real beacon in Detroit [Michigan] for activist work in many ways, and was the congregation that was really the place where the most radical voices in the Civil Rights Movement were welcome, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], [H.] Rap Brown, all of the kinds of people who were saying things that made some of the older civil rights workers--older civil rights leaders nervous, ended up coming through our church for most of my life.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church that you started out with, your earliest recollection of church, what church were you going to?
Speaker 2: Well my father's church was really the--my father and my grandfather, my grandfather's [Mershell C. Graham] church was Plymouth Congregational Church [Plymouth United Church of Christ, Detroit, Michigan] and I remember going to church with my grandparents.  And then the first church of my father's that I remember, I don't remember the church in Springfield [Massachusetts], I remember St. Mark's [Presbyterian Church, Detroit, Michigan] in Detroit, but I was small then so what I really start remembering more clearly is when they left St. Mark's and founded Central Congregational.  For a while we didn't have a building, so that we met in the auditorium of a school, the [Caroline] Crosman [Alternative High] School [Detroit, Michigan] on Sunday mornings, and then they bought a big parsonage for our family to live in, but also big enough for a lot of the church activities to take place there, so that when I was very small, I guess about four or five, we always had choir rehearsal going on downstairs, deacons meeting downstairs, youth fellowship having a party downstairs, which was great for me as a little kid because the house was always full of people doing exciting things.  Not so great for my mother [Doris Graham Cleage], who had to kind of be the pastor's wife and make sure that everybody was comfortable and all of that, when her dream was still you know taking her elsewhere.  So she was not necessarily very happy being a pastor's wife and my parents divorced when I was six.
Story_ID: 227940
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My very earliest memory of being alive I think, is of snow.  I was born in Springfield [Massachusetts] in December and I remember snow, lots of snow and I'm sure that's my first birthday, not my--I'm sure I don't remember the month of December as being born that month but the next December there was a big snowstorm and I remember that.  So that that's really the first physical memory that I have, childhood memories what I remember.  Most I think are family kinds of things which were more my mother's [Doris Graham Cleage] doing, cousins, grandparents, family dinners, those kinds of things.  And then my father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] contribution, which was always meetings, and people talking, always, coming to our house talking, planning movement activities, planning newspapers.  My father founded a political party called the Freedom Now Party, so all of those things, getting up, going out with people to get petitions signed to get a political party on the ballot, lots and lots of political activity always in the household, and a lot of family activity, so that it was a rich childhood I think in the sense that I was very much in the bosom of a family that cared for me, and also a family that connected me unto the world in a wider sense from the time that I was able to listen to what they were talking about at the dinner table.
Story_ID: 227941
Speaker 1: Please give your siblings, their names, and the birth order.
Speaker 2: I have one older sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's two of us.  My sister's name is Kristin Graham Cleage Williams, and she's two years older than I am.
Speaker 1: What street were you living on when you can first recall your early years?
Speaker 2: Atkinson [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan], living on Atkinson.  I don't remember the number--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the street, but it was Atkinson, which was right down the street from my grandmother's [Pearl Reed Cleage] house, my father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] mother's house.  They lived walking distance down the street, which was wonderful, because we could walk down the street and we had aunts and uncles and all of that, and the other way the church was a few blocks from there too, so that the house was very centrally located.  It was the parsonage that we were living in at the time, so that it was very close to the church [Central Congregational Church; Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan] was also nice for us.
Speaker 1: At that time, could you describe what your block was like, your neighbors or your community?
Speaker 2: Black neighborhood.  All black neighborhood.  I don't remember anyone who was not black living in that neighborhood at that time, fairly middle class neighborhood, some mixed in terms of people working in factories as well as lawyers, doctors, all of that because factory work was a wonderful job in Detroit [Michigan] at that time.  The factories were always working, people were working double shifts, so that was--that allowed for a very middle class existence for people who were working at those very difficult jobs but were able to send their children to college and maintain a lifestyle that was, that was very stable and was good for them.  So it was a great neighborhood to be a kid in.  We had kids on both sides of us who were our age, my sister's age and my own.  Grandparents and cousins right down the street so that it was a wonderful--you could ride your bike around the corner.  And it was very different than Detroit is now.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Detroit is because of the unemployment, is a very different kind of place to live because people are not working.  The factories are closed and there's lots and lots of drugs.  When I was a small child, Detroit wasn't like that so we could ride our bikes around, and go visit each other and it was a lovely place to be.
Story_ID: 227942
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Big city sounds, lots of traffic.  I mean I was always in Detroit [Michigan] in the inner city of Detroit, so cars definitely, traffic.  Weather, because I was in Detroit, so we always had lots of snow, lots of cold, lots of shoveling of snow, burning of leaves when you could still burn leaves outside--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --because it wasn't a problem at that time, or we didn't know it was a problem at that time.  But I think that mostly just the fact that it was a big city, that I was living a big city, knew it was a big city; caught the bus everywhere.  My mother [Doris Graham Cleage] was very good about letting us, because there were two of us together, go places and you know I think my sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] probably got tired of hearing my mother say, take your little sister with you, take your little sister with you.  And to me, you can go if your big sister will go, so that we knew how to get around Detroit on our bicycles and on the bus and all of that, so it's really big city sounds and sights that really always feel like growing up to me.
Speaker 1: What about smells?  Were there any foods or any aromas that were prevalent in your neighborhood, or your home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Other than the leaves burning, I always remember that in the fall, because people would rake their leaves to the front of their house and then right there on the--where the curb would go down, right there at the edge of the curb in front of your house, you would burn whatever leaves you had raked.  So I always associate that with fall.  In the house, basic soul food kind of smells, baked chicken and macaroni and cheese, collard greens.  My mother was a very good cook, but not an enthusiastic cook.  My grandmother [Pearl Reed Cleage] on my father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] side was also a person who was used to cooking for lots of people so there was always a meal going on at her house.  And my maternal grandparents [Mershell C. Graham and Fannie Mae Turner Graham] were really the best cooks of everybody, so that there was always lots of food there, and I remember being allowed to help my grandmother cook, which was always wonderful.  You know you can chop the tomatoes or you can do this or do that.  So I remember cooking mostly with my grandparents on the east side [of Detroit, Michigan].
Story_ID: 227943
Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan], the people who are from Detroit often talk about the city in terms of east side and west side.  My father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] people, the Cleages, were people from the west side.  My mother's [Doris Graham Cleage] people, who were the Grahams, were from the east side, so that we always thought of ourselves as west side people but my grandparents [Mershell C. Graham and Fannie Mae Turner Graham] were east side people, so that on Saturday we would go from the west side to the east side to visit my grandparents.  And there's no--you know there is no physical barrier or anything like that, it's just the way that people separated and it's almost like being from another town.  You know this was like, when you're going over to the east side, it's like a big journey and it's not a big journey, it's just across town but that's a Detroit thing I think.
Speaker 2: And where were the African Americans primarily located, east or west?
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: Both?
Speaker 1: Both.  Yeah, yeah.  I would say probably--no, I think both pretty much.  I was gonna say maybe more on the west side than the east side but I think that's just because I'm more familiar with the west side because I grew up on the west side and roamed around the west side more.  Going to the east side, I tend to just to be going to my grandparents' home so I have much less of an idea about the racial mix there.  And on the west side, once we left the house on Atkinson [Avenue] and then moved to the house on Chicago [Boulevard] which was when the church changed and all the activities were in the house on Chicago Boulevard.  And then when we moved from there when my parents got divorced, we still were on the west side, so we were always like within a few miles of where we had lived.  But when we moved to Calvert Street, the neighborhood that we moved into, and I was just starting elementary school [Roosevelt Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], I was in kindergarten; the neighborhood was primarily a Jewish neighborhood overwhelmingly a Jewish neighborhood.  By the time I finished first grade, it was a completely black neighborhood.  All of the Jewish students had left.  All of the Jewish shops had left.  All of the stores had left.  The neighborhood had completely changed within a year and half, which even for me as a small child seemed like a real dramatic change, to watch everybody you're in school with move, because all of the people in that neighborhood were moving to a suburb to get out of the inner city, to get away from the fact that the black neighborhood was changing.
Story_ID: 227944
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went to Roosevelt Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan], named after [President] Theodore Roosevelt [Jr.] and it was actually constructed--the building was constructed in the shape of a "T" for Theodore Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in your elementary years that were influencing you?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  The teachers--the first, my kindergarten teacher was a wonderful teacher, Mrs. Murphy [ph.] was her name.  She was a wonderful storyteller and for me as a person who already knew they wanted to be a writer it was wonderful to have this woman telling stories all the time.  So that was wonderful, and I had a second grade teacher who was very influential because she made us read so much.  We had lots of books and special assignments and all that, and that was second grade.  And she was also a very mean person, so that stuck in my mind because she was a good teacher in terms of making you read things, but she was very--she was cruel to students in a lot of ways, so she stays in my mind because she was good in terms of the content, but she scared me to death, so that I do still have her in mind for that.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school that you went to?
Speaker 2: Went to McMichael Junior High School [Detroit, Michigan].  We had moved by that time, so that I had gone into another school district, so that I went to an elementary in one district, I should have gone to another junior high if I had stayed there, but we moved so I went to McMichael Junior High School for seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a great student, (laughter) I actually was.  I was very curious.  I loved school, always did from kindergarten on through college, I loved it.  And I always liked the reading.  I did not do well in math at all, I was terrible in math and I struggled through science.  But I really love school, I always did.  And I was always a very good student.
Story_ID: 227945
Speaker 1: Did you have any dreams and aspirations as a young woman?
Speaker 2: To be a writer.  I always wanted to be a writer.
Speaker 1: When were you first aware that you wanted to be a writer?
Speaker 2: I knew I was a writer when I was a little kid, like two years old.  I remember being in the crib, leaning over the side of the crib, telling stories to my older sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] who indulged it, and actually sat there and listened to me telling these stories.  So that I've known all my life that I wanted to be a writer when my sister learned how to read, she was two years older, so she started school before I did.  I realized that she could read, and I of course couldn't read.  She was six then and I was four, so I made her teach me how to read, because I thought that adults were the only ones who actually could read and write.  When I realized she could do it, I figured I could do it too.  So I made her teach me, which she did, taught me how to read, and then I started keeping notebooks so that I had--I was already writing down my stories when I was four.  So I've been writing all my life.  I've done a lot of other kinds of jobs to make a living but I've always been a writer.
Story_ID: 227946
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were still at that point in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In Detroit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Detroit Public Schools the whole way through.
Speaker 1: And what was your high school like?  Who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: My high school was great.  My high school was a big, all-black inner city high school.  And from the outside, people were always like a little nervous about my high school, because were the school that would fight.  You know, if you lost a game, my school would fight you about it.  So we had really good teams, so we didn't have to fight often but that was the kind of reputation that my school had.  For me being on the inside of the school, it never seemed dangerous because I knew everybody.  So that the high school time was wonderful for me.  I knew I was getting ready to go to college.  I had great teachers, especially history teachers.  I had wonderful, wonderful history teachers for American history, for black history, they were just a little group of very creative smart black male teachers in the history department, and they were great.  Mr. Ford [ph.] was one, Mr. Glover [ph.] was one, Mr. Williams [ph.] was one who taught black history who was also a jazz musician, which was wonderful because he was real cool.  He would come to class you know dressed like a jazz musician, little suits, and little narrow ties and talked to us about where he had been playing the night before, and then talked to us about black history.  So it was a very rich kind of environment.  I had a wonderful writing teacher, [HistoryMaker] Naomi [Long] Madgett who was the--was the poet laureate in Michigan, is still a wonderful poet.  So that I had a very rich environment there, and the teachers at the school recognized that I was a talented student, so that I had a lot of extra stuff to do all the time.  I always had extra assignments and extra reports and all of that, because they wanted to push me a little harder, because they knew that I could do more and I appreciated it, even at the time I appreciated it, because I wanted to know everything.  I wanted to know what they could tell me.  I was also dancing at that time which was a big part of my high school life.  I was a modern dancer and I had taken dance classes all my life, but when I got to high school I had some wonderful dance teachers, and I actually considered for a while being a professional dancer.
Story_ID: 227947
Speaker 1: Okay so we were talking about your experiences in high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Dance, I was talking about dance--
Speaker 1: --dance.
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah that was it.  So do you want me to talk about that?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You can continue.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You were saying you might have even considered becoming a modern dance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that I thought, I actually--when I was in high school I did a lot of dancing.  I was a--I auditioned for things and was in the all city dance group, and all of that, which was wonderful.  And I thought seriously about becoming a modern dancer.  You know, thought about studying it in college and then going to New York [New York] and doing that.  And I remembered thinking to myself, I was gonna have to make a choice, because if I was actually gonna try to do that, that was gonna take all the energy that I had, and I also knew I wanted to be a writer.  And the two are not really compatible.  It's not like wanting to be a dancer and choreographer which is kind of in the same ring, it's the same studio that you're working, so I knew I really was gonna have to pick, and I figured I could write until I was a little old lady.  But if I was trying to dance that career was gonna be over you know much sooner, just because you get older, you know your knees go, your elbows go and all of that.  So I very consciously kind of let that go because I felt like I could write for the rest of my life and I wanted an art form that I could have forever, not one that was gonna be over when I was forty you know because I had broken my knee or something like that.
Speaker 1: Other than dance, did you consider any other careers or paths other than writing?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Artistically there's really nothing else I can do.  I'm not visually gifted at all.  I cannot sing.  I wish that I could sing.  My father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] always used to tease me because his church was right down the street from Aretha Franklin's father's [Reverend C.L. Franklin] church [New Bethel Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan], and they had a great choir, and when Aretha was in town, she would go there and sing, and when we would ride by there sometimes you could tell she was in town because there'd be people just out the door, and he said, "Now you see if you could sing, we could have that kind of crowd at our church."  But I cannot sing at all.  And I don't do any visual things, and there really was never anything else that interested me other than writing and dance.  I mean I never really wanted to teach.  I've done some teaching but only teaching writing, so that really writing is what I always wanted to do.
Story_ID: 227948
Speaker 1: Coming back to these experiences in the church, your father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] clearly was impacting how your spirituality was developing.  What were your experiences like in the church?
Speaker 2: I really--I grew up in my father's church [Central Congregational Church; Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan], and not just on Sunday morning, I used to follow my father around all the time, and I think I kind of inherited that from my mother [Doris Graham Cleage] trying to be her father's [Mershell C. Graham] son.  My father had two daughters, no sons.  I think I was trying to be my father's son too, so that I was always--if he had to go to the church, and oftentimes in these big old churches the pastor would go to the church the night before the service, and start the furnace because the church was so big and old that they didn't want to heat it all the time, but in order for the church to be warm enough to have church on Sunday morning, you would start the furnace up and get things going the night before.  So I had done that with my grandfather because he was a trustee, and one of his jobs at Plymouth [Congregational] Church [Plymouth United Church of Christ, Detroit, Michigan] was to go start the furnace up on Saturday night, and then I had those same experiences with my dad.  But those I think were just really important to me because I was around my father so often growing up that he would talk to me about what he was thinking about the church.  He would talk to be me about what he was gonna preach about.  He would talk to me about what he was reading, even when I was way too young to understand it.  I remember my father talking to me about Frantz Fanon when I was so little, and thinking to myself, "Wow this is great, he thinks I understand this, and I don't know what he's talking about."  But when I got older I went immediately and got 'The Wretched of the Earth' [Frantz Fanon] so I could read it and see what he was talking about.  So then I adored my father, I really admired him, and he was a very charismatic speaker, a great speaker.  He was a wonderful preacher who would take all of these complicated ideas that he was thinking about and put them in a form where the regular folks who came to our church could understand all of these very complicated ideas.  But in order to do that he preached for a long time.  The first time I went to a church and the pastor preached for twenty minutes I was amazed because my father thought nothing of talking for an hour and a half, I mean, on Sunday morning.  And people would sit there and listen to him because he was able to excite them and to communicate with them in a way that made them sit there for that long to listen to what he had to say.  So for me as a budding writer who really was interested in theater, wanting to write plays, it was a great gift to be around someone who was so skilled at talking, at using the language to move people to do things, and I know that watching my father preach had a great influence on me as a playwright because I know what words can do.  I know that if you can figure out how to say something complicated in an accessible way, you can move people.  Not only to change what they think about things but to do stuff, to march down to city hall, to change the way the world works, to picket the police station, all of those things.  So that I was very motivated I think by the fact that in my father I saw someone who was so wonderful with the spoken word and was also so spiritually and politically active in things that he, you know, gave me something to work toward.
Story_ID: 227949
Speaker 1: What kind of early activism experiences were you having?
Speaker 2: Lots of meetings.  Went to all the meetings, didn't say anything because I was a kid.  So I wasn't there to say anything.  I was there trying to listen.  But as soon as I got old enough, whenever there was something we were trying to do that required petitions, my sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] and I would always be out with other members of the church getting signatures on petitions to nominate people for office, to get the Freedom Now Party on the ballot.  In Michigan, you had to get twenty-five thousand I think signatures all over the state in order to do it so we would all meet at the church [Central Congregational Church; Shrine of the Black Madonna, Detroit, Michigan] and then drive two hours to someplace outside of Detroit [Michigan] 'cause they couldn't all be in our neighborhood in Detroit.  So we would be knocking on people's doors asking them to sign things to get this party on the ballot or to get this person on the ballot or to protest one thing and another.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any of the types of things you were protesting?
Speaker 2: Oh, bad food in the big chain grocery stores, police brutality.  That was actually one where the police in Detroit had shot a woman in the back that was a prostitute, and they said that she was coming at the police officer with a knife.  Witnesses said that they had dropped the knife on the, on the body and that the woman wasn't coming at the officers.  So there was--it was a big issue and my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] was going down to address a rally of people who were picketing and demonstrating in front of the police station, the Detroit Police Headquarters [Detroit Public Safety Headquarters, Detroit, Michigan], and I was getting ready to walk out the door with my father, and my mother [Doris Graham Cleage] said, "Hold it, you are not going because he's gonna be on the platform inciting people to protest in a very vigorous way, and he's not going to be able to look out for you."  And I was maybe ten years old, maybe a little bit older, but not old enough in my mother's mind to be down there when they were storming the police station.  So that's the only time I ever remember my mother not allowing me to go with my father to things, but my father ran for office a lot so we were very involved in his campaigns and getting the mailings out, making fliers, organizing youth activities that had to do with if he ran for city council.  He ran for the school board, he ran for governor on the Freedom Now ticket.  So he ran for lots of public offices.  Never got elected but he definitely improved the level of debate that went on during these campaigns, because he was always talking about the truth of things, and he never was beholden to anybody.  He never took money from corporations or any of that.  So he was only responsible to his own congregation, so that he would force the other candidates to address the issue in a more direct way.  You know they would hate it when my father would file to run for a certain office because they knew then we would have those candidate debates when everybody comes and they'd be like, "Oh my God, now Reverend Cleage is gonna be here, and we know he's gonna be hollering about police brutality.  We know he's gonna be hollering about overcrowded schools," and all of those things that people didn't want to talk about, he was the one who made them talk about those things.
Story_ID: 227950
Speaker 1: So now let's transition into your matriculation to college.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What happened?  Where did you go?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go, it was the '60s [1960s].  I graduated from high school [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] in 1966, and I wanted to go at first, well there's--I'm getting ahead of myself.  It was a wonderful time to be a bright young black student, because there were so many schools that were looking for bright black students because of diversity issues.  They were trying to get more diversity in their student bodies, so then I had very good grades.  I had done well on standardized tests, so I got a lot of scholarship offers to go to schools that I have never even thought about, and I was very excited about going to school in New York City [New York, New York] and I thought about that for a while.  I was interested in going to college to major in dance.  At the time I thought about that, and then I got a catalog in the mail from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and no one really in my family had graduated from a black college [HBCU].  My father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] for a year but he really did not like being in the South so he came back and went to Wayne [University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  And I got the catalog from Howard and it had all of these beautiful black students.  Here they are in front of the library, here they are in the theater, here they are in sociology class, and it was so clear to me that this was where I wanted to go, that this was the environment that I wanted to be in.  I did not wanna be one of five black students at a big white school who had been brought there to integrate the college.  I wanted to be at a place where there were all black students.  That was the environment that I had grown up in, that was the environment that I knew how to negotiate, and I wanted to be very much involved still in the political life of the country and what was going on in the '60s [1960s] and I felt like Howard was gonna give me a chance to do that.  It was in Washington, D.C.  You cannot ask for a better place to be angry and picketing and protesting than Washington, D.C.  But the other part of it was that Howard had a major at that time in playwriting, which is what I was really interested in.  And I could get a degree in playwriting, a fine arts degree.  So that I didn't have to take all of those math courses, all of those chemistry courses, all of those other classes that I had no interest in at all.  So I went to Howard in 1966 as a playwriting and dramatic literature major in the college of fine arts, and if I had finished there I would have gotten a B.F.A.  They have since discontinued the program but I went there for three years, and then I came to Atlanta [Georgia] so I finished college at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 227951
Speaker 1: What brought you away from Howard University to Spelman College?
Speaker 2: Well that was a moment of real--a bad moment in my personal life.  I had gotten engaged to a guy who was abusive to me.  And I had left Howard really because I was afraid of the physical violence of that relationship, and I had gone to Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] for the summer.  On one of those wonderful '60s [1960s] summer programs where they paid for you to come to these wonderful schools and saying if you get good grades you can go to graduate school here.  So I went to Yale because they had a theater program that I was interested in for the summer, and I met Michael Lomax, who was a tutor on that program, and he was coming to Atlanta to teach at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was running from my fiance.  We had broken up and I'd fell in love with Michael who said, "I'm coming to Atlanta, you should come, and come to Atlanta with me we'll get married, and you can finish at Spelman."  So I was nineteen, that sounded like a good plan to me.  So I came back to Atlanta when he came at the end of the summer and we got married in October.  And in January I went back to school at Spelman and finished my last year there.
Speaker 1: Did you notice any transitions in the campuses?  Were the experiences the same when you were coming from D.C. to Atlanta (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they were totally, totally--couldn't have been more different.  First of all I had never been south.  D.C. was south to me.  That was, that was the deepest south I had ever been to and D.C. is not really south, it's D.C., it's different.  But when I came to Spelman the thing that was the--immediately struck me was first of all, it was gender segregated.  It was all women--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Howard was definitely not all woman--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and it was much smaller.  The campus itself was just like a little jewel, and all of these girls behind these walls, and all of that, it was almost like a movie set to me, but very interesting women, really nice women.  And it was--it was less important to me than it would have been when I was seventeen going to college for the first time that the campus be gender integrated, because by that time I was married and living off campus.  So that I really appreciated the fact that these were all women in these classes because we could avoid a lot of the games that people play in gender-integrated environments.  This was all girls so nobody was trying to be cute 'cause the guys were there.  We were studying.  We were talking about the issues, talking about what was going on on the campus.  So I'd--once I got used to it being a different kind of environment, I really enjoyed my time at Spelman.  I was actually--I graduated when Dr. Manley, Albert [E.] Manley was the president.  And he had been very nice to me.  I was married to Michael who was teaching at Morehouse, and in the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], they often will let the children of faculty go free to the schools.  And Dr. Manley allowed me to go free to Spelman because I was so young.  He said, "Well you could be somebody's child.  You can go free to Spelman," which was wonderful because I probably couldn't have afforded to go there.  I was working at The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time, and Michael was teaching, so we weren't making a lot of money, and Spelman had tuition that probably would have been too high for me, but he allowed me to go tuition free, so that was a great gift that Dr. Manley gave to me.
Speaker 1: Was there a large age difference between you and your first husband?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  He had just gone to college very young.  So it was really only one year, but he started college when he was sixteen.  So he was twenty-one teaching at Morehouse and I was nineteen going to Spelman, so he was young when he started, so he was young when he finished.
Story_ID: 227952
Speaker 1: So upon graduating from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], what was next for you?
Speaker 2: Well I'd graduated.  I was already working in the world in Atlanta [Georgia].  I had been working at The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] in the library documentation project where they were collecting papers from people who had been in the Civil Rights Movement, so I was working, actually as they were just beginning to build that archive, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had only been dead for a year.  So they were just beginning to try to pull together papers that people had been saving or had just stuck in the garage, all of those fliers and strategies and notes and letters and cards.  All those things that are so valuable in trying to understand what a movement was really like were the things that we were after.  So we used to go people's houses, look through what they had in their basements and bring those things back, and those actually became the basis of the civil rights archives that The King Center has today.  Those things we were doing.  Then I left The King Center, went to work at the Southern Education Program, which was a very small program.  Funded by the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], and the purpose of the program was to recruit black teachers for southern black colleges, and many of our recruits came from big northern graduate school programs, so we would go to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and talk to these young black graduates, almost graduates, about how necessary it was for them to come south and teach for a couple of years at a black college [HBCU] and our slogan was "Teach a Brother," all of our posters, which shows you how long ago it was because it didn't say teach a brother and a sister, it just said teach a brother.  But that was a great experience, because I got to travel around to so many black colleges, talk to them about what they needed in their faculty, who were they looking for, did they need science people, did they need people in history, what were they looking for?  So then when we went north to try to find these people, we could say the people at Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama] are really looking for you, a historian, the people that you know Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] are really looking for an artist, the people here are looking for something specific that we would know.  So that was a wonderful job for me and I enjoyed it.  And I left there and started working in TV, which was about the time that I was finishing at Spelman.  I went to work as a writer and producer at the ABC affiliate [WXIA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] here at Channel 11, at that time was the ABC affiliate.  So I was writing and producing public affairs shows for television which was exciting.
Speaker 1: That's interesting visibility for that particular era.  How was that negotiated for you as a woman of color?  Did you encounter any challenges or constraints or rewards?
Speaker 2: Not in the sense I think that you're asking.  I came into it because I had been doing some work with [HistoryMaker] Charles Hobson, who was a television producer.  Worked at--for a while was working at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], it was just Clark College then, putting together a communications program.  So I had done some work with him, and then they asked him if he would produce some public affairs shows at Channel 11.  So he kind of took me as part of the package so that I didn't have to go there and present myself individually.  I went there with a producer to work with him.  And I didn't really find any kind of race and gender issues that I think were insurmountable.  I don't recall there being a lot of problem with me individually.  I was a hard worker and I wanted to learn everything.  So they were happy to let me do way more than what I was being paid to do because I wanted to know how to do it.  The biggest problem that I had there was when I was producing the programs I was always trying to get radical people as guests on the program and eventually they came to me and said, "You can't have people on here who are asking for five states to secede from the United States as an all-black homeland.  We cannot have that on ABC-TV."  So it was exactly the same as my family history.  I mean it's the same thing.  I see an unbroken line, but you know I would try to sneak in the people that I knew, because I knew a lot of movement people who were still in Atlanta, so that I had Willie Ricks was on the show, who is now Brother Mukasa [Dada].  But he was the one I think that made them you know just come screaming into the booth, and say, "You can't have people saying these radical things on television," but that was always my quest to try to get people to present points of view that you wouldn't ordinarily run into on Sunday morning on Channel 11--
Story_ID: 227953
Speaker 1: And you're mentioning a continuum, this line--I meant to ask you earlier, how far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I'm the wrong one in my family to ask for the specifics of that, but my sister [Kristin Williams Cleage] has gone all the way back to a female ancestor in slavery.  My sister has been able to go unbroken all the way back to an ancestor that we can identify, whose name was Annie, who was a slave, and then come forward.  So she's gone through all kinds of census records and all of that, and you can see you know all of our history reflecting all of the racial history of the country.  You know we've got people in the South, people who went north during the Great Migration, people who went north and then my generation my sister and I both came back to the South.  My sister stayed for a while and went back, but my grandparents all left the South and they were horrified that we were coming back south.  My grandfather [Mershell C. Graham] had a long talk with me before I came to Atlanta [Georgia] and said, "You don't understand, these are a different kind of white folks," he said to me, "you don't know anything about these white folks and they're different and they're mean and they're dangerous."  And I'm saying, "Oh my God," you know I'm getting ready to go to Washington, D.C. to go to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but he was very nervous about that, and then he was extremely nervous about me coming to Georgia.  And he was correct to be warning me.  I mean Lester Maddox was the governor when I got to Atlanta, so it definitely was a different kind of a place to be.
Speaker 1: How were the contrasts?  Were the experiences so different with whiteness in Detroit [Michigan] that the thought of whiteness in D.C. and whiteness in Atlanta were just huge?
Speaker 2: Well the different I think between Detroit and the Deep South in terms of what my grandmother [Fannie Mae Turner Graham] was--my grandparents really, but my grandfather mostly what he was talking about was the fact that when he left Alabama that you could be a black man who could be killed, a woman too, without any problem.  You know, you'd just be gone.  You had to step off the street to let a white person pass if they wanted to pass.  All of those things that we know were present in the South.  My grandfather was very concerned about me being a person who had been raised in the North, and had been raised in the North in an environment, all-black environments, by people who talked a lot of stuff who didn't take anything off of people.  So that he was worried that I would be coming to Georgia, talking the way my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] talked in Detroit and that I would be in danger, because you know the people he remembered in Alabama would not have put up with that from a black person, man or woman.  So he was very nervous about me coming here.  It didn't feel as different to me as I think he was thinking because I went from an all-black environment in Detroit to an all-black environment in D.C. to an all-black environment in Atlanta.  I moved into southwest Atlanta when I got here.  So that every environment that I've lived in throughout my life, they've almost all been all-black environments, so that the presence of race is kind of outside of the neighborhood where I live, it's outside of the place where I'm working, so that while you know that if you drive an hour outside of Atlanta in 1969, you were gonna hit some people who were gonna be different than who were living in southwest Atlanta.  But that was also true in Detroit, in if you drove an hour outside of Detroit, you might get some people who were not gonna be enthusiastic about black folks being their town either.  So then I--I don't recall in Atlanta ever feeling that I was in danger in the places where I was moving around.  Now I'm sure that if I had gone into other communities or outside of the City of Atlanta, I probably would have had more to contend with, but I don't remember ever having the feeling that racial violence was going to be a problem for me living in southwest Atlanta.
Story_ID: 227954
Speaker 1: So you were coming at this point in terms of your professional experience from The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] into media television [WXIA-TV, Channel 11, Atlanta, Georgia].  Were you writing at this time, were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the time.
Speaker 1: --speaking?
Speaker 2: Constantly.  I was writing, I was writing a lot of poetry.  I was writing plays at that time.  So I was writing a lot, and I was saying my poems in public, you know, performing on all of those kinds of things, where before we had the political moment we're gonna let some of the poets read some of their revolutionary poetry, and I would be one of the poets with my African dress on and my earrings down to my shoulders reading my revolutionary poetry.  So that I was a part of a group of black artists who were very much tied to the political changes that were going on.  [HistoryMaker] A.B. Spellman, who was a wonderful poet, was here then.  His wife Karen Spellman was the director of the Southern Education Program, so that through them I met lots of activist artists.  She had been a member of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] so I met lots of SNCC people.  That's really how I got the entree into inviting all these radicals to be on my television show, because they were friends of Karen's and she was a friend of mine.  So we all knew each other, so that when I needed guests who could talk about reparations, who could talk about what was going on in South Africa, then I knew the people because we had all been sitting around drinking wine talking about these things the night before.  So that it was a rich environment.  Lots of very dedicated movement people.  And the movement was at a very transition--a transitioning moment because of all of the assassinations that were going on, all of the violence that was going on.  [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had been killed.  The SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] was still trying to regroup from all of that, so that there was a lot of activity that was going on in Atlanta [Georgia] because so many of the movement people were here, which really was wonderful for me because many of them knew my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.].  So it took me from one environment which was very rich in terms of movement activity, and put me right down in another one, which was here, which was still full of movement activity, so that my writing continued to be very grounded in movement toward social change, and you know gave me a chance to say my poems and meet other poets, and all of that.  So I was still writing all the time.
Story_ID: 227955
Speaker 1: How were women being located, in these movements and these causes?
Speaker 2: We were at that point not yet talking about gender in the way that we would come to later.  At that point we still had the feeling that we as conscious black women were supposed to be talking about race, that our men were under siege from white America, and that we needed to be supporting them and talking about race.  We were of course encouraged in thinking this by our men who did not want to talk about gender.  They wanted to talk about race, which we came to understand, because not only because it was life and death for us as black people but when you talk about race, black men are the victims of race.  When you talk about gender they are the oppressors as men are oppressors in their relationships with women, when you talk about sexism, when you talk about feminism.  And it was very difficult to get even the conscious radical political black men to talk about issues of gender.  I mean it was around the time when Stokely [Carmichael; Kwame Ture] made his famous statement about, "The position of women in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] is prone."  You know it's just all of those things are so--were so terrible because these were very wonderful, dedicated, charismatic guys.  And as a young woman I loved them.  They were wonderful.  But as a woman who was also beginning to develop a feminist consciousness I was angry at them for thinking that we were always gonna be the ones in the background, making a coffee, running off the fliers, doing all the hard work but never the one who gets to articulate the position, who gets to make the strategy, all of those things.  So that it was, really I came into a group of women because the SNCC women were really the ones that took on all of these issues very, very early, so that being friendly with Karen [Spellman] and then getting to know all of these SNCC women was wonderful for me, because we were always talking about that.  You know, what are we gonna do about these guys.  And at the same time as the political activities were going on there was also the lives of the cultural nationalism, where people were beginning to really think about Africa, and beginning to wear African clothing and take African names and all of that, which was not necessarily a good thing for us getting these progressive black men to think about feminism, because they were beginning to leak into a mythical kind of African past where we were then not only supposed to wear African clothes, but walk three paces behind, and all of that, when LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] was saying things, like women should be seen and not heard and all of those kinds of things.  So it made for someone like me who was born to agitate and raise questions, it was a very wonderful environment, because those were really worthy questions to focus our attention on.  How do you integrate race and gender?  How do you begin to as a black woman understand that you have to talk about gender as well as race, because otherwise you're denying part of what you really are.
Story_ID: 227956
Speaker 1: What did the men need to be talking about related to the struggles of women from the 1960s forward?
Speaker 2: Well I think that they, like all American men, were used to focusing on themselves as men with problems, whatever their problems were race, class, employment whatever it is, but they weren't at that point and we were not thinking about gender, and about feminism at that time in a way where we could push them to do it.  So that in an environment like the Civil Rights Movement where there really were life and death struggles going on, it was difficult I think for the women to say in addition to talking about race and how dangerous it is and all the things that are going on, you have to also now talk with us about how you're relating to us as women who are working here with you, because we are strategizing with you, our lives are on the line right here with you, we are organizing with you, we are registering people to vote, so why is it that we are treated differently because we happen to be women.  It was extremely difficult to get any of the men that I was aware of as being conscious African American men to talk about feminism.  My father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] who was my first progressive man in my life, argued with me until his death about feminism, because he just would not admit that women are discriminated against on the basis of gender.  And he was so progressive on questions of race that every little inch he was able to go with me on gender, I was so grateful because he fought it every step of the way, every single step of the way.
Speaker 1: What were some of the arguments that he would use to fight you?
Speaker 2: Well that women are doing fine, that women are doing fine, what's the problem?  What are you all arguing about?  Women run everything anyway.  That's the kind of thing that he would say.  Women run all the households, women really run the churches, so that just because you're not necessarily the pastors doesn't mean you don't run it.  And I would say well how would you feel, if that was an organization where the person in charge was a white male saying to all of you black men, just because you do all the work doesn't mean you get to be in charge but that didn't cross for him.  He couldn't really put himself in that position.  But my development as a feminist really did not come out of my experiences in the freedom struggle in black freedom struggle--
Story_ID: 227957
Speaker 1: They came later when I started talking to white feminists, and that was, I would say, after I had started working at [Atlanta] City Hall [Atlanta, Georgia], when I was working for [Mayor] Maynard Jackson, and I had a good friend who was a writer, a white woman, and she was also discovering feminism and we were coming to it the way many women come to it, which is we are stronger and smarter than we used to be and all the men that we're hanging around with are still treating us like we're fifteen years old, we can't stand it.  Why are we so unhappy, why are we so dissatisfied personally.  And then it becomes a wider question, because you realize that it isn't just you and your man having a problem, it isn't just you and your boyfriend, you and your husband, it's a whole set of behaviors that are, that are definable that you can look at in the same way that you can about race.  For me as a person who was already conscious and radical about race, once I really got it, the gender was the same thing, I was in heaven.  Because I already understood what oppression was.  I already understood how devastating it can be and how subtle it can be and all the different ways that it can manifest around race, so that when I understood about gender, I applied all of those things to my thinking about gender, and was able to with great struggle, and continue to have great struggle, to make black men take their racial experience, and apply it to what they need to understand about gender, but it's very difficult because it changes their role.  For us as black women I think it's not so difficult, because I'm a victim because of race and I'm a victim because of gender so that it's the same thing.  I understand that I'm oppressed.  For men, if they are being oppressed by race but they're oppressing when it comes to gender, it changes the role completely, and many of the progressive black men that I knew were not prepared to say that they oppressed anybody.  They were so used to being the victim of oppression that they fought tooth and nail against the fact that they could be oppressors as well.
Speaker 2: And how were black feminists reconciling race within feminism?
Speaker 1: I think that's one of the more depressing things that happens, and that happened to me as a person who was involved in movements, you know in the Civil Rights Movement and the anti-Vietnam War movement.  In the women's movement the fact that there was so little cooperation and cross between black feminists or feminists of any other color and middle-class white American feminists who pretty much defined how the feminist movement was viewed in the United States.  I went to many meetings where the issue of race needed to be addressed but the white middle-class women who were there as feminists were not prepared to address it, in much the same way that the conscious black men were not.  Because as women these conscious white feminists as women were oppressed by gender.  But for me to say to them that's fine about the gender, but you all what you just said is racist, so that you are oppressing me on the basis of race.  They could not get past it and it was very difficult because many times the meeting would dissolve before we ever got to the issue of, what are we gonna do about daycare or what are we gonna do about equal pay, because the white women had not addressed their own racism and we would get mad.  And people would argue, fuss, walk out all of that and many of the black women that I knew, that I took to meetings like that said, "I'm not doing it.  I don't care.  If these white girls are not gonna talk about race, I'm not going."  So it was a very difficult thing for the same reason, and I think in that way black women were in a very unique position, because trying to make coalitions with black men we have such a difficult time dealing with gender, trying to make coalitions with white women we have such a difficult time with race.  So that we end up often talking to each other about these issues, because it's only when it's just black women that we can talk about both of those oppressions and not have to stop and do the missionary work with the men, stop and do the missionary work with the white middle class women.  That it has to be a--sometimes I think we need that moment where we are all black and all female so that we can talk honestly about what that means for us.  'Cause our position is different than the black man's position and then the white women's.
Speaker 2: What is your response to womanism?
Speaker 1: I like the word.  I love Alice Walker and as far as I know that's her word, the womanist is a feminist of color.  I like that in the sense that many black women are not comfortable calling themselves feminist.  So that if they're more comfortable saying, I'm a womanist, but what they're really talking about are the same issues that I identify as feminist issues but they can't use the word, then I say fine.  Call yourself a womanist, that's fine.  Call yourself a free black woman.  Call yourself an Amazon warrior.  Whatever it is we call ourselves, as long as we're dealing with the feminist issues and with those kinds of things, it's fine with me.  I do think we give up something when we throw away the word feminism, because I love the word.  It connects us to a history.  It connects us to a world of people who have been trying to do things for years and years and years.  So that for us to say because we met some racist white American women who call themselves feminist, the word is tainted and we're not gonna use it.  I think it's throwing the baby out with the bathwater.  I think it's a great word.  I think that feminism has a noble wonderful history, and I think that we have been a part of it and we have a right to claim it.  If people are uncomfortable with it, you know I say name yourself what you will, but continue to be involved in what the struggle requires.
Story_ID: 227958
Speaker 1: At this point, let's kind of come back to your last--the last employment situation that you were speaking about.  You're writing, but you've gone from The [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Center [for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] into television [WXIA-TV, Channel 11, Atlanta, Georgia], what exactly happens from there?  What's next?
Speaker 2: I had Maynard Jackson as a guest on one of my shows, and he showed up in the lobby of Channel 11 like Maynard always showed up places, you know, bigger than life on time and introducing himself, like you could possibly think he was anybody other than Maynard Jackson.  And he was getting ready to--he was running for, getting ready to run for mayor, was involved in the campaign of running for mayor, and he did a wonderful interview, and when he came out at the end, I said I would really love to volunteer to help you in your campaign.  I think you're great.  You know, I'm a writer.  I can write speeches for you.  I would love to do it.  And he said, I would love for you to write speeches for me.  In fact I have a speech coming up this weekend that I would love for you to work on.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember--
Speaker 2: --he asked--
Speaker 1: --what the topic of the speech was?
Speaker 2: --oh, I totally do.  I totally do.  He was speaking to some veterans from the Vietnam War, and he wanted to talk about the war and he wanted to talk about how important their experiences were, and how now we had to be a part of helping him process those experiences, and be part of the community again and all of that, black Vietnam vets.  So I went home and told my husband, who was Michael at the time, I have a second marriage [to Zaron W. Burnett, Jr.], but I was married to Michael Lomax at the time, and I said, "Maynard wants us to write a speech for him," and he was in graduate school at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia].  So we were so excited because everybody knew that if things went the way they were supposed to, Maynard was gonna be the first black mayor of Atlanta [Georgia].  He was already a charismatic vice mayor.  So we were very excited to be doing something for him.  So we sat down and we had never written a speech together.  So we sat down and wrote a speech for him, gave it to the campaign guy who took it to Maynard and we were at home the day of the speech.  Didn't know how it had gone 'cause we weren't going.  Big car pulled up in front of our little house and Maynard got out of the car, came and rang the bell.  And of course we were freaked out, went to the door and figured, "Oh my God the speech must have been terrible, he's coming to say don't write anything else for me."  And he said, "That was a great speech.  I'm so happy to have y'all on my team," and went on to his next appointment.  And it changed our lives.  We went berserk.  I mean we were totally excited about being a part of something that we knew was gonna change everything in a good way about how business was done in Atlanta, that it was gonna make a big difference in terms of who was included, who got to be sitting at that table when they divided up money, what was gonna be happening at city hall, all of those things.  So that both of us at that point, we talked about it and we made a real commitment to work for him.  And we worked on his campaign and when he got elected, we both went to work for him.  You know, we quit our other jobs and went to work for him and I did that for two and a half years.  I was the press secretary of his first administration and it was the hardest job I've ever had in my life.  It was the most challenging job I've ever had in my life.  It was the most exhilarating, and the most depressing, and the one that made me feel the most satisfaction, and also the one that ultimately made me cry in my office every single day because there was so much to be done.  He was such a demanding boss, and he wanted everything to be done by tomorrow and you can't change a big city overnight.  So all of us who were there working loved him, loved what the mission was, and were actually you know weeping, and you know going crazy and trying to have babies, because we were all young people at that time, all of that.  So that it was a very stressful environment but I wouldn't trade it, because I really feel like I was so fortunate to be a part of what was going on there.  But I lasted two and a half years, and then I had to leave city hall you know I finally said to myself, when I was having my cry for the day, which I used to do every day in my little office.  I said, "I don't think this is required.  I really think that you get to do something else."  But I don't know if I would have had nerve enough to do it, except that I went home one night, and I used to have--I had--I was pregnant when I went to work for him, didn't realize it because I was very early in my pregnancy.  But I had my daughter [Deignan Lomax], and I would come home from work, spend some time with her, you know, talk to my husband for two seconds 'cause he was working for Maynard too, and then at about 11:30 at night I would have a chance to work on my own writing, and I remember one night, it's 11:30, I was exhausted but I didn't wanna lose my real work, what I really was, which was a writer.  And I sat down to work on a poem and I couldn't hear my own voice in my head.  All I could hear was the mayor's voice because I was writing speeches for him.  So my job was to have his voice in my head all the time, and when I sat down to work on my own work, his voice was still in my head and I was trying to write poems.  So of course I wept.  I mean I just said, "I have ruined everything."  I mean, I won't be able to do this.  So I had to quit that job, and of course my own voice came back and all of that, and I went back and worked in his next campaign and worked with him and for him anytime he ever asked me to until he passed, because I still think he was a great guy.  But for a poet, his voice was not the voice I needed to be writing love poems, so I had to leave that job, and find another one that didn't make me take it home.
Story_ID: 227959
Speaker 1: What did you do next?  Sounds to me as if your artist was consistently calling you.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And would get mad.  "I told you to quit this job, now you're taking too long."  So after that I said, when I left [Atlanta] City Hall [Atlanta, Georgia] I said, "Okay I'm not gonna take any more full time work.  I'm gonna believe that I can be a full time writer and take jobs, rent-paying jobs, I'm not gonna do stuff where my heart isn't in it."  So I did a lot of speechwriting for random people, not random in a bad sense, but not people who were trying to get elected mayor, some for politicians. I wrote a lot of speeches for Hank Aaron, which was wonderful.  So I did speechwriting, I did a lot of public relations writing, press releases and bios and things like that.  Helped people organize their advertising and public relations functions, things like that; didn't like it much at all, hated advertising, really, really hated advertising.  And finally got to the place where I could totally freelance, I didn't have to do the kind of PR I had been doing working with a firm, and I worked at the High Museum [of Art, Atlanta, Georgia] doing public relations for a while.  I finally got to the place where I could do enough freelance writing so I didn't have to have those kinds of jobs.  So I wrote for all the magazines I could find in Atlanta [Georgia].  Started writing for Essence nationally.  Did some work for Ms. and published a couple of things, smaller things.  I was writing columns for the Atlanta Gazette at that time which was wonderful, and then they got bought by Larry Flynt and I couldn't possibly work for Larry Flynt, for the Hustler guy, so I had to quit that job.  Then I started writing for Southline, which was an independent paper that existed for several years.  I wrote for them for a while.  Then I started writing columns for the Atlanta Tribune[: The Magazine], wrote for them for ten years.  So all of those ways of piecing together income allowed me to focus on my own writing and not have to put my heart and soul into somebody else's dream, like, I want to get elected mayor, so okay you can have my heart, my soul, my words everything so that I was not--what I learned from that is not to do that again because if you have a vision of your own you gotta stick with it.  And I wanted to--I wanted to write what was in my own head, not necessarily what was in somebody else's head.
Story_ID: 227960
Speaker 1: So the artist in you is clearly evolving and her voice is becoming more pronounced.  What types of things were you writing?  What were you trying to convey through your work?
Speaker 2: Well I was writing plays at that time.  I'm actually trained in playwriting so that I was writing plays.  I hadn't been writing fiction.  I had been writing essays and columns, but I hadn't been writing fiction.  I was concentrating mostly on plays, and I started working with Just Us Theater Company [Atlanta, Georgia].  There was something in Atlanta [Georgia] called the New Play Project at that time.  And every year the theater companies would get a very small grant to develop new work to nurture playwrights, and I had just met Don Bryan, who was one of the producers at Just Us Theater at that time, and I was married to a politician, because Michael [Lomax] at that time had been elected to the Fulton County Board of Commissioners.  So Don Bryan was coming to talk to me as a politician's wife about working with them on audience development and all of that, and I said, "Well I'm not really prepared to function as a politician's wife.  I'm a playwright, I got a play.  Would you read my play?"  So he said, you know, okay, and he later told me he said, "Oh my God, this is terrible, you know, she's really--she's a politician's wife.  She can't write plays."  So he read the play, and I'm a playwright, so it was a good play.  He loved it.  So they said, "We would love to do this in the New Play Project."  And it was called 'puppetplay' and they did it in the New Play Project and we sold it out.  We had standing room only, and people sitting on the floor, and all of that, which was our first project together with me and Just Us.  And the play had two female characters and a seven foot marionette, which was constructed for me by Janie Geiser, who is now an internationally recognized puppeteer but at that time was a good friend of mine with a little tiny studio at Nexus [Atlanta Contemporary Art Center, Atlanta, Georgia], and she was making puppets.  So I said, "I need a seven foot puppet.  Can you make a seven foot puppet?"  And she made a seven foot puppet, which I still have actually, for the play, and it went so well and my experience with the people at Just Us was so good that they asked me if I would like to be the playwright in residence there, and I became the playwright in residence and wrote a new play for them every year for five years.  So that was really wonderful.  'puppetplay' was the first one.  Then I had two one-acts together, 'Banana Bread' and 'Hospice.'  'Hospice' later went on to New York [New York].  It was done at the New Federal Theatre [New York, New York].  'puppetplay' actually opened the season after it was here at the Negro Ensemble Company in New York.  They built their own puppet though.  They thought my puppet was too thin so they built a stockier puppet for New York.  But I wrote 'Hospice' here and then 'Essentials,' which was a play about a woman politician, 'Good News,' which was a love story with a happy ending.  And 'A Little Practice,' was the last piece that I did for them, which was kind of a hybrid play/performance art, because I was hanging around at that time with a lot of radical performance artists, so that I was less concerned with the traditional proscenium theater, and more interested in exploring other ways of using the theater, and as a radical I had already been involved in street theater, where you go to the pool room and think that you're gonna energize all of these people who are playing pool into doing something revolutionary by doing a play outside of the front of the pool room, which never works.  I mean, we used to try to do this in [Washington] D.C., and the people would be like, "We are trying to play pool, we really don't wanna hear about this right now."  But we were trying to be artists of the people.  So that the--when I started working with performance artists that really brought some of that back to me and I was interested in seeing what I could do outside of the confines of a regular straight one-act play, or full-length play, and I at that point started working more on performance art.  I was divorced by then and was working with Zaron [W.] Burnett [Jr.] who later became my second husband.  And we actually became the people who ran Just Us Theater.  The original crowd went off to do something else, and we became the people who were running it.  And he created a performance environment for us to do performance art, and it was called Club Zebra, and his idea was, Zaron's idea was that we were gonna be talking about radical, political things in a way that was different than traditional theater, and what he wanted was to create an environment where our audiences, who were overwhelmingly black audiences would be open to these radical political ideas, and he said that he thought the environment where our audiences would be most comfortable and where he was most comfortable was a nightclub, a speakeasy setting.  So I said fine with me.  So we actually had a space that had tables like a night club, zebra tablecloths on them.  We had jazz, we would have Joe Jennings who is a jazz musician, wonderful musician from Atlanta, used to play with us a lot, and we set it up just like it was a club.  We served drinks, complimentary drinks because you couldn't serve drinks without a liquor license, but we had drinks, little hors d'oeuvres and people actually thought it was a club that was just like any other nightclub.  And then after the music we would do some kind of performance art and talk about stuff.  You know, talk about issues of race, issues of gender, politics, whatever it was and had a great time doing it.  Our audiences loved it.  We loved it.  Everybody was comfortable.  And it was a real challenging way I think for me to try to take the more traditional theater training that I had, and use it in a way that brought more people to the work that we were doing, and I really thank my husband for that, Zaron for that, because he was trained in healthcare not trained in theater.  So he had none of that stuff in his head that I had in mine about, you must do it this way.  You gotta do it this way.  You know he was like no we're gonna do it the way that works and the things that we ended up doing worked perfectly.  Although I'm sure my introduction of theater teacher at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] would have been horrified by some of the stuff we were doing.  It was very exciting and really gave me a chance to work fast, which helped me to develop my voice 'cause we were doing like a show a week sometimes, with new materials, so that it makes you find a style, find a voice, find out what you're trying to say, in a way that was very helpful to me as I continued to write and develop as a writer.
Story_ID: 227961
Speaker 1: What do you think about the more recent def poets and performance poetry movement?
Speaker 2: I think it's great.  I think it's wonderful.  And I think it's completely in the line of what we know from the '60s [1960s].  I mean it's the last poets, which were you know they were four wonderful guys, who you know did radical poetry with drums and all of that.  It's exactly that same kind of thing.  I think rap is that same kind of thing.  So I'm very enthusiastic about spoken word things, especially since it gives people a way of not just writing their poems and putting them in a book and hoping somebody reads it.  If you're gonna perform your poetry, which is what we all used to do in the '60s [1960s], and what they're doing now, you have to be prepared to engage the audience so that it's a different process.  It's not just write it down and make sure that every little line is correct.  It's write it down, make sure every line is correct, and figure out how to say it in a way that's gonna hold somebody's attention, and get them to have not only an intellectual response to what you're doing but an emotional response to what you're doing.  So I think it's great.  I mean, I hope they keep doing it.
Story_ID: 227962
Speaker 1: Many grassroots artists celebrate your self-publication, I think, of your first novel, if I'm not mistaken--
Speaker 2: It's probably 'Mad at Miles: [A Black Woman's Guide to Truth,' Pearl Cleage] is what they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Mad at Miles,' exactly.
Speaker 2: 'Mad at Miles,' yeah.
Speaker 1: Could you discuss that?  What made you self-publish, and the content in that particular text is particularly provocative.
Speaker 2: Well that, 'Mad at Miles' and it's subtitled, 'A Black Woman's Guide to Truth,' and it actually was published by several of my cousins who had straight jobs who were not artists.  One was a lawyer, one was a doctor and they had a little disposable income, and so they wanted to start a publishing company, and they asked me if I had anything that I would let them publish.  And I said are you kidding.  I'll put a book together for you.  And we had been doing all of these Club Zebras that I was talking about, and that's where 'Mad at Miles' came from, because I was talking about Miles Davis and about how much I had loved his music, and thought he was such a musical genius, but that he was such a mean, abusive guy toward women, and how do you, how do you make peace with the beauty of the art and the ugliness of the artist.  And I was, you know, I was mad at Miles.  So I was talking about being mad at Miles and I was able to do it fearlessly, although people really were, you know the Miles Davis fans mostly brothers, were mad at me for having the temerity to critique Miles Davis.  But I was doing it in the Club Zebra setting, my husband [Zaron W. Burnett, Jr.] was there.  We had all the guys that worked with us, I mean they weren't bouncers, but they sort of were if anybody was out of control.  So that I was in that wonderful position of being able to say whatever I wanted, and know I wasn't gonna get shouted down by the more vehement Miles Davis fans.  So that all of that opened up a whole lot of pieces, short pieces for me that were talking about issues of gender, that were talking about specifically how the black community could think about these things, and a lot of those pieces found their way into 'Mad at Miles.'  It came out right after another book that came out by Shahrazad Ali, and I want to get the name of the book right, but it's called something like 'The Blackman's Guide to [Understanding] the Blackwoman' [Shahrazad Ali], I think was the title of it and it was just awful.  It was just terrible.  It was very sexist.  It said to men, "If the women said something you don't agree with, slap her in the mouth."  It was just awful, and a lot of black men embraced it because it allowed them to think that this was a woman saying this is how they should behave.  So that the reason I subtitled 'Mad at Miles: A Black Woman's Guide to Truth,' was because her book was a "Black Man's Guide to the Black Woman," and I wanted to say no, that's wrong.  Don't believe all of that.  Do not slap women in the mouth when you disagree with them.  Listen to what they have to say, because they're probably telling you something you don't know.  So that there were all kinds of things in there at the beginning of 'Mad at Miles,' actually it says think of this as a workbook.  Think of this as a way for you as a reader to begin to look at your attitudes about race, look at your attitudes about gender.  So that those, those pieces are--it's a little tiny book but the pieces have flown all over the Internet.  You know people will tell me, oh, I saw your piece on this, or I saw your piece on this.  And which is fine with me.  The only thing that annoys me is when people will say, well, use one of the pieces, the whole piece, and then say the author is anonymous.  And I wanna say, no, no, you can use it, but say who the author is, and say this is where it came from, this is where I can find out more, and all of that, but the good thing is that those pieces in that book hit a chord in people, I think, who had wanted to think about gender, and didn't really have a way into it, so that I always am pleased that we were able to publish it, because it did, I think, raise a level of discussion for people who read it.
Story_ID: 227963
Speaker 1: So we were discussing 'Mad About Miles' [sic. 'Mad at Miles: A Black Woman's Guide to Truth,' Pearl Cleage]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and what was the next piece that you published after that?
Speaker 2: Well I was writing.  I had been writing plays with Just Us Theater [Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and then I did some--we did all of those Club Zebras, which was a chunk of performances.  And then I started working with [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon, who was, who is a director, and who had just become the artistic director at the Alliance Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia], and he said--called me up and said, "We have been trying to work together for a long time."  He was an actor primarily then, and had just gotten into directing, but we had never had a chance to work together, and I loved him, he was a good friend of mine is still a very good friend of mine.  And he said, "I have some money in the budget here to commission plays.  Do you have anything you'd like to work on here?"  And of course we had been working in small black theaters so the idea of actually having money to commission a play was so wonderful to him and I was so grateful that he had thought that I could do this, 'cause that's the kind of work I had been doing at Just Us, but we weren't doing plays at that time.  So I said "Yes, I have a play I just started working on, and it's called 'Flyin' West.'"  And it was a play about black women going west after the Civil War, set in 1898, and I developed it working with Kenny at the Alliance, and we had a great time doing it.  The cast was wonderful.  So that was 1994, we did that one.  And then two years later we did 'Blues for an Alabama Sky,' also at the Alliance, which Phylicia Rashad came down to do that one with us, and she had been a friend of mine in my class at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so that when I heard she was interested in doing it I was really happy, because she had just finished 'The Cosby Show,' so that it definitely was gonna get a lot of attention for the production.  She came down, she was wonderful.  So that was a great experience.  And then I did one more with Kenny called 'Bourbon at the Border,' which was about some survivors of the Civil Rights Movement having a hard time with the experiences that they had had living in Detroit [Michigan].  So we did three plays together, and then I started writing fiction.
Story_ID: 227964
Speaker 1: I wrote a novel called 'What Looks Like Crazy on an Ordinary Day,' [Pearl Cleage] and I actually had wanted it to be a play because I was not comfortable thinking of myself as a novelist.  I had never tried to write novels, but I couldn't figure out how to make it a play and I wanted to--this was '95 [1995] I guess, '96 [1996] that I started working on it, and I wanted to write, specifically I wanted to create a black female character who was dealing with the challenge of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  My best friend was HIV positive at the time, and he eventually died of AIDS.  Bill Bagwell was his name.  And I wanted very much to write something that talked about a person with HIV, but not putting them in the position of, oh this is so sad, this is so terrible, their life is over, they're gone.  Because he was the most full of life person I knew up until the very last moment of his life.  So the book grew out of me wanting to write about that, kind of because I was--to say to him, you can do this, we can--you can still have adventures, you can still have your life until your life is over.  And also to communicate with the black women who were reading my work and looking at my work to say, this is something that we have to think about.  This is not something we can say that's just something those other people have to deal with.  We've gotta deal with HIV, we have to think about AIDS.  So the story that evolved from me thinking about those two things became 'What Looks Like Crazy,' and I couldn't make it a play, too many different settings and characters and all that.  So I started writing, and I wrote two hundred pages trying to write third-person, because I felt like if I was really gonna be a novelist I had to be serious.  And when you're trying to write as a black woman and be serious you know you got Alice Walker sitting on one shoulder, Toni Morrison sitting on the other shoulder, and you're intimidated.  I was, by the idea of novels.  So finally after two hundred bad pages, I wasn't having any fun with it, and I wasn't liking what I was writing.  I threw it away, and started again writing first-person, which for me as a playwright was much more familiar because it's--
Speaker 2: When you say you threw it away, do you mean literally?
Speaker 1: Literally threw it away.  See I said that very casually, but I was really evil for about two weeks, but it wasn't good, it wasn't working and it wasn't--there was no way to fix it.  So part of the thing I think about being a good writer is when it's wrong, and you know it can't be fixed, you gotta bite the bullet and throw it away.  So I threw it away.  Started again and wrote it in her voice, the main character's voice, and it went great.  It was a process that was familiar to me.  I wasn't intimidated.  I kicked Alice Walker and Toni Morrison out of my mental office so that I wasn't worrying about trying to write novels like they were writing, and just wrote the story that I had in mind.  And I had really a good time with it.  I had published a book of essays that included a lot of the work that was in 'Mad at Miles[: A Black Woman's Guide to Truth,' Pearl Cleage], and some new work because a publisher had seen 'Mad at Miles' a black woman editor at a publishing house.  Ballantine [Books, New York, New York] had seen 'Mad at Miles,' someone had given it to her.  She asked me if I was interested in writing a book of essays to expand on it.  And I did and it was called 'Deals With the Devil, and Other Reasons to Riot,' [Pearl Cleage] and it did well, they were pleased, I was pleased, and so when I--they asked me if I wanted to write another book of essays, and I said, "Well I'm actually working on a novel if you all would be interested."  So they were interested.  I finished it.  I liked it.  We did a Club Zebra.  I read aloud from it.  People really loved it.  It was wonderful.  I sent it to the publisher and they hated it.  My editor absolutely hated it.  She didn't tell me that she hated it for months, and I was calling New York [New York], and saying, "Is it just terrible, please tell me, this is my first novel.  I need to, you know, maybe I can fix it."  So she finally called me and said, "This is a terrible book.  The characters are unlikeable.  It's really not good, and we can't possibly publish it, and if you are thinking of taking it elsewhere, you shouldn't do that because if this book ever gets out, you'll never be able to make a living as a writer again."  And I said, "Wow, this must really be a terrible book."  I mean, I was crushed.  But I remembered having read it at Club Zebra, and the people loved it.  So I said, I think she's wrong.  I don't think that whatever she's reacting to has anything to do with the quality of the book.  So I called my friend [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell, who was also a black woman writer, and told her what my editor had said, and she said, "What did your agent say?"  I said, "I don't have an agent, because she's a black woman, I'm a black woman, I thought we could just work together, the editor at the publishing house."  Bebe said, "She's not your sister.  She's working for the publisher.  You need an advocate.  You need an agent."  So she gave me several people's names, and I called several of them, and I ended up with a black woman who has her agency [Stinson Literary Agency] in Detroit [Michigan], Denise Stinson.  She said, "Send me the book overnight.  I'll read it, and if it is as bad as she says I'll tell you.  If it's not we'll sell it elsewhere."  So I sent it to her.  She read it immediately and called me, and said, "Your editor is crazy.  I know I can get you an advance for this.  You can pay back your old advance.  It's gonna do great.  This is a great book."  So I said, okay, so we did, bought it back from the other publisher.  The people--my new publisher was Avon Books [Avon Publications, New York, New York] and they published it in 1997 and it did well.  It sold thirty thousand copies in hardback and then they asked me if I wanted to write another one and I said that I did--
Story_ID: 227965
Speaker 1: --I signed a contract to write another one, and then the first one ['What Looks Like Crazy on an Ordinary Day,' Pearl Cleage] got picked by the Oprah Winfrey book club [Oprah's Book Club], which means that it went from selling thirty thousand copies to selling eight hundred thousand copies.  So my publisher [Avon Publications, New York, New York] was ecstatic because of course the advance they had given me was nowhere near what they would have to give me if they had waited until after the after the sales of the book, but it was completely unexpected, a really wonderful gift for me as a first-time novelist, because her audience is so vast that what it did was immediately present my book to twelve million people, or however many people watch Oprah every day, so that the book became a New York Times Best Seller.  It was up to number two on the list, and it stayed on their list for nine weeks and sold all those copies, and you know it was really wonderful.  So that it established for me a certain readership which meant that then I was able to as a novelist to receive better advances and have better advertising for my books and all of that because the books sold so many copies, that first one.
Speaker 2: And did you ever hear back from the publisher who--
Speaker 1: From the old editor?
Speaker 2: --exactly.
Speaker 1: I never did.  I never did.  And all my friends who were so angry that she said all those terrible things to me were like, you need to call her and say, you see, this is what happened.  And I said no you can't do that because when the universe sends you a gift like the Oprah Winfrey book club, after you've already had the gift of selling it to another publisher, and being validated and vindicated by the people who read it, and then on top of that you get Oprah, you really should not be in a position to call people and say "I told you, this was," you know, don't do it, just don't even send that out into the world.  So I restrained myself.  I never did that.  But I often wonder how she felt about it because I'm sure she knew it.  You know, she works in publishing and all those Oprah books become something that people know but I never heard from her again after that.  But--
Speaker 2: And how did you sustain your level of confidence and tenacity after receiving that quality of critique of your work?
Speaker 1: Well, I had been writing all my life and I had been--I was a very successful playwright, I was a very successful essayist, I was a very successful columnist.  I mean in terms of the response that I was looking for people liked my work; I knew I was getting better and better and better as a writer.  So that I was, of course it was terrible to hear that kind of thing from someone who is supposed to be a professional in your field, but I think the thing in addition to all the things I had already done, the fact that I had read this specific work a big chunk of it in front of a live audience of people who really liked it meant to me that I think that something is wrong in terms of how this woman is reading it, 'cause I had better evidence than that.  And my husband [Zaron W. Burnett, Jr.] was very helpful to me, Zaron was very helpful in saying, "Think about the response you got at Club Zebra.  It had nothing to do with anything this woman was talking about.  People loved the characters, they loved the issues that you were talking about, they loved the love story that was in the book.  I mean they leaped to their feet and wept and all of that, so think about what you know, don't think about what somebody else told you just because they happen to be working for a big publisher in New York [New York]."  So I said, "Okay, maybe he's right, maybe he's right."  But I think if I had been twenty-five years old and just starting out, I think I would have been devastated.  I don't know what effect it would have had on me if I had been a person who hadn't already established for myself that I knew what I was doing and I was good at it.  I think that the experience would have been very destructive to me, where it was just kind of a blip in the road as it turned out in the--after that one I wrote another called 'I Wish I had A Red Dress' [Pearl Cleage].  I have one that's out now called 'Some Things I Never Thought I'd Do,' [Pearl Cleage] which is set in Atlanta [Georgia].  I have another one coming out in April called 'Babylon Sisters' [Pearl Cleage] and I'm working on one that'll be out probably a year or so from now called 'Baby Brother's Blues' [Pearl Cleage].  So I feel good about all of them.  I mean, I think the novels are completely different form that I'm still learning, but I really love the ability to continue to work through them.
Speaker 2: What's at the core of how you're inspired?  These are a lot of novels coming forward bubbling.
Speaker 1: Well you know the thing is, this is what I do.  This is what I've always wanted to do.  I've always, since I was that little kid tormenting my sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] about teaching me how to read, I knew I wanted to be a writer.  The idea that not only am I able to continue to write, but that I can make a living at it, is just so amazing to me every single day of my life, that the life that I wanted as a little bitty kid in Detroit [Michigan] is exactly the life that I have, and I know that my mother [Doris Graham Cleage] wanting to travel and all that when I travel and do all the things, and go international and all those things that I've done now, I think about how much she would have liked this life for me.  So that it's really wonderful when I look at my grandmothers who wanted to work and their husbands said, "No you gotta stay at home, 'cause that's what the woman does."  And my marriage is nothing like that.  My life is nothing like that, so that I know that I carry with me all of those yearnings that they had, all of that wanting to be active in the world, wanting to be able to express themselves and I know when I do that, that I'm also doing it because they didn't have a chance to.  So that it's a--I have never had a problem with writer's block, what do I write about and how do I do it?  My problem is trying to write as fast as I'm thinking.  You know, how can I possibly tell all the stories that I want to tell before I'm gone, before I have to move on to my next life.
Story_ID: 227966
Speaker 1: What other kinds of things have you been involved in as of recent?  Writing clearly occupies a large space in your life.  What other things occupy space?
Speaker 2: Family is real important to me.  I have a daughter [Deignan Lomax] who just turned thirty, and I have two little tiny little grandchildren, one who is ten months old whose name is Chloe Pearl, named after her grandmother [Pearl Reed Cleage] so that's wonderful, and a grandson who is two, Michael [Lomax], so that they live three doors from me.  They just recently moved out of--they relocated from New Orleans [Louisiana] so now they living close to me which is wonderful.  So I'm spending a lot of time walking down the street with my little grandchildren, being granny.  I think that the wonderful gift of having my grandchildren that close to me is that same kind of seeing myself connected to a family that goes on.  The fact of knowing all of these ancestors that my sister has looked up, and then knowing the ones that I know, 'cause I knew my great-grandmother [Jennie Virginia Turner].  That was as far back as I actually knew the people in my family, and then I knew all my grandparents and you know uncles and aunts and all of that.  But I think having grandchildren has been a very soothing, really, experience for me because it makes you understand that you don't have to do everything.  You don't have to fix everything.  You don't have to figure out everything, because my granddaughter has to do some of that.  My grandson has to do some of that, so that it takes away I think some of the feeling that I had as a young person, which was, I gotta fix all this before I'm thirty-five, and I'm not working fast enough.  Okay forty-five, okay now I'm fifty-five and I don't feel like I have to fix it.  I feel like I have to continue to do the work that I'm trying to do, but I also I think have the new kind of feeling about what I do which is based on looking at my daughter and looking at her children and seeing that line not only stretching out behind me as far as I know it goes, but also imagining it stretching on in front of me as far as it goes.  You know, because I want my grandchildren to be able to say, we are really proud of you that you did all of this, and now we're gonna do whatever it is they're gonna do.  You know I look at 'em, I'm sure people do this, I remember doing it with my daughter and now I'm doing it with my grandchildren.  You know where you look at them when they're sleeping, and say, "Wow I hope I'm around when they're twenty, I hope I'm around when they're twelve, to see what they think about the world, to be able to talk to me about whatever music they're listening to, all of those things, so."  I think between work and family, my life is pretty much that circle.
Story_ID: 227967
Speaker 1: What causes do you feel passionate about?
Speaker 2: I think most passionate at this moment about women, about women and children.  Race is certainly something that always is present, but I'd feel a much more profound I think connection to other women, to mothers when I look at the pictures on the news of what's going on in Iraq and I look at the bombing of some place like Fallujah [Iraq] which is full of civilians, and I can't help wondering what is happening to those woman, what is happening to all those little kids.  How can we as women begin to make the connections with each other that we need to make nationally and internationally, so that we can figure out a way to run the world that is more peaceful and more productive than the one that--the one--the ways that men have been able to figure out how to run the world, because men are still running the world.  I don't care what we do and what we say at this moment, men are in charge of how the world works, and I think they've done a terrible job.  I think the men in this country should be ashamed of themselves for the kind of violent impetus that they have put forward and unleashed in the world.  I think it's outrageous, and I am so concerned about the fate of women and children who don't get to make the decisions, but who are horribly injured and maimed and killed in the war.  So that I'm very conscious of trying to have a more international view, to not be trapped in that American construct about race that says black and white is all there is to talk about, because there's a lot more to talk about, and in this country when we continue to just make it black and white, we act like there aren't people of many other nationalities here now doing all kinds of things.  I remember when a couple of months ago, there was a thing saying that the population was shifting in this country and that pretty soon Latinos were going to be the biggest minority.  And a lot of the black folks that I know were just outraged.  You know, they were mad about that.  And I said, "Why are you angry?"  And the anger comes from we're used to being the minority.  We're used to being the one who hollers, we're used to being the big minority and now what if we're not the big minority, then who will we be?  And I keep saying, we'll be citizens of the world.  We'll be able to talk to them about what their experiences are as Americans, we'll be able to talk to all of these people who don't speak English but who live here.  You know, rather than saying, you gotta speak English, you gotta do it the way we do it, let's really try to make it bigger.  You know my--the book that I have coming out in April is really trying to talk about women being friends, being able to work together even though they're not all from the same country.  So I think at this moment my real focus is trying to see if there's a way that women can connect in a way that I don't think we have yet.  But it's very possible, and I'm hopeful about that.
Story_ID: 227968
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to add to the interview, something perhaps that I haven't asked?
Speaker 2: Just, I don't even know, I was gonna say just and then couldn't think of what the just would be.  I think it's an amazing project that you're trying to do, and I think that talking to people about their lives is very similar to what I do, except I make the people up.  I make up their lives, and I think that sometimes when people say to me that sounds so much like what happened to me.  That sounds so much like what happened to my grandmother.  Then I feel like as a writer of fiction, as a creator of fictional characters, I've done something correctly, because what I make people do is think of the people that they know.  Think of how much they love their own grandmother, think of how much they felt when their first little baby was born, think of how much they really enjoyed being in love when they were able to surrender and be in love with somebody.  So that it's--I think that the work that I do, and just talking about my own life, is just like energizing to me because I think that stories are the main thing, and I love that the work that I do is ancient work in a sense that it's just like people sitting around the campfire, talking about what they saw, what they think you know, what those animals might be, what our community is gonna be.  I mean, all the way back to when we were living in caves so that it--I think it's something that connects me that far back and that I think that people will always do, tell the stories about their lives and have people designated like me to tell the stories about the people that we make up.
Story_ID: 227969
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what has been important to you?
Speaker 2: I feel good about it, because I think I question myself a lot.  I'm very much in favor of self-examination, and I do that a lot, and I'm not afraid to change if I see something, and I know that I now know better, then I will go back, and say the reason I said this was at this time all I knew was this.  Now I know better so that I'm prepared to say I was wrong, or I'm building on what I knew, but to keep trying to do more, to understand more and to take advantage of the situations where I find myself to learn something, to look at people, to figure out why they do what they do, and it's endlessly fascinating to me so that I'm blessed in that the work that I do lends itself to the kind of person that I am, and that I was raised to be.  I think I would be a writer whatever family I had been born into.  The fact that I was born into the conscious radical black family that I was born into means that my writing is filtered always through social consciousness and those things, but I think stripped of all of that, I think in the same way that I am a woman, and am very comfortable with that.  I think I feel the same about writing.  That it's as important to me and as a much a part of what I know myself to be as being female.  I can't imagine not doing it.
Story_ID: 227970
Speaker 1: For those who aspire to become writers, what types of recommendations or suggestions would you have for them?
Speaker 2: I would say you have to write every day.  People sometimes think because we all use the language when we write letters or term papers or whatever that you can just sit down and you have a great idea and write down the wonderful short story or the great American novel, or whatever it is, and I always try to say to young writers, if you were gonna try and play a trumpet like Miles Davis, with his mean self, if you were gonna play that beautifully, you'd have to practice every day, and you would know that.  You'd get up every morning if you wanted to be a ballerina, and put those toe shoes on, and practice every day.  If you're gonna write, you gotta do the same thing.  You have to write either in a journal, or work on a story, but you have to spend some time every day, just like if you were a musician, you'd be playing scales, because if you don't do it every day, your craft won't be able to support the weight of your ideas.  You'll have great ideas, but you'll write yourself into a corner, because you won't have the craft to know what to do to shape that idea.  People come to me all the time and say I write fifty pages and it was great and I didn't know what to do.  But that's because they haven't taught themselves or been taught the craft of writing.  So you have to practice it, just like you would if you were a dancer or playing music.  And then when you have a great idea, your craft will be able to support whatever depth of idea you have, 'cause you'll know how to do it, how to present it.  And I know I got that from my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.], watching him read all of those complicated books he was reading, and then listening to how he translated that into a Sunday morning sermon.  It's exactly the same process that I use, so that it's the same thing, take what you know and figure out how to say it to regular people, who while you're reading all these books 'cause that's your job, they're going to work at Ford's [Ford Motor Company] factory or they're going to work at whatever they do for a living at the hospital being a nurse, being a doctor.  My feeling always was and I know this is directly from my father that our job is read and synthesize and organize this information, and present it to people when you have a chance to talk to them, and his chance was always on Sunday morning.  My chance is when they pick up my novel, go to see my play, whatever it is, but it's the same thing.  If they turn their attention to you in the midst of all the work they're doing, all the family stuff they're doing and say what do you have to say?  Your job is to have something interesting to say, and to say it clearly so that when they leave your presence, they'll remember what you said, and be able to say it to the next person who'll be able to say it to the next person, the next person and the next.
Story_ID: 227971
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I wanna keep writing.  I wanna get better as a writer.  The novel I'm working on now ['Baby Brother's Blues,' Pearl Cleage] is my first third-person one.  That was the last time I tried that, I threw away those two hundred pages.  So I've written several books in first-person, and I knew it was time for me to go back and try to third-person again because first-person was beginning to frustrate me.  When you're writing first-person, you only can write what that person saw or thought.  In a third-person novel, which my husband [Zaron W. Burnett, Jr.] who also writes novels, keeps saying to me, "That's what I been trying to tell you, that's what I been trying to tell you."  But what I finally now understand is the beauty of it is, you can see everything as the writer.  In a first-person book you can only see what your main character sees.  So I'm very excited to work with the form as I begin to understand it better.  So you know there's the things like that that are directly related to my craft as a writer.  And then there's just all the things that have to do with loving the people that you love, spending time with them, watching my grandchildren grow up and learn how to walk and cut teeth and all of that stuff.  I've been married for ten years.  You know, figure out what the shape of that continues to be as we you know love each other and live together and get to know each other more and more and more and more.  It's like, the opportunities to have a life where you actually are doing something that means something to you, I think is so rare and so great that I'm always conscious of trying to push myself to do it.  You know, I'm surrounded by people that love me so I'm pushing myself to be grateful for that, to love them.  I'm surrounded by people who want to read my work, so I push myself to be as good at it as I can be, because it's a real blessing.  I mean I've gotten not only everything that I hoped I would get as that little kid in Detroit [Michigan] but so much more than I ever thought would happen to me.  You know, to go around the world and see my plays done in London [England].  I mean I could not have conceived of that growing up on the west side of Detroit, could not have conceived of selling almost a million copies of a book.  You know, could not conceive of having plays done in New York City [New York, New York], all of that.  And since all of that has happened, you know I feel like I'm supposed to keep doing it.  You know there's a reason why I'm doing all of this, and I don't have to know what the reason is, I just have to keep doing it you know so that when I'm gone away and my little granddaughter [Chloe Pearl] is thirty years old and picks up one of my books, she'll say, "Oh my God, this made me understand it."  You know, "Thanks granny."
Story_ID: 227972
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done already that you would have liked to have done differently?
Speaker 2: Not really.  There's things that of course I would have done better if I had done them now, but that's 'cause I'm fifty-five now.  I couldn't possibly have been as smart about men and women and what love is as I am now at--when I was twenty-five.  So that, definitely looking back I would have said, this is a bad guy, why did you waste time with him, or this was not a good move for your budget, why did you do that?  But not really, nothing major.  I wouldn't change a thing.  I wouldn't take back a thing because I think all of it helped me have the struggles that made me understand the things that I want so desperately to understand about life and death and people and love and family and all that stuff.  I don't think you can spend time regretting what you didn't know.  You know, I think you have to look at it and say, what did I learn from that one?  You know, what could I have done differently?  And if you could have done it differently, then think about how, but not to waste a lot of time on it.  Try to do it better next time.  Same thing with the books.  You know, I read them when they're done and I say damn, I could have gotten chapter three, could have been perfect if I had just known this.  You know but you can't, you can't know it.  You know you learn it as you go, you learn it every time.  There's things I would do completely differently with my daughter [Deignan Lomax].  I'm really good at creative things but I'm terrible as a disciplinarian, and you gotta be able to say no as a mother.  I never knew how to do that.  So if I could, I would have done that differently, but she turned out fine.  So regretting it I think is really a waste you know it doesn't get you any place, you can't change it.  It's that thing about, "The moving finger writes and having writ moves on," it's an Omar Khayyam thing I think, but you know, it's a wonderful thing, but all it means is you can't go back and change it, you know, so look ahead.
Story_ID: 227973
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most?  I'm not sure I understand the question.  What stands out the most in terms of what's been most important to me, or?
Speaker 1: It could be what's been the most important, it can be moments, it could be phases.  It could be anything, like if someone were asking you to reflect the past fifty-five years--
Speaker 2: Okay, I got it.
Speaker 1: --what would the first things be that just pop in your mind?
Speaker 2: I think the thing that really shaped the life that I now have was coming to Atlanta [Georgia], which was in 1969.  And I didn't come here, as many people came here, because it was the black mecca and everything was gonna be great and you know people came here especially around the time that Maynard [Jackson] was elected the first time, because it had such great national press, I came here for personal reasons so that I didn't expect to really like it.  My grandfather [Mershell C. Graham] had given me all those warnings about Georgia.  I was a little nervous about all of that, and I really did not expect to be here long.  I expected to be here a few years and then to be going back north, and I think coming to Atlanta actually changed the direction of my life, focused my life in terms of really grounding me in a community, and in my case in a black community in southwest Atlanta, which is my little village in a way that has influenced all of the work that I do, that has influenced where I chosen to live because I can't imagine leaving this place.  And I never really thought about places having that kind of importance in my work or even in my life, but I think it really does because Atlanta has been such a specific community that I can see and get my mind around, that I think it really has--had the greatest influence on me that really if I was gonna name one I'd have to say coming to Atlanta.
Story_ID: 227974
Speaker 1: What values do you consider to be the most important, and why?
Speaker 2: I think that we make things really complicated when we try to talk about values.  When we think about what's a good person, what's a bad person and it's--I think it's the [14th] Dalai Lama who says, "My religion is kindness," you know compassion, be kind because there really is no way to be confused about that.  You know when something is kind and you know when something is not kind.  And I think that for me that's always at the heart of it.  I wanna be compassionate.  I want to be able to channel whatever rage I have into really being compassionate about how complicated it is for people to live their lives, to really be able to grasp how much people struggle to be good people, to take care of themselves, to take care of the people they're responsible for.  So that I think that I'm always trying to, in my work and in my life, to not get angry and fuss at somebody because I think they could have done it better or I think they should have done it differently but to be compassionate about what people faced in their lives and the choices that they make.
Story_ID: 227975
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want for people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I really don't care.  I really don't.  I think it would be great if they say nice things about me, but I will be gone, and I truly don't care.  You know when people say, well don't you want you know to leave a legacy and all of that and I'm sure my work will be around for a while, but I never spend time thinking about that.  I, you know I really don't.  I think that the people that love me will say loving things about me.  Everybody else I really--I'll be gone.  I won't care.
Story_ID: 227976
Speaker 1: So the next question is gonna be really interesting because (laughter) the next question was, what do you want your legacy to be, and perhaps it could be interpreted a bit differently, if you think, or you locate yourself in historical context of women of African descent writing in the U.S. [United States].
Speaker 2: Well I think in that sense I do think about my work.  Not necessarily because I wanna be remembered, but I do think I understand where my work fits in to my generation of black women writers.  And I also think that what I'm doing is something that needs to be done, which is back to my father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] legacy to me, but to be able to take this big explosion of black women writing that has occurred since [HistoryMaker] Terry McMillan published 'Waiting to Exhale,' to be a part of that, and to say what I'm going to do is to tap into this audience of black women who are looking for romances, who are looking for books where the black women struggle but they find the great guy at the end, and there's a huge group of black women who are looking for books that the publishing world calls romances.  So I'm writing in a genre that has a title, which is romances.  But I'm not really writing romances, I'm writing--a friend of mine at Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] said that what I'm doing is writing stealth fiction, because they seem to be love stories but what they really are, are revolutionary romances.  They're talking about transformation of community.  They're talking about transformation of relationships between men and women.  They're talking about domestic violence.  They're talking about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  They're talking about how older women can communicate to younger woman who need that information, the information that we have.  So I think that I'm--really the way that I'm working is trying to lure people in by making them think that this isn't going to be a difficult challenging thing, you'll love this book, you'll love these people.  It's a love story.  You can read it, don't be afraid.  And then by the time they realize that it's also about all those other things, they already like the people, because what we're always looking for I think in a story are people that we like.  Someone that we can say, I know her.  I believe her.  I know him.  I've seen people like that.  And within that I think that what I've been able to do is really subvert the whole idea of black women writing love stories, and to say, you know, they are love stories but they're also stories about how we can take responsibility for changing the communities that we live in and then the cities that we live in and ultimately the world that we live in.
Story_ID: 227977
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my husband Zaron W. Burnett, Jr.  We are taking a publicity photograph for a series of Club Zebra shows that we were doing at the first National Black Arts Festival in 1988, and we had actually gone up on to the roof of the High Museum [of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], where we were not supposed to be, and we were taking pictures as quickly as we could before they ran us off.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my husband Zaron before he grew his dreads with a suit on with a bow tie.  On the other side is [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon, who directed several plays of mine at the Alliance [Theatre, Atlanta, Georgia], and we were taking a publicity picture for a performance piece that Zaron and I did together called 'Love and Trouble,' and Kenny was the director, and this was the day that we were taking pictures for the poster.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me at about age fifteen, shaking hands with Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] in front of the alter at my father's [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] church [Central Congregational Church; Shrine of the Black Madonna] on Hogarth [Street], Linwood [Street] and Hogarth in Detroit [Michigan] and Stokely had just come up from the south to raise money from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], and I was there with my dad and I was so in love with Stokely.  I thought he was just the finest revolutionary ever.  So they asked me if I wanted to shake his hand, and as you can see I sure did.
Speaker 2: That is my grandfather holding my mother, my grandfather Mershell C. Graham holding my mother Doris Graham [Cleage].  Next to him is my grandmother Fannie Mae Turner Graham.  And in front of her my Aunt Mary Virginia [Graham] Hawkins who is still in Detroit, and in the very front is my mother's brother who died.  His name was also Mershell [Graham] after his dad.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And they are actually standing in front of Plymouth Congregational Church [Plymouth United Church of Christ, Detroit, Michigan] after service in Detroit.  I love that hat.
Speaker 1: This is my mother and her family in the backyard of their house on Theodore [Street].  My grandfather is holding my mother's youngest brother who also died, Howard [Graham].  Then that is my mother leaning on her mother.  My mother is the little girl in the white dress in the front leaning on her mother Fannie [Mae Turner Graham].  Next to her is my mother's sister Mary Virginia and on the very end is my great-grandmother Jennie [Virginia Turner].
Speaker 2: That is my mother at the top of the photograph.  My mother, next to her my Aunt Mary Virginia, next to her my grandmother Fannie, next to her my great aunt Daisy [Turner], and next to her my great-grandmother Jennie.  And they're getting ready to go to church.
Speaker 1: Those are my paternal grandparents, my grandmother Pearl Reed Cleage, and my grandfather Albert B. Cleage, Sr.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother's brother.  She had several brothers, and this is I wanna say her brother Hugh Cleage, who was very well dressed at that moment.  I don't know where he was going but that's my grandmother's brother.
Speaker 1: At the top those are my--that's my father and my three uncles.  My father is at the top of the picture.  Next to him is my uncle, who is also my stepfather, Henry [W.] Cleage.  Next to him is my other uncle Louis Cleage and the little one at the bottom of the picture is my uncle Hugh.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my older sister Kris [Kristin Cleage Williams] at the top, and a friend of ours in the middle and that's me on the other side of our little friend in Detroit.
Speaker 1: This is the parade for the Black Arts Festival.  We were lining up on Peachtree Street [Atlanta, Georgia], and that is--that's me in the middle.  On one side of me with the little African hat and with the white suit is former mayor Maynard Jackson.  Next to him with the white hat on is my husband Zaron Burnett.  On my right side is former mayor [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young in the white suit with the red tie, and he's talking to Maynard's wife [HistoryMaker] Valerie [Richardson] Jackson who was standing there with him.  We were all getting ready to ride in the parade.
Speaker 2: That's my grandfather Dr. Albert B. Cleage in Detroit.
Speaker 1: That's my father at about age twelve, Albert Cleage, and he's also in Detroit.
Story_ID: 227978
Speaker 1: That's my mother standing outside of their apartment when they were living in California, Doris [Graham] Cleage.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother, my father's mother, Pearl Reed Cleage, and I'm named after her.  Didn't appreciate her life until I was much older and wish I had had a chance to tell her so, but I'm named after her and that's at their house in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and a preschool, and I think that it must have been connected to our church because my father [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] is there at the far left on the photograph talking to some of the children, and my father as you can see had on a suit and a tie so I can't imagine he would have been at the sandbox with us unless it had something to do with the church.  I'm all the way over on the other side.  There's a woman sitting on the edge of the sandbox.  There's a little girl sitting right in front of her.  There's another little girl with the back of her head to the camera and then there's a little girl in a white shirt, and that's me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my mother's mother, Fannie Mae Turner Graham, right before she left Montgomery [Alabama] coming to Detroit to be with my grandfather [Mershell C. Graham].  She is wearing a gold locket that was an engagement present which she eventually gave to my mother who eventually gave it to me so I have that locket now.
Speaker 2: This is my mother dressed up to go somewhere.  I'm not sure where, but she was twelve years old and I think that must have been my father--my grandfather's car that she was standing in front of.
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother starting from the left.  My grandmother Fannie Mae Turner Graham, my great-grandmother Jennie [Virginia Turner], my great aunt Abbie [Allen Brown], my aunt Mary Virginia standing kind of in the back.  Then next to her back to the front is my great aunt Alice [Turner] and then my mother.
Speaker 2: That was a picture that was taken for an article in the Detroit paper about my father.  That's my father sitting in the front, my sister [Kristin Cleage Williams] sitting on the floor with her brand new afro in front of him.  I'm standing behind them, and I have not made the move to an afro yet, but I was thinking about it and that's one of my father's favorite pieces of artwork, the dancing Watusi, a guy who's on that painting that you can see on the floor, and I have that now in my house.
Speaker 1: That's me and my sister Kris in Detroit, I think it was Thanksgiving, we were cooking, but that's the two of us in Detroit before I went off to college.
Speaker 2: This is my father and several other members of my family at a dinner to honor my father.  Standing starting from the left is my niece Tulani [Williams], my sister Kristin, my niece Jilo [Williams], my nephew Cabral [Williams] and my niece Ayanna [Williams], all my sister's children.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my sister Kristin and me just arriving at my grandmother's house on Atkinson [Avenue] in Detroit.  We had been on the train from Springfield [Massachusetts] for a long time and we were both kind of shell shocked because we were moving from Springfield, Massachusetts to Detroit, but my mother had dressed us up in our little Sunday go to meeting coats and our bonnets and we had our doll babies with us so we were going into my grandmother's house to be greeted by all our family.  And that's me in the little dark coat and my sister looking out for me there in the lighter coat.
Speaker 2: That's me and my daughter Deignan [Lomax], and her son Michael [Lomax].
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Doris Graham Cleage.  She was--at that point my sister and I were not born yet and she was thinking about teaching a dance class.  She was also a modern dance enthusiast for a while so she was going through her practice right there.
Speaker 2: That's my father, Albert Cleage, Jr.  He also has an African name, which is Jaramogi Abebe Agyeman, which he took after our church [Central Congregational Church] became the Shrine of the Black Madonna [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: That's my mother at home in Detroit, Doris Graham Cleage.
Speaker 2: That's my stepfather Henry W. Cleage, an attorney, and he was also printing--owned a printing plant at the time this picture was taken.  They were printing a newspaper that my family wrote and distributed called [The] Illustrative News [sic. The Illustrated News], and he had just come home from a long night printing The Illustrative News.
