Story_ID: 486378
Speaker 1: Hello, my name is Adrienne Jones and I am the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer and there are no observers. May I get you to state--
Speaker 2: Except for Elmo.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) May I get you to state--
Speaker 2: My name?
Speaker 1: And spell your name please (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Kevin Clash, K-E-V-I-N, C-L-A-S-H.
Speaker 1: I would request actually that you spell as many names as possible so that we can--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --get the correct spellings.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah like I'm gonna remember, I'm going to tell you, you know get, get your, my (laughter), my personal assistant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's your date of birth and (laughter) the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my date of birth is September 17th, 1960, place of birth, Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: What's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September 21, 2007.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Location of the in- interview is at the ASCAP building [One Lincoln Plaza] in New York [New York], which--Sesame Workshop has offices in this building.
Speaker 1: What's your occupation?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's a lot, being a puppeteer you do a lot of things. I'm a, I'm a puppeteer, puppet builder, producer, director, you know sometimes writer.
Story_ID: 486379
Speaker 1: Okay I'm gonna ask you our five People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'll just ask the question and you just answer with whatever comes to mind.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ooh, my favorite food is French food.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation?
Speaker 2: Ooh, my favorite vacation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Destination.
Speaker 2: --destination, Australia, Amsterdam [the Netherlands].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or selling--or selling, favorite phrase or saying, and if you do will you share it with us?
Speaker 2: Wow, phrase or saying, I think phrase is, it's in every one of us, it's in every one of us, yeah.
Story_ID: 486380
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your family.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And let's start with your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Miss Gladys, that's G-L-A-D-Y-S.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And George [George Clash, Sr.], which is spelled, George--
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mom first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Miss Gladys Clash [Gladys Jones Clash].
Speaker 1: Where was Gladys Clash--
Speaker 2: I think she was born in, in Baltimore, Maryland, I mean actually Baltimore City [Maryland], she was born in Baltimore City (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did she grow up in Baltimore City?
Speaker 2: I think she did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up, like what it was like or some anecdotes about something that had happened?
Speaker 2: No, not, I mean that there was a, I mean, was it her mom, her mom and dad [Clarence Jones] they were the first ones that had a television actually in the city. Her mom was really a, a businesswoman, her father, they had a trucking company or something like that. And, and so, but she ran the books and everything, her mom did, and--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Okay, perhaps not, and what about your grandfather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's Genevieve.
Speaker 1: Genevieve?
Speaker 2: Genevieve Jones.
Speaker 1: Jones.
Speaker 2: Jones.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know my grandfather's name, we just called him Pops so, that's wild, I should know, but no, don't know.
Speaker 1: But your grandfather has a trucking company?
Speaker 2: He had a trucking company, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your mother, I mean your grandmother ran the books?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I mean I know that they had the first, I don't know if it was the first TV but it might've been the first color TV. But I know they had the first TV something, you know, in, in, in Baltimore City.
Speaker 1: And did you spend any time with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, would, well a lot of my cousins lived in the city also, so I would go and, and stay, actually on my mother's side. Her brother, they had two sons and, and I think both of them were close to my age, so I would go up and, and visit, and spend, spend some time up in, up in Baltimore City (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did you, did you get to meet your grandparents'--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah my--
Speaker 1: --family?
Speaker 2: Oh, all of family was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or any of their--
Speaker 2: Well my, my mom's, they lived pretty much close together, my mom's sisters and brothers they all lived kind of close together in Baltimore City. So I really spent a lot of time around them, you know during my younger years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and did you, were you ever given a sense of what your grandparents' youth was like?
Speaker 2: Not really, I mean our family was, was I mean they, they were all characters, they were all people who want--who loved entertaining each other. They were always telling poems and standing up in front of, you know each other and, and performing. They, everybody I can't, as long as I can remember ev- everybody always wanted to stand up and perform for everybody. So I guess that's where I got some of that from.
Speaker 1: So your mother, outside of knowing what her parents did, did she tell you any stories about when she was a youngster?
Speaker 2: Not really, I mean you know it was a close-knit family but, no she never really sat down and talked to us about you know what actually had happened in her younger years.
Story_ID: 486381
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Gladys Jones Cash]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My mom very ou- is very outgoing, very outgoing, a very militant lady; she was as we were growing up. We had a, we had a big poster of [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis above the, the TV (laughter), yeah, she's a, she a, she was very, she was always very observant of what we enjoyed doing. You know if we wanted to you know, Georgie [George Clash, Jr.], my, my, my ol- my brother was into sports, so she supported him you know. My, my sister [Anita Clash] was really good, my older sister was really good in ac- you know acade- academics and stuff like that, so she supported that. You know every, everybody you know, my brothers and sisters, whatever we, just as long as it was legal, you know she was very supportive. At an early, early age I, I know she, anything that we wanted to do.
Speaker 1: And do you remember anything specific that your mom was outspoken about, do you, can you give us an example (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, the outspokenness was really about the, you know the concerns of racism and stuff like that, well back then. You know there was a lot of stuff going on, you know I was, I was born in the, you know in the '60s [1960s] so a lot of riots, that was happening. And in, in the neighborhood that my mom you know my mom, my grandmother [Genevieve Jones] and my fa- and my grandfather [Clarence Jones] lived, my mom's mom and dad and stuff. So it was you know kind of a touch and go and she was very militant about it. My father [George Clash, Sr.] was very quiet, but my mom was the one who you know I mean (laughter) she had a chip on her shoulder.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And you know so, you know we, we grew up knowing what that was all about, 'cause we were around it, I mean we, we you know we would be driving past Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and you know and, and the [U.S.] military was up on the roof and everything, so.
Speaker 1: The military was on the roof at Sears?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To prevent black shoppers?
Speaker 2: No just because the riots and stuff that was happening at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Keep the area safe.
Speaker 2: They were just, yeah, they were just; I mean it would just breakout everywhere. You know we tried to leave, my mom- my grandmother's and my grandfather's house and you know and there'd be whites at one end and blacks at the other end throwing rocks at each other. And we had to wait until it, 'til it subdued, I think one, one day (laughter) when he finally got in the car, I was believing him--and this was at the time that my father was still drinking, he stopped because of, it was just too much for him. But we were driving going back to the county [Baltimore County, Maryland] and we heard a huge pop. And he said, "Put your heads down," and we found out it was, you know a Cold Duck underneath the, the seat of the car that you know was so hot (laughter) it just blew. And he thought it was gunshots and stuff, so. No, but we grew up going through you know that stuff.
Speaker 1: And was--so was that tense for you?
Speaker 2: It was tense, but I mean my, but my mom and, and, and you know my mom and dad they were still very respectful of, of whoever they, you were, you know. No matter what color, you know they weren't, you know it wasn't to the point that they were prejudice about it you know. Especially when you know I started at ten building puppets and everything and, and then I started branching out and going in, in mo- the majority of work I was getting, you know people that would hire me were, were predominantly white, so I was going up in the neighborhoods and, and, and doing all these shows. And, and I mean my mom and dad would go with me, but you know but they never, there was no you know the, what I did was color blind (laughter) you know, it really was.
Speaker 1: And would you say that the area that, the area around where you lived and around where you lived was it segregated so--
Speaker 2: No it wasn't segregated, it was called Chocolate City, it was across the tracks from where the whites were, whites lived. We were, we were on the other side of the tracks. So, but I mean you know schools were, but the neighborhood wasn't.
Story_ID: 486382
Speaker 1: What about your father, what's his name?
Speaker 2: George (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Clash [George Clash, Sr.].
Speaker 2: --Sylvester Clash, yeah, yeah. Mr. George, he, he was very quiet, but very talented.
Speaker 1: Where is he from?
Speaker 2: He was from Chase, Maryland; I think that's where he was born, in Chase, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And is that where he grew up?
Speaker 2: He did, yeah and then he met you know my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] and they moved to the county [Baltimore County, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of anything that happened to your father as he was growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not really I mean he had a really close-knit family you know, his, again his, every Sunday we'd be over at his mom's [Mary Clash] and dad's [Daniel Clash], either after church or, or if we didn't go, we'd go over there, 'cause his, his, one of his brothers was in an accident and got crippled by it. And so my father would go over there almost every other Sunday and bathe him, my Uncle Ed [ph.]. And so I would go over there with him and stuff. Very religious in the church was my dad and his brothers and stuff and, but man crab cakes and biscuits and stuff in the morning on Sunday, oh (laughter). They even had a strawberry, they, they grew strawberries out the back too, my grandmother did. But interesting, interesting.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know, and you know I used to sit with her and, and have, and eat, I love licorice and, and cashew nuts. And we'd sit and eat licorice and cashew nuts, but it was really interesting, I mean you know, you go back and you think about you know how you hear Creole, and you hear this you know but as far as shades of color, it was very interesting. My grandmother wasn't that keen on us 'cause we were darker and she gravitated to the other nieces and nephew, you know or (laughter) or, or grandchildren that she had that were lighter, so it was interesting. You know and I of course got wind of that from my mom and how frustrated she was about it that you know, Grandma played sides. But I was al- I was always very outspoken, I remember she had shoes that, that I, I, for the life of me I just didn't understand why these, why this woman would get shoes where the, the meat of her, you know (laughter) meat of her feet you know this part of it would be overlapping (laughter) on the shoe. And I remember saying you know, "Grandma, why your feet so fat?" And my mom was ready to kill me. But I mean interesting family, I mean my, my, my father's father was really cool. He had a little, a little Chihuahua called Buddy, and Buddy would chew gum and eat, eat pops, you know frozen pops. I mean they, he was like a part of the family, and I remember when my grandfather passed away he ran out and, he ran out into the street and got hit, he couldn't live. He, he, he literally he, this dog knew about everything and he knew that that was not something--he never came out of that fence, and we thought you know, we felt as though that's, he didn't wanna live if, if Grandpa was gone. Little Buddy, and he loved gum, he'd be eating gum so much that tears would just run (laughter), he loved it so much, no funny little dog. But a good group of people, I mean I, I, I loved at a early, early age, because you know my father was in the [U.S. military] service. And actually you know his, his sister, Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Clash] was in church, you know in the choir and I would go listen. I mean early on I loved church music, I loved church music, and I would listen to it over at my grandfather's house. Listening to you know and, and getting into it and, it was fun (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What had your grandfather done as a career?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know, I really don't know.
Story_ID: 486383
Speaker 1: What did your father [George Clash, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he worked at a factory called Raymond Metals [Raymond Metal Products Company] for a long period of time. And he was the, you know the fixer, the, the, you know the, the, the handyman in the neighborhood. And he would go, I used to when I was real young, used to run around and build sheds with him and for the neighborhood and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And I didn't ask you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Isn't this terrible, I don't know (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I didn't ask what, what does your mother [Gladys Jones Clash] do for a--?
Speaker 2: Well my mother was a daycare mother, always was daycare, that's why we had a lot of kids around all the time, some funny, crazy kids. And they were all from the neighborhood and stuff like that so, it was cool. My mom has about twenty kids (laughter), twenty or twenty-five kids around the country that still call her mom. And my father, called him dad you know they, they were a good group. I mean my mom and dad you know they, they, I learned a lot from them. As far as how to, how to take care of and you know inspire kids and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 486384
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Going to church and not wanting to (laughter).
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: Oh man, it's a Baptist church, within walking distance to the house.
Speaker 1: Did you go every Sunday?
Speaker 2: We'd go every Sunday, yeah.
Speaker 1: And about how old were you when you went and you didn't wanna go?
Speaker 2: Please, I don't even know, I mean this was hard you know, it was hard to get up on Sundays (laughter), on weekends, it was just hard. Then once you got there it was wonderful, but man, trying to get us up.
Speaker 1: And wha- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know my father was crazy, he would say you know to, to (laughter) and to get us to go, he'd say, "Oh you don't wanna go? Okay, well go and get the belt." Now why would you go and get something that you know you gonna get hurt with? I ain't never understand that (laughter), but he would just do it, then of course we, we would you know, it wouldn't go that far. My father was really funny, he, he did one thing once where, my, my brother ate everything in sight. I mean all of us had specific personalities, all four of us. My father, my brother was totally you know--
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) shower, George also, George, Sr. [sic. George Clash, Jr.]. And you know it was all about sports, NeNe [Anita Clash] again academic, I was creative. When, when sh- when Pam [Pamela Clash] was born, we were the ones who, we, we kind of got together 'cause we were close to age and then Georgie and NeNe was you know kind of, they had a clique, 'cause they were close to age. But you know my father he, he had some ginger ale in the refrigerator and he put a mark on it. And said, "Okay (laughter) don't mess with it," so of course somebody did and we were all home when he came home. And he looked in the refrigerator and he said, "Okay, everybody get in the car." And my mom said, "George [George Clash, Sr.], where you taking everybody?" And he said, "Don't you worry." He took us down to Baltimore City Hospital [Marcy Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland]. And we didn't know what was going on you know, especially Pam and I, and you know finally NeNe who was always the loudest one of all of us, had attitude all the time, said, "Dad, where you taking us?" He said, "Well, I'm taking you guys to the hospital to get your stomachs pumped, 'cause I wanna find out who drank the ginger ale." And so we didn't know what that was, she was like you know, and NeNe was like, "Hm, I ain't do it," and of course Georgie was back there with tears (laughter) going down, coming down his face. So he turned, turned back around took us home, but he found out who did it, and Georgie was punished at that point. But they would do stuff, I mean they, they were really cool, I mean everybody knew Mr. George and Miss Gladys [Gladys Jones Clash] in the neighborhood. 'Cause they watched all of them and you know so we always had a lot of kids over at our house. And I was real creative, I wo- you just, I would, there was a huge oak tree in the back and I would make these gadgets that could kill any child. And I'm lu- I'm lucky to this day that (laughter) I ain't you know, I ain't kill nobody, but man you know I would make these, these swings and stuff. You know just a rope with a piece of wood and, and you know we had, we were, it was all connected to Baltimore City [Maryland]. So they would come and cut the fields and stuff like that but they would leave you know the grass, the dead grass. And so we, you know break it up and make huge haystacks and I put it under the tree and I you know and all the kids they, they would just congregate. I was like the Pied Piper, they would come and you know and then we'd have everybody. We hoist the kid up on this rope all the way up to the branch and then let it go, just let it go (laughter). You know and one child would bite their tongue you know as they coming down, and he go running and we'd be like, oh no we gonna get in trouble (laughter). You know but I would make these gadgets that were just ridiculous, you know.
Speaker 1: What kind of punishments did you suffer?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: At George's hand what kind of--
Speaker 2: They would, they would, they would you know, I mean we, we you know I couldn't go out and play for a while, you know TV definitely was, was taken off. And also, you know, with me building puppets, they would take everything away; say you can't build for a while. You know, and that would definitely you know, I'd lose my mind.
Story_ID: 486385
Speaker 1: When did you start building puppets?
Speaker 2: At ten, nine, ten years-old. My fath- my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] sewed a lot, you know we were always you know, she had this Singer pad, you know a Singer sewing machine [Singer Manufacturing Company; Singer Corporation] and, and the, the, I forget all the different patterns you could buy and stuff like that she would get. And, and my father [George Clash, Sr.] drew a lot, he's a really good artist, and so I think that combination I just, I know, I, I'd gotten a dog. There was this little Chihuahua, my father brought it home one day, and it got distemper, and it passed away. And I had a hard, you know I lost my mind, and mom said okay that's it, no more pets. So I remember walking to one of the local stores to get some bread or something like that. And it had just finished raining and there was this stuffed dog that was in the mud and everything. And I took it home and washed it up and took all the stuffing out of it and got a little mayonnaise, the top of a mayonnaise jar and, and ripped some foam up in it. And, and that was my pet, that was my (laughter) little puppet dog, (laughter) but yeah that was, I was really young when I started building puppets. And really just started, I would just build them, didn't really, didn't start performing and, performing them until, until I started--there was a recreation hall right down the street from where we lived. And, and so I decided to put on a puppet show, I found this book on this little Terrier dog that, that sailed the world, and had a little slicker on and something like that. And I built it and, and fi- you know borrowed some blocks from the recreation hall and made a little set and stuff like that and--
Speaker 1: So this is a second dog puppet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Miss Fleming [ph.] who lived in neighborhood, she had a little you know candy shop right in her you know, that's back then they used to do that. Where, you, you know so it was a candy shop in the store and, I mean in his, in her apartment. And you could go, so I got some candy for the kids to try to you know get them to come and watch the show. So that was my first live sh- you know, you know show that I did with the puppets and stuff like that. And then I gradually started doing church shows and, and incorporate them in my school, you know. Yeah, but I was definitely different from NeNe [Anita Clash] and (makes noise), and Georgie [George Clash, Jr.] and Pam [Pamela Clash].
Story_ID: 486386
Speaker 1: So can you tell us, you said your mom [Gladys Jones Clash] ran a daycare--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us what a typical day was like at your house?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there was rules of how many kids you could have in a household you know if you, if you did daycare you know. So I think it was about, I think the limit was four, and I think that included an infant or not, I can't remember. But we would have one infant and you know and the rest of the kids were pretty much, would be pretty much my age. Or maybe a, maybe a little younger, well actually no, a little younger actually they were, they were, they were young. Because I was going to school at the time and stuff, but some of them you know were my age. I mean they were kids that you know, that you know would go to school with me and come back and then their mom would come. But it was fun, I mean 'cause there were always, everybody was always around.
Speaker 1: So you would get up, you would go to school?
Speaker 2: We get up, we go to school, you know a lot of times yeah, we get up, go to school and then get off the bus. And then a couple of the kids would come along with me.
Speaker 1: And when you would get home would there be other kids there?
Speaker 2: There would still be other kids, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: Because the moms wouldn't get off until about five or six o'clock something like that so.
Speaker 1: And did your mom have some kind of curriculum like throughout, I mean not necessarily curriculum but did she have a structure to her day (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we would, we would, we had, we had you know a bunch of toys and TV and stuff like that and, I mean when it snowed, she was out there making forts with us and everything. I remember one year she made you know a, a fort and ironed on some, some letters called Fort McKids and stuff like that and. You know my father [George Clash, Sr.] would take us out back you know, I mean there, there, there was always a lot of activities you know that we could do. Because of, the field was out there we could basketball or football or you know.
Story_ID: 486387
Speaker 1: What were the most important holidays--
Speaker 2: Oh of course Christmas.
Speaker 1: --when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Christmas and Halloween was, was definitely the two major ones.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: You know and the neighborhood was great with Halloween you know.
Speaker 1: Talk, talk me about Halloween.
Speaker 2: Well, it was you know I mean it's, it's not, it's, it's you know it got scary because these idiots out here just you know, just made it that way, but I mean it was, it was a neighborhood you know that's, that was, that's what was always fun about Halloween. You know I think back then it was a whole neighborhood thing, the neighborhood we get involved you know some of the, you know parents would actually really go all out. You know with, with really make it like a haunted house and, and stuff and, and they would just get a kick out of you know giving candy to everybody. That was always fun, and then laughing at you know what we would come up with as far as costumes and stuff. I was always winning because I was so, you know I was always so in art and creating and stuff like that. That I would make my costume and Pam's [Pamela Clash] costume, Georgie [George Clash, Jr.] and NeNe [Anita Clash] would do their thing. Because they always thought they were more adults and stuff, so. But it, it was, it was always a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Where do you, you all trick-or-treat?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And also have a party I assume?
Speaker 2: Well, you know normally we wouldn't really ha- I don't remember parties that much, I think when we got a little older that's when that would happen. But for the most part there was no party; you just go from door to door, to door to door.
Speaker 1: And tell us about Christmas.
Speaker 2: Christmas was really, I mean Christmas definitely cool, 'cause my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] you know would they, they, they was very tra- it was such a tradition to them. So you know there had to be a bowl of nuts, there had to be you know tangerines. And there had to be you know, just the whole thing of the toys and Santa and all of that stuff, and you know we got wind of it. And you know we'd sneak and look in the closets and find you know some of the stuff, and try to act like we don't know and. But it was always fun to watch them go out shopping, you know still being, it still you know acting like we believing that Santa Claus but, because we were just happy that it was Christmas. So you know we go along with it, you know.
Speaker 1: Did your family, other mem- family members come to your house?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And did they--
Speaker 2: We would normally, we would, they would normally, everybody would normally come to our house.
Speaker 1: For most holidays?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for most holidays.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: New Year's was different. New Year's was different because it was, it was, we would go to, to relatives' houses. Whoever had the, the party that year and I remember, geez we would you know, they'd put us in the back room. 'Cause at certain point we just couldn't stay up, you know so we'd go to sleep. But no, I remember you know being up, you know going to everybody's house doing, and it was normally not at our house, it was at you know an aunt's house something like that in the city [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Was your mother a good cook?
Speaker 2: My mother was an okay cook.
Speaker 1: But your grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you talk to my sister she would say (laughter), 'cause my sister can cook, but my mom would you know make roast that was just the stringiest stuff be--you know NeNe would be just gagging and stuff. And you know the fish would be (laughter), have bones in it, be choking, but I mean you know she didn't, but apple pies; she made some really good apple pies. My father [George Clash, Sr.] was a good cook, but his was really, since he was from Chase, Maryland, it was a lot of you know, he, he knew how to you know cook fish real well. And, and he taught us at a young age how to go crabbing and, and shuck oysters and all of that stuff. I mean he you know he was really good with, with, with, with seafood, really, really good.
Speaker 1: So at Christmastime the spread was just okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh it was phenomenal, well you know normally it was tr- it was more traditional, it was the turkey and ham and, and apple pie and, and sweet potato pie. And macaroni cheese and you know sauerkraut stuff like that, I mean eggnog was definitely something that we, you know was a traditional thing that we would have and everything. And then you know decorating the, the house and everything with the lights and everything. My mom was majorly into that, totally.
Story_ID: 486388
Speaker 1: Did you all have a television?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a big--one of those big televisions that sat, you know that sat in the front room.
Speaker 1: And what did you watch on television?
Speaker 2: Well, of course I watched 'Sesame Street' and, and 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie,' which was a, 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie' was a, was a like a, would come on on the weekends. Like on a Sunday it was, I think it was CBS, 'CBS Film Festival' ['CBS Children's Film Festival'], and so it was Burr Tillstrom who was a, this man was a genius. Jim [Jim Henson] talked about him a lot you know, thought the world of him, along with, with Edgar Bergen and stuff. But, but yeah, Burr Tillstrom was very amazing, he would do two puppets, it was, it was Kukla and Ollie. And there was a clown in kind of a dragon type character, and he would do them at the same time. And Fran [Fran Allison] was this actress who was kind of the straight person for, but they would do the wraparounds for these wonderful foreign films. I, I remember seeing one that was called 'The Red Balloon,' that's just a phenomenal classic. I don't know what country it was from [France], but it was, it was a classic, beautiful film that I, I would never forget. I still remember it, but that was one of the films that they would you know, they would, it was all foreign stuff, it was wonderful. Really, really cool and so that was my early on connection to puppetry was 'Sesame Street,' 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie.'
Story_ID: 486389
Speaker 1: So you said 'Sesame Street' and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Kukla and Ollie'?
Speaker 2: 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie.'
Speaker 1: 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie.'
Speaker 2: Which was a, was 'Sunday Morning Film Festival' [sic. 'CBS Children's Film Festival'].
Speaker 1: They were your basis in puppetry. So it sounded like you had already really started making puppets--
Speaker 2: Very young.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like watching these television shows sort of expanded your thought process about the puppetry?
Speaker 2: I think so, I think you know 'Kukla, Fran,' I really didn't look at it for the puppets, I really looked at it because I thought it was a fun show and the films were great. But 'Sesame Street' I watched it because I enjoyed it, but also I wanted to learn how to build the puppets, so I was like glued to the TV trying to figure out how they--
Speaker 1: Tell us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they built those puppets.
Speaker 1: --how you watched television?
Speaker 2: I was you know, it was like up cl- you know, I mean just you know, 'cause I wanted to see where were the seams and stuff. And how did they you know it that is that material or is it foam or what have you? You know you, you grew up, I mean my mind, you know, your parents were always saying you know if you stay too close to the TV you gonna go blind and stuff. Or lose an eye or whatever, I don't. But no, I mean you know TV was, was even great back then, I mean it was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: What made it, you know we have a lot of complaints about television now--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: If you could tell us what was great about TV--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well we--
Speaker 1: Or what you really liked about it?
Speaker 2: It wasn't censored, it really wasn't censored, I mean Jim [Jim Henson] was blowing up Muppets on (laughter) 'Sesame Street' and you know, and, and, and, and you know dismembering the puppets and stuff like that, and it was silly. And that's what it was supposed to be you know, it you know, nobody felt that you know the kid, a kid would go out and do that you know and, but it really, it, but back then it was based on how your parents, how parents took care of their kids. You know, now days--
Speaker 1: And how is that different?
Speaker 2: Well they don't, nobody really, it's very, you, you, you find that the discipline of a child is so different now. You know and it shouldn't be, there's no reason for it at all. And so I think back then you know parents took care of their kids you know, and, and showed them what's, what was right and wrong. And never let them get away with anything, until they could make the choices that they, they, they could make for themselves when they were old enough. And so they gave them that you know that background, so when they watched television, they understood that it was, it was not real. And that they understood it was, it was there to entertain, not to educate to the extent of you know, okay you see a Muppet taking their nose off, you take your nose off your friend, and blah, blah, no. You know the, the, the ways that parents brought up their children were very different from now, unfortunately.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite character on 'Sesame Street' when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: I think Grover.
Speaker 1: Or characters?
Speaker 2: I think Grover was my favorite.
Speaker 1: Why did you like Grover?
Speaker 2: I think Grover was just a really cool, funny character, I think Big Bird of course too, because he was the icon of the, of the show and you know. But those two I really a--
Speaker 1: Did you watch any more adult kinds of television shows?
Speaker 2: I think PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or shows that weren't--
Speaker 2: Again you know, MPT, Maryland Public Television, I mean it was the, you know, loved watching a lot of the educational stuff. Definitely loved watching what was it, 'The Wonderful World of Disney.' A lot of the wildlife stuff that they did back then was phenomenal and classic stuff that I loved watching. I remember you know of course every child always wanted to go to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida]; we didn't have enough money to do so. But I remember taking construction paper and just drawing you know, I wanna go to Disney World, and putting it in bedrooms and the bathrooms and the kitchen and everything, like that was gonna get me there (laughter). If it could of turned into money that would've been, that would, would've happen, but no. But you know so definitely Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company] was you know a major influence too back then.
Story_ID: 486390
Speaker 1: Now you said that you had an early love of gospel music and that you heard it at church and through your mom [Gladys Jones Clash].
Speaker 2: Well my mom, that, she was the one who really brought in music into the house, I mean she, my, my father [George Clash, Sr.] was, was as far as the church music church. But my mom was like Motown and, and jazz and blues and stuff like that, I mean we you know Nat Co- King Cole [Nat King Cole]--
Speaker 1: Tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Louis Armstrong and, and Billie Holiday, you and know and definitely you know, definitely Motown. Definitely 5th Dimensions [The 5th Dimension] and you know, and Diana Ross and stuff like that. And my mom had a nice voice, so she was always singing it, but she was also singing the old, old songs like you know 'Shoo-Fly Pie and Apple Pam- Pan Dowdy' ['Shoo-Fly Pie and Apple Pan Dowdy']. And you know and so I, I got huge influence back then from, from listening to her and what she enjoyed. And, and really I started connecting to it real well.
Speaker 1: And does that music influence your work now or has it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand percent, 2000 percent, people are very, very impressed with how much I know and how much I, I connect to music. I mean and I love it, I mean and, and I'm getting to do it a lot more on the show, I'm really trying to incorporate all aspects of music. Back, back to the show like when I was growing up the way it was, I mean you could turn on and watch Stevie Wonder. And then the next day you could, you know I mean you could see you know, I mean just anybody, you, I mean it was unbelievable you know. I mean (laughter) next, next person you know, I mean they had so many, the music was, was, was something that was so wonderful about, about 'Sesame Street.' The variety was unbelievable you know and, and so now I'm trying to put that back you know by, by grabbing up people like Chris Brown. And, and then the next day have Yo-Yo Ma and you know the next day you know, I mean it was wonderful, I mean Luther [Luther Vandross] was one of the you know he was the one way, way back when before he, before anybody even knew him, he was in a, a group. And that's, that's, that's what's so, been so wonderful about the show, and just, I just love you know music, I just love it. And, and we're getting to do a lot of fun stuff with it now.
Story_ID: 486391
Speaker 1: So when you think about growing up, can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells that you encounter today that take you home?
Speaker 2: Well city, you know city, the city has a specific smell to it, it really does, I don't know what it is, but you can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this city [New York, New York] has the same smell as the city--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you came from?
Speaker 2: No, no, not, not, it's interesting, no. If you're, you're talking about comparing it to you know, I mean I've traveled all around the world now, I mean I don't know. You know Baltimore [Maryland] had its own smell to it, and still does, and I think it's interesting that, that if I really think about it you know. I think if (laughter) I close my eyes you know, if I got on the plane you know and didn't know where I was going, and I, and I landed somebody- somewhere I could probably smell and hear in certain ways where I'm at. That's what was really interesting about South Africa too, it had that feel and that smell you know, that that you just saw on TV, but then being there you're like oh, you know I was right. It was cool, it was really cool.
Speaker 1: What sounds reminds you of Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Well definitely, definitely the harbor, you know Inner Harbor [Baltimore, Maryland], you know parts of, parts of Inner Harbor and, 'cause I did a lot of shows there my little puppet shows and stuff. Kids playing, I mean again it's you know the, the whole neighborhood type feel you know, definitely and it's, and it's still there, which is nice. Even with it being built up in certain ways, it still has that feel to it that I remember.
Story_ID: 486392
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Dundalk [Dundalk Elementary School], Dundalk [Maryland] which is right, you, you have Turner Station [Dundalk, Maryland] and then you, you have Dundalk and then you have you know. Then you have the, the, then you go from there to the city [Baltimore, Maryland] and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And I know that you're, you know you started your career at--very young--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you tell us about some of what you did in terms of puppeteering while you were in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well I mean the, the puppeteering that I was doing is really like birthday parties, I guess some, some church functions and, and recreation halls, was mainly the, the shows that I was doing. And what was nice is I started getting involved with, with different organizations that would put you know shows into plazas back then, you know for the holiday. And so they would, they would give me like thirty-five shows for the season you know, that I would, that my father [George Clash, Sr.] would then drive me to you know Brager-Gutmans [Brager-Gutman, Baltimore, Maryland] or whatever these, you know. And then from there I started doing you know malls with, with the puppets and stuff and--
Speaker 1: And these are even--elementary school for, for, did you get money for performing in these shows?
Speaker 2: No, I, you know really it wasn't until I got to middle school, 'til I started you know being like fourteen, I think fourteen or fifteen. That I started getting like fifty bucks [dollars] for a show or what have you, or twenty-five you know depending on what it was and everything. There was a lot of different parks around, so they would always have events and so I would do puppet shows there and everything you know, do my little show.
Speaker 1: What kind of student, what kind of elementary school student were you?
Speaker 2: I was okay, you know I was, I you know, I knew my, my rules and my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] gave me is that you know okay, once you do your homework and all that stuff, then you can draw and you can build and stuff like that. But not until you do your homework. I wasn't the best student because I was really bad at reading, I was terrible at reading. And what really got me out of it, is TV Guide, TV Guide, I started interested in celebrities and reading about celebrities. And, and, and so that's what really got me out of that, you know I was really, and I was really a shy child too. So you know I mean, hey you know (laughter) it was really bad, and act- and actually puppets got me out of that too.
Speaker 1: Did you have any memorable teachers or--
Speaker 2: Oh great, I had great teachers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I had great teachers, Miss Dussault [ph.] was one that was, that was you know she took a liking to me. And she would take me home with her and, and you know and, and I mean a lot of the teachers really found me to be special. So they would you know, so a lot of the teachers. And, and it was interesting when I starting building puppets and everything. Mr. and Mrs. Hiffel [ph.], you know he's, he was a, a gym teacher, and she was like an English teacher. And you know they would get a, you know a batch of foam and you know for, for, for phys ed [physical education], and he would get me half of it. There was a, another teacher who was wonderful, who his family lived around a fur mill and so he would come back and give me bags of fur and, you know there was lot of support of, of, of the teachers, I just, I just did a, a, a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] special ['Tribute: A Concert Honoring the Teachers of America'] where this, this tributing teachers and Rosie [Rosie O'Donnell] was there. And Cosby [Bill Cosby] did something ab- you know about you know, and it was really neat and it was all hosted by Peter, Paul and Mary and, and I did a piece with Elmo. And actually wrote an original song, con- you know tributing teachers, and, and I actually had my drama teacher, Mr., Mr. Riggs, Robert Riggs come and I honored him you know. He was very supportive in school and everything. I was very, like I said I was very shy, and he actually helped me get out of that shyness by acting, as myself, so.
Speaker 1: What did the other kids and the people in your neighborhood think about you?
Speaker 2: Oh they, you know they would tease me, they would tease me and say you know, oh you go to sleep with your puppets, blah, blah, blah. And it wasn't until I got into high school that--and I got my own, my first local television show ['Caboose'] that, that they were like wow. You see because I mean I was in my own, my own element at that point, I mean I'd get up on the stage with the puppet you know, and I'd be, you know you wouldn't see me, but you would see the puppet. And, and they would try to heckle me 'cause they knew I would, but I would go, I could, I, I you know I, I knew how to heckle back with the puppet and stuff like that, so they stopped that. But then they saw me on TV with you know, with the puppets they were like oh, okay, so then it stopped you know.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to middle school?
Speaker 2: Dundalk Middle School [Dundalk Junior High School; Dundalk Middle School, Dundalk, Maryland], ev- it was all in that (laughter) area, Dundalk you know, it was Logan Elementary [Logan Elementary School, Dundalk, Maryland], then, then Dundalk Middle, Dundalk Junior High and Dundalk Senior [Dundalk High School, Dundalk, Maryland], and you know.
Speaker 1: And how soon did you recognize that what you want to do is to be a puppeteer?
Speaker 2: Oh I knew, I knew when I was ten years old, I, I you know I, I, you know I would go back and forth from drawing to, to building puppets. But I mean 'cause I wanted to be an animator for Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company] and stuff like that too, so.
Story_ID: 486393
Speaker 1: So did you have a sense that you might go to college after you went to high school [Dundalk High School, Dundalk, Maryland] like--
Speaker 2: Didn't really think about it.
Speaker 1: Was there a college (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, didn't really think about it, I mean my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] said that you know, you know you gonna, you're really gonna have something that's gonna be special for you, you know. And she knew that, and she knew that early on and, and then it just started, it started happening too, I mean it really started happening. But they were very open to it and they, they, they didn't know anything about it, but they, they, they learned as they went along. And you know, it's a, you know 'cause it was totally different, I mean nobody, I mean my, on my ma- my mom's side, one of her, her brothers was into entertainment. And act- acrobatics and stuff like that and, and his sons are into acting and, and performing on cruise ships and stuff like that, very talented guys and stuff. And so it came you know I mean the, the there is some in, in our family that that got into it, but very few.
Speaker 1: But your parents really trained themselves on, sort of, how to get you plugged in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 486394
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your high school years [at Dundalk High School, Dundalk, Maryland], you said that you had television show, and I just kind of like to talk about some of your milestones in high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in terms of performing, so and I know ultimately you ended up going--meeting Kermit Love and going to the--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --Macy's Day Parade [Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade] so I'd kind of like to make my way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Stu Kerr was the first, yeah, Stu Kerr was the fir- but I you know but--
Speaker 1: --from 'Caboose'.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you started working on 'Caboose' before you met Kermit Love and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: At the Macy's Day Parade?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so why don't you tell us about how you met--
Speaker 2: Well, well--
Speaker 1: Stu Kerr.
Speaker 2: You know I was doing, I started doing variety shows in high school, before that I was doing you know I would use the puppets for grade- you know for different projects that the teachers would give me. You know I would, I would incorporate the puppets into it.
Speaker 1: So you have a class project or report?
Speaker 2: Yeah like a class project, like you know the, the teacher would pair us into groups and say, and say okay you have to take a country and you have to figure out a way to tell us about that country. And so she paired me with this guy named Armand Brown [ph.], and we sat down and brainstormed, and I said okay well why don't we do, you know back then it was you know the, you know the reporter on the street; you know like what Kermit [Kermit the Frog] would do with his trench coat on and his little fedora with the little press thing. And then you know he would interview you know Goldilocks or something like that. So why don't you be the reporter and I'll have a puppet that lives in Russia and you ask him all the questions that you, you wanna ask about living in Russia. And so that's what we did, and it became really, really dif- you know I got an A on it, and then they wanted to do it for the, the school you know, assembly thing. And, and through that I, I actually started getting, and through that, one of the secretaries to the principal had a friend who worked at one of the newspapers, local newspapers. And he, she told him about me and then he called my parents [Gladys Jones Clash and George Clash, Sr.] and, and that was my first TV, I mean newspaper article. But what was nice is the little supplement in the newspaper called Young World and they put me on the front page. So that's how I started you know, getting some, some, some work you know in, in the Baltimore [Maryland] area for people.
Speaker 1: Now I know the newspaper doesn't exist anymore but what was the name of that paper?
Speaker 2: Well one of them, I, you know there, it was The Baltimore Sun and the News-American [Baltimore News-American] and then the Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers].  There was, there was three one of them still exists and I can't remember which one. But no I was always in the papers and stuff and it did very well 'cause I started doing a lot of shows and whatever. That's how I got that, this start doing all the different plazas and malls and everything.
Story_ID: 486395
Speaker 1: What basically was your curriculum for a show, like how did you decide (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I--please it was--
Speaker 1: --what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: Earth, Wind and Fire, it was you know it was, it was sort of what Jim [Jim Henson] did, Jim took out a records--records and, and had the puppets lip sync to them, and I was doing the same thing. But it was what I grew up with you know it was, it was Earth, Wind and Fire and the puppets were doing the bump and the robot and everything. And, and the puppets that, that I was building were, you know Helen Reddy had a song out called, 'You and Me Against The World,' so I would have a, a skunk mom, and a skunk little child. And she and they would sing this song about you and me against the world because they stink, you know, blah, blah, blah. And then I did, you know, "I'm stuck on Band-Aids 'cause Band-Aids stuck on me," I'd have a mummy come up and sing the song and, and. And then I had this creature called the, there was an actress called Rula Lenska that she did a lot of commercials for Camay, which was a, a bar of soap that was supposed you know make you have this beautiful complexion. And she had this terrible broken accent (laughter) and she would say you know, "Camay for your beautiful complexion," you know. And, and I so I had this monster come up with one eye down here, and up here and you know and you put the soap up. You know so I was doing the commercials that, you know, "Two all-beef patties, special sauce, lettuce, cheese," there was a burger that would come up and sing it you know. And, and so that's what I would do and I would, and I had a character that I originated from a friend of mine that was, that I went to school with, Tony Bartee. I built this puppet that has his character not his look, the way he looks but the character of, of Tony. And so he would, Bartee would host the show.
Speaker 1: So and when you say that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was all coming from watching 'The Muppet Show' and all that you know and all the variety shows that were happening at the time. That was just a spin-off that I, you know again, everything was topical 'cause that's what I was getting. So my shows were always what I was watching on TV, so.
Speaker 1: So you said there was the puppet that had the character of your friend Tony.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was Tony like?
Speaker 2: Tony was crazy, he was a lot of fun and had a great sense of humor, I'm sta- I'm trying to find him, he lives somewhere in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I'm, I'm trying to find him. But he was, he was yeah he, we were really close, he was really cool guy.
Speaker 1: And did you making any puppets that actually look like friends of yours?
Speaker 2: No, I never did, matter of fact this, this kid named Skylow, who everybody, all the girls thought you know just went crazy over this guy. His, his, his Afro was so huge that it fell in the middle you know, and you know I said to him that Friday, I said, "Skylow, I'm a build a puppet after you." And he said, "Yeah right," you know, and I built it that weekend and you know like I sa- we, we lived right behind the Chesapeake Bay you know. There's a fi- there's, there's the field and then there's the ocean there's the water right there. And he decided to go swimming with a friend of his that actually lived down the street from us, from, from our house. And neither one of them knew how to swim and they were just building the Francis Scott Key Bridge [Baltimore, Maryland] right behind us. And they tried to get to one of the pillars and they didn't make it, and they started to panic. And each one pulled each other down and they drowned that weekend, so I never got to show him that, the Skylow puppet. I was gonna bring it in that Monday and, and I found my mom [Gladys Jones Clash], my mom and dad [George Clash, Sr.] they, they told us on a Sunday. But I knew something was happening, 'cause again it was right behind our house, so the ambulance was there and everything and. So that was, yeah that was tragic, but I went on it, but the puppet didn't look like him (laughter) at all, it was baldheaded, mustache you know, you know kind of a leisure sho- suit type outfit. And he would sing all Lou Rawls songs you know, so (laughter) totally different but, but grew--but of course had the coolness of Skylow.
Story_ID: 486396
Speaker 1: And so what happened is you know incorporating the puppets you know with my friends and stuff like that and then you know doing all these shows because of that newspaper article, I started doing a lot of the city harbor- and harb- you know and, and city, city, no ci- Heritage Fair [Dundalk Heritage Fair], City Fair [Baltimore City Fair] there was another one in Timonium [Maryland] that was like the State Fair [Maryland State Fair]. And I would do my shows there I would do my puppet shows there.
Speaker 2: What where your audiences like then?
Speaker 1: It was always a, a variety of people I mean blacks and whites you know.
Speaker 2: And of all ages?
Speaker 1: All ages, yeah, oh yeah. And they would you know and I would always step out after you know during my show and they were like, "What?"
Speaker 2: They were surprised--
Speaker 1: Little black kid, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --to see that you were black?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was like what? And that's when I met Stu [Stu Kerr], Stu was, Stu was Mr. Channel 2 there was a television station called WMAR [WMAR-TV, Baltimore, Maryland]. And he was the weatherman, he was you know, he was the, the, the, you know he had a show called Mr., 'Professor Kool's Fun School.' And you know he was Mr. Channel 2. And he was doing a show, he was doing a, his, his 'Professor Kool's Fun' you know, he was doing it, you know as a live performance that at the Heritage Fair, which was in Dundalk [Maryland], you know where I lived. So I was doing my show and he was very impressed, he went up to my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] and he said that I would love for, for you to, for, for him to audition for a new show ['Caboose']. And my mom said fine and so they took me up to, to audition, and I had Bartee, and it, they hit it off. I mean the whole, it was like I was there you know, I, I always been there with Stu. And Stu taught me a lot, he taught me a lot 'cause I didn't, I didn't, I really don't, the only television that I was doing is you know a news crew would come and, and shoot at the Inner Harbor [Baltimore, Maryland] something like that at my show and you know and nine times out of ten I didn't even know they were there until they came up to me and say what's your name you know blah, blah, blah.
Speaker 2: So how did he make you more savvy about working in television?
Speaker 1: Well I never done television before, I mean I, I did it, you know I, I, I had to learn you know. I didn't know about watching a TV and watching the puppet on the TV and you know and that's how I can, you know that's how I can keep them in the frame and all of that stuff of the camera and all that stuff. And, and he taught me how to, how to write scripts and, and, and memorize and, and all of that stuff. And you know chroma key and you know all the stuff that you can do with puppets and everything. So he taught me a lot, I learned a lot. So that when I did met Jim [Jim Henson], he was very impressed by all the stuff that I already know.
Story_ID: 486397
Speaker 1: So what's the name of the show that you worked on?
Speaker 2: It was called 'Caboose,' but I, I was doing two shows, I was actually, I had two local television shows on that, at that station [WMAR-TV, Baltimore, Maryland]. One was called 'Mr. Rainbow's World,' which was a, which was a, a produced by an archdiocese of, of Maryland. We would literally pray, there was a pastor, I mean a, a priest who, who was the producer of it and we would pray before we would do the show.
Speaker 1: And what was the content of that show?
Speaker 2: It, you know it was, it was dealing with religion, but not to the extent of throwing any type of religion on you. It was just being, being respectful to your neighbors and all the, and you know. And there was clown that was the host and I'd, I'd built the puppet called Shinkle [ph.] who, who you know of course you know there were times where you know they'd say it wrong and they'd say Tinkle and everybody fall out laughing you know, (laughter) but it was a fun show, it was, it was local and we had a great time, and then I would, I would go and hang out with Stu [Stu Kerr].
Speaker 1: And then on 'Caboose' what was that show like?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was all based at a train station called Whistle Stop [ph.] and everything took place at this train station. So Stu was the conductor and, the, the host and he was the hobo, he played all the human characters. And I you know would just build whatever he needed, and I would puppeteer and sometimes he would puppeteer with me. But for most part I would just you know do all the puppets and Bartee was on that, that was it, you know. And it was a fun show, I learned a lot.
Story_ID: 486398
Speaker 1: So at this point is Jim Henson; has Jim Henson become a sort of an idol for you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, totally (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know who he is--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know what he's been doing?
Speaker 2: Well you know, at that point it was you know the show was on, it was very successful, he was, he was doing specials at the time, you know. I mean I even remember seeing him on, on 'Ed Sullivan Show' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'] and, and 'Jimmy Dean' ['The Jimmy Dean Show'] was, was another show that, that he had, he had puppeteered this character called Rowlf [Rowlf the Dog]. So of course my dream was to, to work with, with, with Jim, but what was really interesting about Stu [Stu Kerr] is, Stu was in the [U.S. military] service with Bob Keeshan, who of course is Captain Kangaroo (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Captain Kangaroo.
Speaker 2: And, and Stu was a page with Keeshan in New York [New York], you know at NBC and, and so they stayed friends even after all the, you know, you know, Stu moved down to Baltimore [Maryland] and married his wife [Mary Thatcher Kerr], you know, and had children. But you know they kept close and so Stu would come up and do guest spots on 'Captain Kangaroo.' And, and that's when Stu started to tell you know Keeshan about me, and at the same time that that was happening, my mom [Gladys Jones Clash], you know I really wanted to get into 'Sesame Street.' I wanted to get with Jim, so my mom called the local PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] station and, and 'cause I saw this show called 'Call it Macaroni', with this guy by the name of Kermit Love on it, who helped design and build Snuffy [Mr. Snuffleupagus] and Big Bird for 'Sesame Street.' And she called the local PBS station to see how she could get in touch, and somehow they got a number for, for Stu Kerr [sic. Kermit Love] and his, his shop in New York. And Stu called one day and said whenever you're up you know New York look me up. And fortunately you know in school you have these field trips and stuff, so one was, in twelfth grade, they were gonna take you know we went up to New York. And that's when I met Stu and started talking to Stu about, no but that's when I met Kermit and started talking to Kermit about you know maybe working on 'Sesame Street.' I showed him all of the stuff you know I had; I had publicity pictures at that point of, of 'Caboose.' And, and, and a video tape and, which was three quarter inch of (laughter) paperweight at that time. But he was really cool and he was very impressed and he said that year that they really have already cast for 'Sesame Street.' But you know he'll keep me in mind 'cause he had his own projects that he was doing too.
Story_ID: 486399
Speaker 1: Now tell me a little bit about 'Call It Macaroni,' I mean you're aware at this time that Kermit Love is designing and building Big Bird, is that what the show 'Call It Macaroni' is about like--
Speaker 2: No, 'Call It Macaroni' was ab- wha- it was a really clever and they should bring it back, it was really cool. Where they would take a young boy and girl and they would, they would let them spend the day with somebody in a profession. And so that day they got to hang with, with Kermit and Kermit had them build butterflies, it was beautiful. They, they did a shot with where you know he, he, he, he taught them how to build these beautiful butterflies. And they went to Central Park [New York, New York] and you know had them up in the air, it was really gorgeous, really nice. And they went to a shop and he was actually refurbing some stuff on Snuffy [Mr. Snuffleupagus], so they got to see that. And, and I was like--
Speaker 1: So you're watching (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know I was going crazy--
Speaker 1: And, oh boy--
Speaker 2: And finally I'm seeing somebody show you know how these things are built in certain ways, so you know.
Speaker 1: And was it akin to how you were working, I mean clearly Big Bird and Snuffleupagus are much bigger puppets--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but are you finding that--
Speaker 2: I'm finding that actually I, I, there is some things that I'm doing that they are doing, which is, which was really surprising to me. But I made a lot of stuff that, I mean (sighs) they (sighs), you know the materials and stuff was amazing. And I learned that, I get you know, I got to find out all of that through, through Kermit, yeah.
Story_ID: 486400
Speaker 1: --Stu [Stu Kerr] you know would, would tell Ka- Bob Keeshan about me and, and one time Stu's director went up with some tapes of 'Caboose' to this children's television convention here [New York, New York]. And they, they, they showed the tape and Keeshan was there and saw the puppets and loved it, and, and told Stu yeah, I wanna get him to come up here and do some guest spots. So I did, so they would, they would, they would pay for my train and put me up in the, this hotel. It was right by CBS, it was cool, and I would you know and they would let me bring a friend of mine too you know and stuff like that, so. But I was old; I was I like eighteen or something like that, nineteen.
Speaker 2: And this is before you graduated high school [Dundalk High School, Dundalk, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, yes I did.
Speaker 2: Did you graduate high school in 1979?
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979] yeah.
Speaker 2: So we're talking '77 [1977] '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so tell us a little bit about guest spots that you're doing on 'Captain Kangaroo' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well I was just you know, but that they, they actually came down, the producer and one of the writers, one of the writers came down to, to my mom's [Gladys Jones Clash] house. And I had all the puppets, I made so many puppets, they would, they were on yellow shelves in my in my mom and dad's [George Clash, Sr.] bedroom. And so they came (laughter), they went in the bedroom, said, "Okay, oh, that's a nice funny puppet," or, "That's cool, that's cool." And so they picked the puppets they wanted to be on the show--
Speaker 2: As guests?
Speaker 1: --and then they would write something around those puppets and stuff, and, and what happened is then the next season they started making them regular. Making, making the, the, the puppet, my puppets regulars for the show and stuff.
Speaker 2: And were these paid gigs?
Speaker 1: Oh they were paid, oh.
Speaker 2: And were they paying you for the rights to your characters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Paid--well no they weren't doing that, but they were, I was making like three thousand dollars in three days. I was making, I was making mon- and that was just performing. And then they would pay, if I needed, they needed something built, they would, they would pay like twenty-five hundred a puppet, oh yeah it was like ridiculous.
Speaker 2: And what were you doing with that money and--
Speaker 1: I was spending it.
Speaker 2: As a youngster?
Speaker 1: I was spending it.
Speaker 2: Were you spending at Jo-Anns Fabrics [Jo-Ann Fabric and Craft Stores]?
Speaker 1: I was spending it at Jo-Anns; I was buying clothes, yeah everything. It was really nice and I did it for five, four, five seasons, but it was great. And that's the first time I got to meet Cosby [Bill Cosby], there was a segment called "Picture Pages" that--
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah and he was part owner of that, that, that property, and so he was you know, you know pitching it to everybody that put on their shows. And so Keeshan was very interested, and I remember Cosby coming to the show and, I gotta find that photo. I have a great photo of him and Keeshan and I. And it's interesting 'cause it was around the time that, that Lennon [John Lennon] was shot actually, 'cause I remember going home leaving from the, from the, from the PR [public relations] of it. And, and it was really crazy around that time.
Speaker 2: A number of (unclear) too far (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, something was going on.
Speaker 2: --'cause that's right on the--
Speaker 1: Well I wasn't, I wasn't living at 72nd [Street], I was subletting a place, I think on 47th [Street] and 10th [Avenue], so that's still close. But, but there was something going, there was something in the air when I was leaving, and then I found out when I got home, it was all over the news.
Speaker 2: So you're at 'Captain Kangaroo' in your later high school years, can you, are, what's your schedule like, are you commuting?
Speaker 1: Well, it was terrible; I mean I was, 'cause what happened is, when I got 'Captain,' I turned down 'Captain' for 'Sesame' ['Sesame Street'] when they first offered to me. Because I really wanted to do 'Sesame' and, and Kermit [Kermit Love] actually said listen, hold off because, because you, you if you take it now and, and then I can get you on 'Sesame,' you won't be able to do 'Sesame' because you'll be doing 'Captain.' So I held off, and that was the year that I graduated.
Speaker 2: So you're working, you're doing the guest spots on 'Captain Kangaroo' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --for a while and I don't--
Speaker 1: Well before, before I would, I did the guest spots, you know I had met Kermit.
Story_ID: 486401
Speaker 1: Can we hear about the Macy's Day Parade [Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade]?  I don't wanna skip that.
Speaker 2: Well the, the Macy's thing, the Macy's Day, the Macy's Parade that was, that was, like I said Kermit [Kermit Love] had a lot projects that he was doing. And that was the year that 'The Muppet Movie' had a, had just come out, and so in the parade they had the bus from the movie. And so that meant that Jim [Jim Henson] was really gonna you know be on the bus with you know until--all the main puppeteers from that movie was gonna be on that bus. And so they needed new, they had, they needed more puppeteers for the 'Sesame Street' float that was gonna be in too. So that's when Kermit said listen you know, you know would your mom [Gladys Jones Clash] be cool with you to come up and do the, that means you have to come up the day before. And--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh my god, I don't know.
Speaker 1: And was that the first time that you met Jim Henson?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the first time I met Jim, yeah, yeah and Rich Hunt, Richard was (laughter), Richard was crazy.
Speaker 1: And Richard Hunt was the previous Elmo?
Speaker 2: Yeah Richard, Richard did it before me and hated it and he's the one that gave it to me and then, and then hit.
Speaker 1: And when you met Richard Hunt what was doing at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, Richard was one of his, Richard, Richard is one of the main puppeteers fo- with Jim, he was just flat-out, I mean one of the principal puppeteers with Jim. And when I met him, (laughter) it was in the bathroom at the, at the, in, up in Macy's [R.H. Macy and Company Store; Macy's Herald Square, New York, New York] (laughter), and he was like you know, "You know they don't have no black puppeteer. So you gotta go up there and you know don't be shy, you gonna go up and tell them what you've been doing and all that stuff, and sell yourself." So, (laughter) so you know and I'm talking to this guy who has a tam [tam-o'-shanter] on and a turkey feather in his hat in his tam and everything. And man I was like and I went out and actually I really didn't have to say anything 'cause Kermit actually promoted me to Jim. You know Kermit was like, "Well you know Kevin [HistoryMaker Kevin Clash] has his two, these two, his own two shows ['Caboose' and 'Mr. Rainbow's World'] in Baltimore [Maryland]," and, and Jim was like, "Well, can you stay up and you know and, and you know audition for me. You know I wanna see some other stuff that you've done," and before I could say anything, then Kermit said, "Oh no, he can't because he has to do the two shows; he has to go back down for blah, blah, blah." And you know making me you know, and I was like, "No, I wanna go, I wanna go I, I, I'll tell them I'll tell them," you know. But he was right, I mean I was, I mean that was responsible for me to go down and do what I needed to do. And I sent the tape backup and then I started you know getting stuff with, with Jim and stuff, but, he was, it was, it was a cool time to meet him, and I'd already, Jim had, I mean Frank [Frank Oz], I mean whew, now I'm going through everybody. Kermit had already, I got to go to one of the screenings of 'The Muppet Movie' with Kermit and that was really, that was a highlight of my career.
Speaker 1: Who was at that screening?
Speaker 2: Well, there was nobody, I mean it was just you know, there was, it was, they had already had the premier and everything. It was just a screening you know, so that was unbelievable, that was unreal. I remember crying in the theater watching that, "I wanna be there, I wanna do it," no but it was cool. And to be sitting with Kermit that was really cool.
Story_ID: 486402
Speaker 1: So explain to us after you graduated [from Dundalk High School, Dundalk, Maryland] about your job, what you thought was going to be your job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Or your college--
Speaker 2: No, I had given up 'Caboose'--
Speaker 1: --substitute.
Speaker 2: I had given up 'Caboose' because you know Kermit [Kermit Love], what happened is Kermit said listen, come up and we, we want you to come up for a week and observe the show. Because we really, we really interested in having you, you know come on and I was like, this is it.
Speaker 1: 'Sesame Street'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was 'Sesame Street' and it was like (laughter) and I was like this is it.
Speaker 1: You're doing 'Captain Kangaroo' and 'Caboose' at this time?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't, I wasn't, yeah I was doing 'Captain,' but I was just doing guest spots at the time.
Speaker 1: And does 'Captain Kangaroo'--
Speaker 2: And, and, and 'Great Space Coaster' ['The Great Space Coaster'] hadn't started yet, and that was through, that was through Kermit, that was one of his shows. So I was really just, I was doing, I was doing guest spots on 'Captain,' and so I would go up and, but it didn't happen. It didn't--
Speaker 1: So wait, you're on 'Caboose,' you're doing the guest spots for 'Captain Kangaroo' and does 'Captain Kangaroo' give you a job offer?
Speaker 2: Not yet, not at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so I would, I wanted 'Sesame Street' of course and so I went up there and they, I observe for that week, but I didn't get no job. So and I'd already given up 'Caboose.'
Speaker 1: In order to spend that week?
Speaker 2: No, I got, I thought I was going to, I mean they had the local, the local newspaper that Channel 2 [WMAR-TV, Baltimore, Maryland] was at, at my house. Susan, Susan White [Susan White-Bowden] who was this wonderful reporter at, at Channel 2 came down and interviewed my mom [Gladys Jones Clash], "Aren't you proud, he's going to 'Sesame'." They had it all in the newspapers you know, you know, "[HistoryMaker] Kevin Clash is going to 'Sesame Street'," but it didn't happen (laughter). But I got back and I started doing a little bit of 'Caboose' and then 'Captain' said okay we want you as a regular. And then, and then 'Great Space Coaster' happened with, with Stu [Stu Kerr] and, and I mean with Kermit. And I started doing that and that was full-blown series.  That was an unbelievable series.
Story_ID: 486403
Speaker 1: Now, 'The Great Space Coaster' which I'd like you to tell, you tell us about in a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Is that located in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we shot that here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We shot that here in New York.
Speaker 1: So after you sort of do this senior summer, do you move yourself completely to New York?
Speaker 2: No not yet, I, I, I really just, there was just a hotel called the George Washington [George Washington Hotel, New York, New York] and that was, the bed was like this, you know. And I, that, 'cause that's all I could afford at the time, and, and so I really was just coming up to do the guest spots and you know. And that was really about it at that point, you know it was, and then 'Great Space Sis-,' 'Grace Space'--'Great Space Coasters' started happening. So I, I, one of the performers, one of the puppeteers I, you know, we got an apartment up here, so we really started subletting at the, at the time. 'Cause we really didn't know what was gonna happen, he was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and I was, I was from Baltimore [Maryland], so. We, rent, we went around you know subletting, down in, down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the 'Great Space'--I don't wanna interrupt.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, just down in the Village, we found you know a place you know and we just, you, just started subletting, you know.
Speaker 1: So 'The Great Space Coaster' was that a television show or a movie?
Speaker 2: No, 'The Great Space Coaster' was a, was a syndicated television show, and it was, it was really a, a really cool show. I performed a character called Goriddle Gorilla and, and actually that was the first job that I actually, not only got to you know, perform. But also I was the, associate producer of the puppeteers, so I was like kind of a foreman for them. And, and that was really cool, that was you know give me some responsibility and I mean hey. So what started happening is (laughter) I was doing 'Captain' ['Captain Kangaroo'] at the same time and 'Great Space Coaster.' And I was starting to do bits and pieces on 'Sesame Street,' so I would come, I would go to, go to Baltimore and have a minor nervous break- birth- breakdown and on the weekends. 'Cause literally shooting, I would shoot 'Captain Kangaroo' from 8:30 'til about lunchtime and then I would go to 'Great Space Coaster' from 2:00 to 6:00 p.m. And then from 6:00 to 12:00 I would prerecord the songs at this recording studio for 'Great Space Coaster.' And then from, from midnight 'til about 6:00 in the morning, I was building puppets for 'Captain Kangaroo.' And I was taking shifts forc- fortunately because Jim, Jim Martin who was my roommate, you know he could build puppets too. So he would help and he would help me puppeteer the stuff, but I mean I, that's what I was doing, and that was everyday (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you all sleep ever?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd take shifts, you know he would do a certain amount and crash and then, then I would get up to do a certain amount and--
Speaker 1: And how long does that last?
Speaker 2: Well 'Captain' was for about four seasons. 'Great Space Coasters' was about two or three seasons.
Speaker 1: And how long is a season?
Speaker 2: 'Captain,' I don't know 'cause that was network, that was CBS and so I don't, I don't know if it was amount of, I know that, we would do about twenty-six shows or maybe more with, with 'Caboose' per season. No, not 'Caboose,' I see I'm getting that mixed up, with 'Great Space Coaster,' I think it was about twenty-six shows might've been more. But it was crazy, it was crazy.
Speaker 1: Now, has your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't ever remember it every stopping, I really don't, I mean it just kept going.
Story_ID: 486404
Speaker 1: You said that Richard Hunt had reminded you, to make sure you sold yourself because you were one, you were the first black puppeteer at least that had been 'Sesame Street.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you think about the fact that you're black while you're doing 'Captain Kangaroo' and 'Caboose' and hustling around in the city [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I never thought about you know being black, doing all that stuff, I really didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are other people thinking about the fact that you're black?
Speaker 2: It wasn't, I mean it wasn't really, back then, no, and, and, and it just started recently, I mean I, I was not happy for a long time with, with Jet and Ebony and Essence and stuff. And I'm still not that keen on them and I can't, it's very hard for me to get in there for them to celebrate me. So it's like, it was like you know.
Speaker 1: What are you unhappy--
Speaker 2: I mean I've been in People you know when, when the whole Tickle Me Elmo thing happened, you know I was in People, I wasn't in, in Essence or you know or, or any of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you said you weren't in, did they not come and cover you?
Speaker 2: They weren't interested, no, they weren't interested. Yes, it's, it's been crazy, I mean I, I have twelve Emmys [Emmy Award] now and I still haven't (laughter) you know I'll see Denzel [Denzel Washington] on the cover you know or something like that. But you know I mean it, it's, it's, it's kind of a--
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense of why they aren't interested?
Speaker 2: I just think that, that you know I mean a, a sports personality and an actor they can connect to. I just think that they, they, they don't, they can't really connect to what I do, you know.
Speaker 1: And are there any other--
Speaker 2: Which, which is inter- I mean, which is interesting but, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Are there any other black people working in the industry as you're working there?
Speaker 2: You mean as puppeteers and stuff?
Speaker 1: Or producers or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Set design or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Or sound, whatever?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: So would you say that the set that you're working on was diverse, or the sets?
Speaker 2: The sets are diverse, but it, I mean it's, it's always predominately white, I mean it's not you know, I mean if you do, you don't, you know I mean we used to have a couple of, we used to have a, a black writer, he's not a, you know not doing anymore, music we used to have a black person and not, so I mean it's normally, I mean we, and you know I can count on one hand you know how many black puppeteers. You know, Noel MacNeal is one who's very, very talented puppeteer who, who originated Bear and 'Bear in the Big Blue House.' And now he's a really, really very talented writer is going off and doing things and stuff so. But no it's still a (laughter), I'm still, I'm much a minority, that's why you know it's like it, it kind of irritates me you know that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That you're not getting the coverage.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like--
Speaker 1: After you've done quite abreast of work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: As a black person obviously, a black person just--
Speaker 2: No that's why I mean you know, it's, it's, it's not as frustrating as it used to be, you know but--
Story_ID: 486405
Speaker 1: So how do you eventually come to find yourself working at 'Sesame Street'?
Speaker 2: I think it was really you know it's of course Kermit's [Kermit Love] influence, but also you know Jim [Jim Henson] and Frank [Franz Oz], all of them, the really main guys started going off and doing 'The Muppet Show.' And then they started doing movies and they needed a, to, to get another group of puppeteers on 'Sesame Street.' So I came into play as one of those puppeteers that they started to groom to take over some of those spots hopefully that you know the principal puppeteers were not gonna be around for. And so I just happen, fortunately I was (laughter) at the right place at the right time, so.
Speaker 1: And you ex- you expressed earlier that there was at least one time when you were not in the position to take a position at 'Sesame Street.' And that Kermit Love contains your enthusiasm--
Speaker 2: Well he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And sort of keeps you on the track.
Speaker 2: He was entering the current, yeah Kermit, Kermit took me under his wing and, and he, he really helped me a lot through you know choices to make. I mean you know Jim had asked me to do 'The Dark Crystal,' which was beautiful movie that shot in London [England]. And I had, I had 'Caboose,' why I keep, I had 'Great Space Coaster' ['The Great Space Coaster'], I had 'Great Space Coaster,' and I had 'Captain Kangaroo' at the time. And he explained to me he said, "Listen you know, I have no doubt that down the line that there'll be some other movies that you'll be able to do." I said, but he said, "But right now you have two series, (laughter) a movie you go in and you do it, and it's over. Series you know there's you haven't heard anything about cancellation on either one of them. So you have to really think about that, and I advise you not to take this movie at this point, and keep doing your series." And I was thinking, (imitates crying) but, I, I took his advice, his advice and he was totally right.
Speaker 1: And why was he right? I mean how does that manifest for you professionally (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was right because you know I mean you know that, there would be time for that, there would be time you know this is not, they wouldn't, and this, that was not the last time that Jim would ask me to do something. And he was right, Jim turned around and asked me to do 'Labyrinth' and, and I, I'd been doing 'Sesame Street' you know to a certain extent then. And not only did he ask me to perform 'Labyrinth,' but he, he, through of course Richard again who, who was another one that, that was a huge supporter said you know. Jim went to him said listen you know do you think--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: No Richard Hunt, actually Jim went to Richard and said, "Listen, you think Kevin [HistoryMaker Kevin Clash] would be good at training and auditioning puppeteers for--." And Richard said yeah, and so Jim not only asked me to perform on it, but he also asked me to work with his, his, his son Brian [Brian Henson] on auditioning and doing workshops and you know doing rehearsals and all of that stuff. And so I was over in London for like eight months doing that project.
Speaker 1: For 'Labyrinth'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for 'Labyrinth,' yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Labyrinth.'
Story_ID: 486406
Speaker 1: Talk to me a little bit about what puppeteering entails and you know how you train someone to be a puppeteer.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean you know the training you know that was for something specific you know the movie ['Labyrinth'] was. But I mean as far as you know spec- as far as now that I'm you know I'm a scout for and--I mean what I look for is just you know who you know if they have potential manipulating the character making it come to life. Focus, lip sync all of that stuff plays into it, I mean how realistic did they make the puppet look? And if they can do that you know, I mean again the, the, that doesn't mean they can act, and so that's the next step you know. Can they create or can they create a character, some people can and some people can't. Some people will become supporting and some people will become principal performers.
Speaker 1: And so if you bring a puppet to life, it's really you as an actor--
Speaker 2: It's acting, it's totally acting, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't have a good word for--
Speaker 2: And your sense of humor.
Speaker 1: --becoming the spirit of--
Speaker 2: Well, just you know yeah be, be, we creating a character, creating a character, I mean you know we have phenomenal writers. And the writer will write down, okay this, this character is threes and, three and a half years old. He's like a sponge, he, he, he you know he learns through the games that, that, that he comes up with. You know he talks in third person you know, you know all of those things you, you get, and then you, you figure out what you gonna do with it, you know.
Story_ID: 486407
Speaker 1: Talk about Jim Henson and what kind of a person was he and why you and everyone on the 'Sesame Street' set, I'm sure really, admired and adored him.
Speaker 2: Well because Jim was all about play, he was all about having a good time. You know we, we always knew that Jim didn't have to, I mean he already made his millions, he didn't have to get down (laughter) in the trenches with us. And, but that what was the fun about it, I mean puppetry is a lot of fun, and, and, and, and definitely him having to deal with business so much that was of way of getting away from it too. You know he'd get down there and put down, and put on the puppets and be silly. He was just a, he was just a really cool guy; he loved what he was doing. And so he made everybody else around him you know enjoy what he was doing. You know you hear that, you know somebody runs a company they're, they're the ones you know set the pace for everybody else under them. And so you know even talking with Frank, I mean he, I remember him being in you know. An interview that he had, Frank Oz, who was like you know (laughter), Jim's right hand perform- you know puppeteer. He always said that you know it's all, it always starts from the top as far as how everybody's gonna be underneath that person. And, and Jim set the tone for all of us, as far as how we create, how we enjoy, how we respect each other. And, and you know that's what he left with us too, so, but he was cool, he was a, he was a cool, cool, cool guy.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: He was very funny, lot of fun, but, but down to earth fun, you know, very, very approachable, never had an ego, we, we, never, we always wanted to give him over 100 percent. Because he always respected us that we were a part of it, and he did that with everybody, he did that with newcomers. I mean he, he always made you feel comfortable, so, 'cause he knew that that would get the best out of you.
Speaker 1: In terms of children's television and children's entertainment, how did Jim Henson revolutionize or pioneer--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --that genre, what was happening before him and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was thinking about you know there was a guy, I'm trying to remember his name, he's such a talented guy who created--
Speaker 1: A precursor to Jim Henson?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah just utilizing TV in a way that never vis- never would, that wasn't used yet. I mean Milton Berle was one of those people that was just a wonderful character actor. I mean really funny comedian that, that just played with the television in so many different ways.
Speaker 1: Or what about Fred Rogers or LeVar Burton, these people are after?
Speaker 2: Well Fred--
Speaker 1: Or Pee-wee Herman [Paul Reubens]?
Speaker 2: No, Fred, Fred was, you know Fred a whole different style on teaching you know or you know entertaining children and everything. But a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful guy, (laughter) I remember once he, he wanted Big Bird to come on. But he wanted; he wanted Caroll Spinney to take off the costume to show that it was make-believe to the kids. And we had to say no Fred (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On 'Mister Rogers' ['Mister Rogers' Neighborhood']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well because you remember he had the land of make-believe [Neighborhood of Make-Believe], so he would, you would go and see King Friday [King Friday XIII] and all of that stuff. That was the land of make-believe and so he wanted to make sure that the kids knew, that's why he would have the finger puppets on that would be in that world. But that was imaginary, so that's the way he played it and it was very respectful and it was great. But that we, we can't do it, and so we had to say no, but he did, he still had Big Bird on and he understood. But really, really, cool, cool, cool guy. But what I loved about you know, Jim is, Jim took that medium of television and made it very approachable for, for, for, puppets. That really wasn't, it wasn't a matter of, you know with 'Kukla, Fran and Ollie,' they had a puppet stage. That you know the puppets here would get behind the puppet stage and then the camera would just shoot the puppet stage. Well Jim used the frame of the camera, so the illusion is you didn't know, you know it, it, by doing that you thought that the puppet was you know was just standing there. You never thought there was a puppeteer underneath because he used it just like television normally does. I mean you don't (laughter) you don't see people behind you know, you know on the news you saw them behind a desk. But you saw them head to toe and stuff like that or you, you saw them half you know median shots or what have you. And so he used the framing the way you would a human.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned, mentioned Milton Berle, is he--
Speaker 2: Well Milton Berle and, and, and Imogene Coca and Sid Caesar they, they all were the pioneers of, of you know, of, of using, using that medium, the television you know and with the humor and stuff like that. Ernie Kovacs is the person I wanted, wanted to talk about Ernie Kovacs was unbelievable. With the, with the stuff, I mean he had Jack Lemmon back then (laughter) and you know being silly and, and you know utilizing the, the, the framing of, of the, you know of the camera and stuff like. Of, of the tube, you know not just sitting in a chair but just really utilizing in, in very clever ways.
Speaker 1: With puppets or?
Speaker 2: Not with puppets, just with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just for children's entertainment?
Speaker 2: Yea--no, not even children's entertainment, it was more for family-oriented. And Jim grew up watching that stuff and loving that stuff you know, and so he's the one who brought it to the forefront as far with puppets and stuff.
Story_ID: 486408
Speaker 1: When do you become a regular on 'Sesame Street,' and what characters are you playing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what was funny is I, I was doing three, I was, I told you I was doing you know 'Great Space Coaster' ['The Great Space Coaster'], 'Captain' ['Captain Kangaroo'] and 'Sesame Street.' Well I couldn't juggle all three, and so what happened is 'Sesame Street' let me go actually. And then I would, I was just doing 'Captain' and, and 'Great Space Coaster.' Well 'Captain' was on its twenty-ninth, I did the last five seasons of 'Captain,' 'Captain' was on at 6:30 in the morning and, and they, I thought C- CBS was so respectful of, of, of Bob Keeshan for so many years. Because it actually made CBS back then it was the number one kid show, and Milton Berle was the number one you know family show back then. And so they were very respectful, but then they couldn't do it anymore, so they let him go, and so that (laughter) went away. And then 'Great Space Coaster,' the, the, the producers of that, they were really looking to get their foot in the door to do half an hour commercials. 'Cause they were working with, they were, I think it was Tyco [Tyco Toys, Inc.], Hasbro [Hasbro, Inc.], I think it was, where they wanted to do 'My Little Pony' and 'Transformers.' They wanted to do half an hour of that, and so they, they started this show to really show you know Hasbro that they can do it. And so once they got in the door, they pretty much let 'Great Space Coaster' go you know to, to go on to do that.
Story_ID: 486409
Speaker 1: --Twenty-ninth season grant- you know, 'Captain Kangaroo' is gone, and then 'Great Space Coaster' ['The Great Space Coaster'] they, they went on; you know do their other shows. And then what was the other show, 'Sesame Street' you know they didn't wanna work with my schedule. So that, that had already left, so I was like, but you know ev- every single time something like that happened, boom, I was back doing work again. Jane called me, Jane Henson, Jim's [Jim Henson] wife called me back up and said would, "Are you interested in doing workshops with me, puppeteering workshops?" I said sure. So I went over and started doing that and then she said you know, "Are you still interested in doing 'Sesame Street'?" I said, "What?" And so she said, "Well, I'm gonna set up you know for you to meet with the producers and see which, what they can do." And so I met with them and they said okay, come on back, and that was back in '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. And that's when Jim asked me about, I think he asked me about 'Labyrinth' at that point. And went on to do 'Labyrinth' came back and started in, that's when Richard [Richard Hunt] gave me Elmo. And it just went crazy after that, I mean it was just crazy.
Story_ID: 486410
Speaker 1: How did you create the character that is now Elmo?
Speaker 2: Well Brian Muehl, who is a, who is a phenomenal puppeteer, who actually originated Barkley and Telly Monster on the show ['Sesame Street'], he started, he actually was the first one who performed Elmo. David Korr, who is a wonderful, wonderful writer of the show saw this little red monster, that they just made us an ensemble and, and just thought it was so cute that he started writing it in his scripts. And the producer was like what is this, and he said well I think it will work, and so they gave it to Brian. Brian left the show because he went to start, he wanted to get into writing and producing, I mean writing and acting more. And so they, they threw it to Richard [Richard Hunt], actually I got, I got [Dr.] Nobel Price, which was another character that, that Brian originated, which was an inventor who just constantly reinvented stuff that was (laughter) already invented. But he just gave it another name for it, and they would say you know, "Nobel, you know that's a basketball, somebody already invented that." And he would say, "Oh, never mind," and he would just run off (laughter), so I, that was a character that, that Brian originated. And I got that. Richard took over Elmo and he just started screaming with the puppet, he just, I mean everything, every script. Because he hated young kiddy characters, he thought Elmo was kiddy. And he, he the head writer, Norman Stiles would call and say, "What is he doing?" And Lisa Simon who was the producer at the time you know she, she you know (laughter), she was like, "Let's just get through it." So I happened to be in the Muppet room and by myself and Richard came with, with the puppet and threw it to me and said, "Come up with a voice." And I came up with a voice, went in to Lisa, Lisa said, "I don't care," I got you know, I started doing the puppet. Matter of fact there were two more shows that was, that the cup- the character wasn't in that season. And I got through that season and didn't know what I was doing, and my thing is if Richard couldn't do anything with it, I didn't know what I was gonna do with it. And so I went back and hung out with my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] and you know daycare and stuff like that, and started thinking about the character. And, and I came back in the next season and a little more focus with it, and, and then everybody started laughing at the stuff that I was doing. I said okay, so I'm going in the right direction with this, and it kept going, kept going, kept going, and I mean to now it's just a phenomenon, it was ridiculous, crazy.
Speaker 1: And so how did Elmo actually become a phenomenon? I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --first there's the doll [Tickle Me Elmo]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Now there's 'Elmo's World.'
Speaker 2: Well, you know back, I started you know I got him probably '85 [1985], '86 [1986] and the show started 1969, '70 [1970]. You know I mean in, in 1971 [sic. 1970], you know Big Bird's head was on the cover of Time magazine, I mean that's how huge this show was (laughter). And you know I mean you, you couldn't, you, I mean these characters are household names you know. Ernie and Bert and Grover and Cookie Monster and Oscar [Oscar the Grouch] and Big Bird, I mean they were huge. And they were you know, you're always looking for the next you know you never know what's gonna happen, and you know he just, I mean the research. We have a huge research department and they go out and they really test these characters to see if they're doing what they supposed to do. It's the same thing with a commercial you know if, you can put a commercial on, it can be the best phenomenal looking thing, but do they know what the product is? It's the same thing with a child you know you go out, you, you let them you know, "Well you know do you like Elmo?" "Oh yeah, we love Elmo, he's funny." "All right, well what did you learn," did you know, and they actually were learning what they were supposed to learn. I learned long a time, long time ago, from, from, from Stu [Stu Kerr], he said the way he likes to teach is give them 95 percent entertainment and 5 percent education, they'll get it every time. 'Cause if you make them laugh, they gonna remember what they're laughing at (laughter). And so apparently that was happening with, with Elmo.
Story_ID: 486411
Speaker 1: What kind of lessons does Elmo teach?
Speaker 2: Well you now, I--it's interesting Elmo learns by, by, by again by the games that he, that he plays with people. But also he, he, he's this three and half year old that's a sponge you know. He's just everything is, is new for him, he's excited about it, and what I found over the years of working with Jim [Jim Henson] is you, not only do you have to have, you know what you're supposed to be teaching to a certain extent, but you have to have that Muppet sense of humor that edge that, that, that everybody can watch and laugh at. And so that's what I do with Elmo, I mean I know my balance and I know the limit that I can go. But there's a, there's a, there's a large amount of what you can do with these Muppet characters. Because first of all they're not, you don't see them every day. It's not, you know these not, you don't see these, these type of things walking down the street (laughter) you know. And, and, and, and that's why the Muppets were always so popular, you know it was always coming from, Jim never had, he never wanted his characters to play down the kids. You know he, he had five kids of his own and he never played down to them. You know, he, he enjoyed them and, and he, he played off of them (laughter) more than anything. And, and so that's what, that's why the characters were always so popular, you know. And, and so Elmo was, was the same way you know, he, he was there to, to, to be that younger kidlike for the show you know. But also he still had that funny Muppet edge to him that was, that everybody loved. You know and it was interesting, I didn't really, didn't think that you know, that the voice would catch on. I thought it would be irritating, and not that it's not to some people, but it's, it's they, but, but it's, it's, people love it more than they (laughter) they, they don't love it. Which was interesting, but, but I think one of the reasons is because it comes from the place that's believable to me, it's not, I'm not just doing a falsetto of voice you know. It's, it's, it's, it's a character that's young and innocent and, and he loves the world, and that's about it. I mean you know, and so, but that's where acting comes into play, that's what I was talking about before. If a puppeteer has a potential of, of focus, lip sync, making sure the puppet looks real, the next step is creating a character. Now, now how are you gonna bring me in and connect with this character, if you can't do that, then you know you're supporting. You will, you can help a puppeteer, but you can't grow to the point of having your own character. And that's really important, very, very important. I've seen it, you know time and time again, when it works, and when it doesn't.
Story_ID: 486412
Speaker 1: Were you surprised when you won an Emmy [Emmy Award] in 1990 for performing Elmo (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was so surprised I already framed the, I framed the nomination certificate. Dulcy Singer who was executive producer at the time said, "Would you like to go?" 'Cause it was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time, and I said, "No," I said, "please I'm, I'm this is it for me." I mean, I you know 'cause I did not think, I mean it was, it was LeVar and LeVar Burton and, and, and Paul Reubens who played Pee-wee [Pee-wee Herman] was with Mister--and Fred Rogers. I was up against these huge heavy hitters.
Speaker 1: Just to remind those who might not remember what show was LeVar Burton associated with?
Speaker 2: LeVar was the host and, and, and the producer of 'Reading Rainbow,' at the time and so that's what he was doing. And of course Fred had you know--
Speaker 1: Mister Rogers.
Speaker 2: 'Mister Rogers' Neighborhood' and, and of course Paul Reubens had 'Pee-wee's Playhouse,' and I think Tim, Tim Curry had, was nominated at the time for Captain Hook, which a, an animated series ['Peter Pan and the Pirates'] that was on at the time. And so I was up against some heavy, heavy hitters (laughter) and I was like shoot, I you know, I, I framed my, my, my certificate had it in my little workshop and I was, I was off for, for the next project. And she called about midnight that, that night and said, "You won kiddo," I was like I didn't even know what she was talking about. And then found out that I was like blown away.
Speaker 1: How, how did you feel?
Speaker 2: I didn't sleep that night, I, I didn't go to sleep until about four o'clock in the morning. I remember calling Mr. Riggs [Robert Riggs], my drama teacher and, and I brought it up to him, he said you know I don't remember, I said yeah, 'cause you were asleep (laughter) he was just mumble, mumble, mumble, I was screaming on the phone. But of course, I woke up my parents [Gladys Jones Clash and George Clash, Sr.] and everything and it was, it was cool, it was cool.
Speaker 1: And who accepted the award for you?
Speaker 2: Actually Ted, Ted May who was one of the direct- directors at the time, really, really cool friend of my mine, he, I told him what to say just, because, Jim [Jim Henson] had already passed away I think. And I, and I really wanted him to just say you know thank you Jim, and that's what he did. But that turkey didn't bring home the envelope, I wanted him to bring home the envelope. But (laughter), but it was nice, it was nice, you know it was cool, especially the fact that it was the year that Jim passed away too. 'Cause it was 19- 1990.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1989, '90 [1990] was that, was that year and, and so it was still on everybody's mind and--
Story_ID: 486413
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, was that an unexpected death or, for you all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very unexpected, I worked with him two weeks prior to it, I was doing 'Arsenio Hall' ['The Arsenio Hall Show'] with him, and actually he was talking to Jim [Jim Henson] about, he was talking to Arsenio [Arsenio Hall] about doing a project that was I mean, I, I, I hope I can try to get it done. But it was gonna be on African folk tales and, and the character Clifford that I originated with, with Jim, Clifford was gonna be the host and would, and he would talk to the celebrities. And then they would become a Muppet and be a part of you know the, the story.
Speaker 1: So someone would build a Muppet?
Speaker 2: Exactly like, or you know whatever they needed in the story, but they would then become like you know he was talking to Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] and then he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna use Whoopi--
Speaker 2: --he talked to Arsenio--
Speaker 1: So Whoopi--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --becomes a Muppet and suddenly she's speaking as a Muppet.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And you're discussing African tales?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That sounds great.
Speaker 2: It was gonna be really, really cool. But you know he passed away two weeks after that, and he was complaining of a sore throat then but that was about it. It was walking pneumonia, so you know you really don't, and it was funny after that, about a month after that. I was doing something with Whoopi, and she said she had come down with, with walking pneumonia, but she went to the doctors. Jim was, Jim was practicing Christian Science, his parents [Betty Brown Henson and Paul Henson] would, was, was he was on and off with it, but they were very religious with it.
Speaker 1: So no medical care?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, no matter of fact when I've, there was a, we had just, Joe Raposo had passed away and there was a special ['Sing! Sesame Street Remembers Joe Raposo and His Music'] that was actually a year after, it, I think it was a special that Jon Stone, who was one of our creators of 'Sesame' ['Sesame Street'], had produced for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service]. And, and that was, that was the same day that Jim passed away, he was supposed to be at this, they had a, they had a big party at B. Smith's [New York, New York] that afternoon. And actually Lena Horne who just adored Jim and Frank [Frank Oz] was at the party, and was asking about Jim. And Jerry Nelson, who's one of the celebrated principal performers with Jim, they had, they were at a recording studio that day. And, and Jerry said you know for the, I, for the life of me I can't remember anytime that Jim was never, never showed up at a recording session. And that was, that was the day that he passed away too. And Lena asked about Frank and, and Jim and we said, well Jim's under the weather. Frank was off doing something, he wasn't there, but I remember going home that afternoon and asking, calling up The Sherry-Netherland 'cause that's where he lived in New York [New York]. And couldn't get a hold of him, it went into answering machine, and one of his assistants lived in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know worked in L.A. And so I called her and she said, "No, he's not taking any phone calls, he's just under the weather, he's not taking it." And I cr- I had crashed, went to sleep, and got up and was gonna get some Chinese food and you know started to get myself together. The phone rang and his assistant in New York called and said, "Listen, you know I don't know if you heard about Jim." I said, "Yeah, he's you know, he's under the weather and stuff like that," she said, "No, they don't think he's gonna make it through the night." And that's when it hit you know and, and I, I, I think, I did go into shock, he, she got off the phone with me. And my instinct had went back into where I was gonna go, you know as far as Chinese I, was gonna go out and get Chinese food. But I had no shoes on, I didn't have no, no keys, I was just getting ready to close the door on me and lock myself out. When the phone rang again, again and she said, "Listen you don't sound right, you stay there and I'll keep you abreast and you know here's the hospital information.  And I'll, I'll, I'll call you back and tell you what's up," and then that's when I called, was freaking out, you know I called my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] and called Jane [Jane Henson] and everything. And I fell asleep again and I think about four o'clock in the morning I got a call from, that was when you could use phones, you know you had phones on the plane, but one of, one of his producers, Karen Barnes, was flying in from L.A. And she called and she said, "Listen I was gonna go straight over to the brownstone but I, can I come over there 'cause I gotta find a hotel." Beca- and because Jim and that's when I found out that Jim passed away and stuff like that. But I, I'm trying to remember if, I think one of my, my grandmother or somebody had passed away and. But it felt like that 'cause it was really, it was really wild, the, the brownstone you know the offices became like a house. You know food was up on every, on every floor, everybody was there; we congregated for about a week, just at the brownstone. There'd be, nobody worked, everybody would get up in the morning and go to the brownstone and be there until about 4:00 or 5:00, we'd hang out with the family with, you know with the kids. And, and then that's what, and you know and what, what happened is, I mean nobody really knew that first morning you know going to the brownstone it wasn't announced. So Frank, that afternoon before, he knew, it was only immediate family who knew, they didn't the assistants, you know his personal assistants didn't know. So Jim, Frank was already calling his, his connected you know whoever was really, really connected to Jim, Frank was already calling. And so when we got in that next morning, they assigned us to people that we needed to call, like all of the puppeteers that I had been working with and trained and all that stuff. They wanted to make sure that everybody knew that knew him before it got out you know that he had passed away.
Story_ID: 486414
Speaker 1: Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was crazy emo- I mean waves of emotion was unbelievable, but then he left like all these letters.
Speaker 1: I was about to say, did he know that he was gonna die?
Speaker 2: No, you know Jim [Jim Henson] was, Jim was, Jim was very, very spiritual in his own way, he, he began to look at his mortality when you know certain things he was doing just wasn't working. And so (laughter) he started question himself more than he should have, and he went to an island just hung out you know. On this island and just you know contemplated, just thinking about you know his life and stuff like that. And he started writing letters, and he wrote, and you know an individual letter to each one of his kids. And he wrote a letter to us, the puppeteers, and so that was four years prior to his death. And then those letters were opened that week that we were together, matter of fact the kids in the family told the, you know the ones that he specifically said in the letter to come to The Sherry-Netherland [New York, New York] and they, they read some of the stuff that he left for us which was again funny, crazy man (laughter). One was you know, I know what I want for my memorial service, I don't want nobody in black, I want everybody in color, you know. I wanna, I want a Dixieland band, I wanna dirge, blah, blah, blah. And he said you know and please don't argue with me, I'm dead, you can at least do this, you know and it was like, and he, he you know he just had all this fun stuff, he said listen you know, bottom line is you know you guys gotta go on, and you know that. You gotta go on and, and keep this going, you know we had too much fun to let it, let it stop now and, it was really nice. And, and the kids were around and puppeteers and stuff and, and Heather [Heather Henson] was the one who made all of us cry. Because she, we were starting to get too businesslike and she said, "Wait a minute, you know I grew up with you guys. And, and you babysitted me and blah, blah, blah," it was really very emotional. The memorial, the memorial service was the un- most unbelievable thing I've been to. It was five and a half hours and it felt like a half an hour, it was amazing, it was amazing. The shop [Children's Television Workshop; Sesame Workshop] was mourning and they didn't know what to do, and they, they Jim, the simplicity of humor was always something that Jim, was always on Jim's mind. And the simplest thing you know could be a rod with a, you know, he loved this--anything. So there was a rod with a, with a, a cutout of a butterfly on it that you would flip, it would just flutter and that's how you made a butterfly look like it was floating you know. And on, on 'Sesame Street' or what have you and, and so somebody got, thought about that, one of the builders thought about that. So they made about five hundred of those butterflies, didn't know what they were gonna do with them. And they airbrushed Kermit the Frog eyes on each one, and there was a, there was a beautiful church [Cathedral of Saint John the Divine, New York, New York] here, I forget the, the church it was, it was held at. But they decided to take the butterflies and, and take them to the memorial service, and just put them on the chairs that were in the front. And Jim was really, really close with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, he loved Harry. Matter of fact when he, when he was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame [Television Academy Hall of Fame], they asked him who did he want and he said, "I want Harry to induct me in." And so Harry was there and did this beautiful song that he did on 'The Muppet Show' called 'Turn the World Around,' beautiful song. And he had his band and his back-up singers and, he started going and the church just went crazy. And all of a sudden the butterflies went up, everybody was in that room, and so he got choked up and everything, it was amazing. Ladysmith Black Mambazo they sang, they did a beautiful song, 'The Chant' [sic. 'Rain Chant']. Frank [Frank Oz] got up and told some stories about Jim that was hysterical.
Speaker 1: Didn't he, who, who had the suit, the--
Speaker 2: Steve Whitmire who actually was the one who, who was given Kermit you know to, to keep going, Steve Whitmire, who is wonderful, wonderful talented puppeteer, who lives in Atlanta [Georgia] actually. You know he (laughter) he took what, what, what Jim said and he went even further than any of us. He got a beautiful white linen suit and dyed it Kermit the Frog green and, instead of having a, a tie, a bow tie on, he, he had the, the collar the little green you know Kermit collar on. And his wife [Jane Henson] was there and I mean it was, it was an unbelievable day, I mean to see, and then Big Bird came out and sang 'It's Not That Easy Being Green' [sic. 'It's Not Easy Being Green'], and then looked up and, said thank you Jim, but we're gonna miss you Jim. Wonderful lot of celebrities who, who loved him, I mean it was really a cool evening, I invited my lawyer and, and, and some friend--producer friends. And, and I mean the, the, the letters and the, and the calls that was you know after that was like you I can't go back to work, there's no way. This was something I'll never forget the rest of my life, they said. 'Cause it was just amazing, amazing you know at some points they would just play some of the songs that Kermit, you know like 'Being Green' or, or, or 'Rainbow Connection' ['The Rainbow Connection'], they would just you know, you just hear that in the church.  It was phenomenal, it was, it was amazing.
Story_ID: 486415
Speaker 1: And one thing that he [Jim Henson] really, really enjoyed doing which we always pee on ourselves laughing about, is he loved recording, and recording studios. You know you heard of the 'Sesame Street Live!' shows, well a lot of times we'll go into the recording studios. And it's about ten of us in a recording studio with mics [microphones] in front of us and music stands, and we go through the whole script, doing all dialogue and singing the songs and, and then they have dancers in the costumes do it for the shows and stuff. And we'd have such a good time to the point where you know they would have to have either Jim or Frank [Frank Oz] leave. Because they couldn't stop laughing and they 'cause they make all us laugh, and so he loved prerecording and singing songs and stuff. So that's what we did on the stage, they set-up music stands and mics. And, and there was one song called 'If Just One Person' [sic. 'Just One Person'], it's just a beautiful song and it's from Peanuts where it just keeps adding and adding and adding. And so that's what the song, that's what we did you know, it started with Gonzo singing, and then Fozzie [Fozzie Bear] and then Kermit [Kermit the Frog] and then Big Bird and then Elmo, and then it just kept, to the point where had about eighty puppeteers on the stage with all the puppets up. And, and that was the shot that was in People magazine, it was a gorgeous shot. And they, they, they did it in London [England] too, because he had such a huge family in London of puppeteers and film you know people and everything, that they did it again in London. It was amazing, the letters were amazing too, it was from presidents down to you know parents of kids, or that they grew up and, the, the letters were amazing and you know you just don't know how much impact until something like that happens, it was wow. It was (laughter) really, really wow. It was unfortunate, Brian [Brian Henson] was in London at the time, you know who, he was like my, my, my brother 'cause I started doing you know shooting movies with him because of, because of his father and stuff. And he didn't make it in time to say goodbye to his dad and, and that really, that really upset him. But it was, it was an amazing time. And you know it's still a, I mean the, the group of us still had, hold of piece of Jim (laughter) with us. 'Cause we all have, all have our stories and stuff of, of some fun times with him.
Story_ID: 486416
Speaker 1: Tell us your favorite Jim Henson anecdote.
Speaker 2: Well there was, there's so many, there's (laughter) the, the one that I always tell and I actually wrote it and you know I talked about it in, in, in one of the, the Muppet books, is we were shooting the thirtieth anniversary of the Muppets in Toronto [Canada], and he put Steve Whitmire and I in charge of checking out of all the puppeteers at all of the different tables. 'Cause there was, you know there was pigs over here and it was just rats over here. And you know, Mup- you know 'Sesame Street' characters over here, so 'cause it was a tribute you know, and so it was a roast too. And we had a lot of Toronto puppeteers, a lot of puppeteers, that we wanted to make sure that they you know they were doing it right. And Jeff, Jeff Wainmoss [ph.] was the floor, floor manager of the thing. And, and so we would you know, we would say you know, "Wain we gotta change puppeteers over blah, blah, blah." "Okay fine." And so what happened is we're watching the monitor and there's a, a part of the song where all these rabbits are supposed to be singing a song. And, and Jim, the chor- the choreography that we always did, it always started to the right, and you know all any, any choreography, he said okay you know the easiest to start to right. So we're watching the rabbits and everything and they, they're dancing around and one is just doing something totally different than everybody else. And we were like what the hell, and so I, you know I went over to Wain, I said you know, "You know, we gotta go and, and, and you, we can't you just cut that 'cause we, we gotta go and talk with the puppeteers." He said, "What?" I said, "You gotta," and he said, "Are you sure you wanna?" I said, "Yeah," so I started to walk back there. He said, "Wait a minute," and he had the headsets on and he said, he started talking on the headset, say what? And I looked at Steve and said what you--and I looked at the monitor and one of the rabbits just came down and Jim Henson's hand (laughter) came up and that was the rabbit that was doing his own thing. And I was telling him that he (laughter), and boy we were so embarrassed, but we laughed about that forever. That I was telling, I was saying that Jim Henson's puppeteering was that bad, that we had to stop the shot and everything. Oh he never let me live that down, he never, I mean but that was him, I mean he would've just, he loved just puppeteering. But that was fun. But there's been some great, I mean I, I, I've gone to Dijon, France with him. Hot aired- hot air ballooning for a weekend that was just out of this world, I mean just unbelievable experience. He was the type that if he went on a trip, he wanted everybody to, to experience it, so he would call up and say listen, I'm going, you know I'm taking the yacht, blah, blah you wanna go? I mean he was unbelievable like that. He was always that if whatever it was successful it wasn't just him that was gonna you know reap the benefits, everybody was, and so that's the way he always was. You know when Tickle Me Elmo was a huge hit; I don't own Tickle Me, I don't own it you know. I don't, I don't own the character, I wished I would but, but he sat down and made sure that I, you know definitely got a piece of the success of, of that doll. Him and Sesame Workshop [Children's Television Workshop; Sesame Workshop] was very, very generous with that, they didn't have to. I, I don't own anything you know, you know I helped create it and they, and they respected that so. But good, good, good people.
Speaker 1: And Jim Henson is his, did he come up like you, I mean clearly he couldn't watch 'Sesame Street,' but he, was he a puppeteer by?
Speaker 2: You know it's funny I, you know I wanna go back and talk to Jane [Jane Henson] a little bit more, but it seems like he really didn't get into it until high school. You know he really didn't get into it until he got actually into college I think, and that's where he met Jane. And they started doing puppet shows, yeah.
Story_ID: 486417
Speaker 1: --Make fun of us, and let's throw that on when it starts getting boring you know (laughter) and so that's what they started doing. I mean John Cleese started doing them he made beaucoup money doing it, I mean it was a great idea to just get, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is in the beginning of Jim's [Jim Henson] career?
Speaker 1: No, no, this was, this was, this was when, this was when 'Muppet Show' ['The Muppet Show'] was happening and stuff like that. He started doing these mini films. You know they would just get, you know they would just write it, you know and just, just tot- roast you know all the stuff that happens. You know and the pompousness that happens you know I mean, and so he asked me to do you know, to come in. And I was just you know new, you know was, he didn't really know, and so he put me in the middle of him and Frank Oz. And this puppet that they, he changed the features on to become a different type of executive and, and I literally had like six lines at the most. And I'm sitting there with this piece of paper with six, six lines on it and I'm doing this (gesture) and I'm working the puppet. And he said, Jim said to me, "You can't memorize six lines?" So I was like okay, that's it, I'm gone (laughter), I'm gone. But actually Karen Barnes, who I told you is a really good friend of mine, she's one of the producers [for 'Sesame Street'], in fact she started as a lawyer, she was one of my, you know allies, she, she, she took a liking to me. So she said, "Listen," she said, "give him a chance, I mean come on, what do you expect, you put him between you and Frank you know. How much intimidation can I, can I, you know can a first-time puppeteer have? You know, give him, give him some time." So he did, thanks to, thanks to Karen Barnes. But (laughter) no I thought that was it.
Speaker 2: You thought you'd have a short career (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Please, I thought I'd be back doing birthday parties.  Fortunately you know he, he gave me a chance.
Story_ID: 486418
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about, I know you're no longer married, but about your wife, how did you meet her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Please, Genia [Genia Loving Clash]--
Speaker 1: --and about your daughter.
Speaker 2: Yeah Genia, well actually it was one of my, my mom's [Gladys Jones Clash] daycare kids that, that watched, that she, she watched. We became like brothers and stuff like that, and he came into town, I hadn't seen him in a long time. And he was dating a young lady that was going to UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County], one of the colleges in Baltimore [Maryland]. And he said he was going to visit you know would you like you know go, 'cause we, we had just seen each other. We wanted to hangout some more, so okay, fine. And so I went with him, and, and lo and behold I met Genia, that was one of her girlfriends, and, and she said, what she had a T-shirt on that said, someday my prince will come and I'll have rollers in my hair. It was like a T-shirt thing and, and you know we met then and then we starting dating after that. And god we dated for a long time.
Speaker 1: What's a long time?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't, we didn't get married until six years after we, we were together, because one of the reasons was she was still in school and stuff like that. And you know, and I was just starting to, to go up to New York [New York] a little bit and do some things. And, and she never, she never was on her own, she went right from living with her parents, right into a dorm with everybody. And she wanted to have a place where it was just her own, so she said listen, give me two years. And, and, and so I did and everything and then we, we got married and stuff like that. But I mean the best you know, we grew apart and stuff like that. And, and what was really nice is we're still like brothers and sister; we're totally like brothers and sisters. And, and, you know you see people go through divorces that's just terrible, Shannon [Shannon Clash] was Shannon, yeah Shannon was born at the time, and we knew, we, we knew like I said, we worked together even if we know that things are you know not gonna be what they were, what we thought they were, we still made sure that we, we took care of our daughter, and so what happened is, yeah what's happening, I'm trying, I've lost my focus.
Speaker 1: Well you're talking about you were, most people have these really ugly divorces, but yours (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well you know and but you know it's like, with ours we were like, okay we know this is not gonna work, we, you know she had her lawyer that was crazy and everything. And we're not, you know but we would, we would get in arguments, but at the end of the day we knew that, let's just (unclear), you know, let's just, let's just do this. We know this is happening and we respect each other, let's get it done the right way. And we did and it was really, really cool because we're, we're st- like brothers and sisters now. Shannon has a really nice support system with both of us, we go out to movies together and stuff like that. And, and so we didn't get into that craziness, and you know my thing is, Genia was around when I first started, when I wasn't making no money. And she's the one who, who, she's the reason why I still got money (laughter) 'cause I was the one who was spending everything, and she was like you know, she was very, very thrifty and she, she knew about you know finances and you know investing and stuff, and she did all of that. So as far as you know the, the money and everything, it was 50/50, and, and you know, it was, it was funny 'cause we would go into the bank together. And change over stuff and individual you know, and the bank was like, are y'all here together? And it was the same thing with the divorce, my sister went in with her to, to the courts and everything, and they were like (gesture) (laughter). And it was great, but that's the way our, our, our lives I mean it got really clunky when we decided it. Because you know we both got very emotional about it and stuff like that, but then we got through it and, and, and we really looked at it very realistically to get off of it. Don't waste our lives doing that mess, you know--
Speaker 1: Sounds like you did it like family.
Speaker 2: We really you know what, you, you're right because the bottom line is, Genia is the only child, is the only child with her mom. And you know there was four of us and so we became, you know my sister, my older sister NeNe [Anita Clash] they're like, they're like sisters. I mean they literally are like sisters, they hangout, they, they help each other blah, blah, blah. You know my mom is always over at the house and everything, and you know, my, my, my nieces were you know always over there, still. I mean it's just like nothing really changed you know, it, it hurt you know it hurts Sha- Sha- Shannon but--what we did is we sat down and we really communicated with her about what this really means, so that she know--she knew that it wasn't never her fault. And you know 'cause she, she would say, "Well, why can't you know dad be like blah, blah, blah," like you know, you know. "Why, why do I have to have," you know--
Speaker 1: 'Leave it to Beaver.'
Speaker 2: But you know we've gone beyond that and it, and it's really cool I mean to the point where you know her, you know boyfriend cooks for me and stuff (laughter) you know it's really fun. But it's really came out you know and I, and I my heart goes out to, you know the kids of some, some situations like that with divorces that's just, is just terrible. Really, really bad and to use the kids in the middle and everything that's, that's, that's so disrespectful. I mean you should never have a child in the first place, but you know we got through it and we talked each other, we talk to each other every day you know. I check on her you know, and of course I check on Sha- on Shannon every day and it, it worked out for the best it really did. And, it's, it's fun it really is fun now you know (laughter) instead of the angst of everything, so.
Story_ID: 486419
Speaker 1: How did having a daughter change your life?
Speaker 2: Well it changes everything as far as being responsible you know I mean I, I, I perform a three and a half year old [Elmo] for a living you know. And you talking about a Peter Pan syndrome, I mean you know it gets in the, in you know, in that (laughter) that kind of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: No, but I mean you know as far as how it changed you know what is really fun is, is I had done so much children's programming before Shannon [Shannon Clash] was born, that when you know she was old enough, boy we were sitting down watching 'Captain Kangaroo' (laughter) and 'Sesame Street' and, and 'Great Space Coaster' ['The Great Space Coaster'] and, and 'Caboose' and all of that stuff. I mean we had hours and hours and hours of time to just you know spend watching it together and stuff like that, that was cool. You know everybody always say you well how did, did it influence me in, in, in as far as with Elmo, not really. Because I was, I was pulling from my childhood you know and, and, and so I'd already put all of that in, in, you know in Elmo. I think what was really fun is to watch her separate us you know, and how she did that was really cute and fun and stuff and. I mean with, at three and a half, she was saying, "Elmo, Daddy, Daddy, Elmo, Elmo, Daddy," I was, we didn't know where that was coming from. But she was really sweet with--and now at fourteen I still come home and she has a stack of pictures that she wants me to sign and everything. It's really sweet, it's been really, really nice, you know. It's funny thinking about you know, Candice Bergen with, with her father [Edgar Bergen] and how she wrote a book ['Knock Wood'] about you know how she felt that she was, she was you know the char- the puppets kind of got in the way of her relationship with her father you know. He felt as, she felt as though that the puppets around you know him more than she was and stuff. You know don't really have that problem with Shan- (laughter) with Shannon you know, and now that she's older, she's hanging out, we're hanging out a lot more you know up her and, and being able to do stuff you know. I mean this girl was traveling at three and a half; she was in Paris [France] and Rome [Italy] because I was shooting movies and stuff there. And you know she watches the pictures, she says, "Daddy, we gotta go to all those places 'cause I don't remember any of that." So we gonna start doing some of that, which is nice too so.
Speaker 1: So where did Genia [Genia Loving Clash] and Shannon live?
Speaker 2: They live in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: So you got a really nice close-knit?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they, like five minutes away from Anita [Anita Clash], my sister, and, and about fifteen minutes away from my mom [Gladys Jones Clash] and dad [George Clash, Sr.]. And her, her mom is about you know half an hour away, forty-five minutes away. So everybody's with, within close you know, and so and you know that's, that's what I find that's so important you know, family is so important, of the growth of any, anything and that's, I think that's one of the reasons why Genia and I got through this too. You know is, is the how close our families are and stuff.
Story_ID: 486420
Speaker 1: How did Elmo get the name Elmo?
Speaker 2: I really don't know, I mean I, a lot of times when, when the puppet is built, where it's not, it's just built as an ensemble, a lot of times they either put monster number three or mon- monster number fifteen, or they give it a name. And I think that's really you know whoever, whoever built it you know gave it a name and it stuck. It was on the, you, you when you see you know all the Muppets have a little tag on, on their, on the sleeve of the puppet. That has you know Jim Henson Productions [Jim Henson Productions, Inc.; The Jim Henson Company] or what have you, and then it has a number, a primo, a number two, number three or something like that. And so that's how you identify them, and so his, his identification back then was Elmo, so. I think that's how it stuck.
Story_ID: 486422
Speaker 1: I wanna make sure that we talk some of the traveling that you've done.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Particularly to South Africa.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And to New Orleans [Louisiana] after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And then my third biggie is Elmo's testimony in [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which I think was in 2002, so if we could start in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Well South Africa--
Speaker 1: Tell us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well what happened is this wonderful lady here at Sesame [Sesame Workshop], Cooper Wright, who was in charge of, of dealing with international, the, we have a lot of co- co-productions all around the world. And so she was in charge of you know setting up the other producers to go to these different countries to set-up co-production. And so they knew that puppets was you know of course is so important, you know the Muppets are so important to 'Sesame Street.' They, they that needed to be a part of the co-productions also. And she, Cooper is the one who got me involved with, with co-production, the first thing that I did was I think was in China, was the first co-production I did. And I went over with her and had a wonderful time, and what I normally do is I go over there and, I mean I literally had two hundred puppeteers to look at. And I had to audition them down to four and then that has to happen in a week, and then the second week, I had, that start, the second week is a workshop. Where I, you know I wanna make sure that they perform the characters like you know like--
Speaker 1: So you're actually choosing for?
Speaker 2: Yeah choosing for and then doing the workshop with the four for the second week. And South Africa came up and I said oh, I wanna do that one (laughter), and what was really cool about that is--the first, I think the first season [of 'Takalani Sesame'] you know the first, as far as the specifics that they wanted, as far as the characters they wanted and everything. You know it's like fourteen languages over there, and so you know that was a challenge and also radio is so much more important and, and, easily, more accessible than TV. So it had TV and radio that was connected to this and that was a challenge because you know normally when I go and I, I audition for the puppeteer and then the voice is second. And then you know we were getting some clashing because of the fact that the radio people were saying, well no, I don't like that voice. I said but the puppeteering and their acting is phenomenal. You know with Jim [Jim Henson] what I learned is that you know the puppeteering is first and then the voice is second. You know the, the whole creating of the character is first, and then you know that's why you know he didn't really; it wasn't all about the voice. And so it was like different trying to, you know so we had to do some compromising and everything--
Story_ID: 486423
Speaker 1: But it was, it was wonderful, but what happened is the second season [of 'Takalani Sesame'], is when they started talking, about you know we really should think about having a, a, a character to deal with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] over here. And I remember Sesame Workshop saying, oh my lord how we gonna do that? And there was a an actually a, a, a soap opera that was being done over there that, it was heavily you know educating about AIDS and stuff like that. Couple of the characters in that soap opera had AIDS and stuff like that. And so also because that being so successful, they also did a children's program dealing with AIDS. And so they, the producers over there and 'Sesame Street' got together and asked them questions, about you know how do you go about doing it and I remember brining it, I remember brining it that to my attention that they wanna do that. And I said listen you know I'm fine with it, I just don't want this to be you know a little commercial, you know commercialize the type thing that really doesn't, it doesn't really happen the way it should. If it's, if it's done the way it should and respectfully to try to educate kids, that's a whole you know different story. And so they started giving me the scripts and I was like oh, this is phenomenal, this is really cool. And the design came together and you know and I went over there and, and, and auditioned the puppeteers and found you know the, the puppeteer for the character. That was really cool, but I couldn't believe this country (laughter), a bunch of idiots, just idiots, it's just disgusting. You know it, it, it was done for that country and instead of this country finding out exactly what we were doing, they heard about it and, oh you know they're teaching you know gay and you know and, and you know AIDS, and blah, blah, blah. I mean it was and, and they were gonna take our funding from us and everything and. And I mean and what, what I liked it, it backfired on everybody you know, it, it got out what we were truly trying to do. And, and, and, you know, and, and you know the public began to see what we were trying to do and it was great. It turned around and it was really, really a wonderful thing. But I mean it was to the point where I would come in from, from the countries you know doing co-productions and they would say, you know the, you know you go in to, to, you know show your passport, immigration and stuff like that, and they would, and you would say you know they had asked what you do and I said 'Sesame Street,' oh you're the one dealing with that, you know that get, I was like what? They were very, I mean it was really negative at the time, it was really bad. Really just, just, just disgusting and, and I was like what is up with this country, it was ridiculous. And it was never something that was, that was set up to, and, and I don't, I don't see, I don't see where it's a problem. It's, it's an education that everybody should have. But it was not set up for this country, it was set up for a country that needed it, and everybody needs it, but they truly needed to be, for their, for their children to be educated as far as what it means. And it's been very, very well received, you know Kami is like a part of UNICEF [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund] now. You know for the awareness of that, I mean it's, it's great. And that's what, you know that's what nice about doing co-productions is giving, giving what we love about 'Sesame Street,' but also letting them use it to, to teach their kids what they need in those countries which is, it's very, very, very rewarding projects. But also to go over there like that you know I, I don't like tourist stuff, I, I just, it drives me crazy. So to go over and work directly with, you know with these people and, and, and they take you into their home and you know you have a, a real home cooked meal in that country. And they take you, they take you to their favorite spots instead of something that somebody's trying to make money off of you 'cause you're foreign and stuff, it's wonderful.
Speaker 2: So you mentioned China, can you just list a couple of the other places where you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well China, Shanghai is where we did our, our co-production in China; Paris [France]; Holland [the Netherlands]; Bangladesh; India; Ireland is our new, new, matter of fact Marty Robinson [Martin P. Robinson] who's one of the other puppeteers, he and I go to the different countries to, to do, to do the scouting and stuff like that. So Marty's in Ireland right now doing that, but there's a lot of, a lot of them in Germany, Russia. A lot of wonderful--Kosovo it's been, it's been amazing.
Story_ID: 486425
Speaker 1: So of course this isn't chronologically in order, but let's talk about presentations that you did with 'Sesame Street' in New Orleans [Louisiana] after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].
Speaker 2: Well what you, they said of course you know just as soon as we saw that all the puppeteers were calling PR [public relations] you know department at Sesame [Sesame Workshop] saying you know what can we do, when can we do it? And you know what's wonderful about this company is that you know they know, they know that we're here not only to educate and ma- you know and--but also to, to really connect with anything like that that's happening you know. We're not just a children's program, but this is our, this is our world too. And if we can utilize these characters that are so popular and teach kids and, and be there for, for, for kids and families you know, we're there, so. It took a while because it was so much confusion going on you know, it really took a while for us to get down there. But when we did, boy it was about three months later, we went down and we went to some of the schools. And we went to some churches and it was amazing, it was just unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, just give us maybe one example of--
Speaker 2: Well one example we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) an impression on a--
Speaker 2: Yeah one example--
Speaker 1: --kid?
Speaker 2: --was, was, we had, we went to a school where everybody was relocated, the teachers, the kids, everybody. And we started to do the show and, you know when you're doing something live you can feel the energy. I mean that's why people love doing theatre and stuff like that, but what was going on with these kids who've seen things that they should not have seen, you could feel it. There was waves of emotion, you know that were constantly happened, as we were performing and doing these wonderful, sweet, fun songs with 'Sesame Street,' you know there was a child that very isolated and kept her head down, would, didn't wanna have anything to do with it. There was another child that was beaten up another child, there was another child who, who was looking off in a distance. There was, then there was, there was the ones who just was just clinging to you, they, they needed love. They, they lost stuff and they don't know how to deal with it, so it was all of this emo- but it just kept happening. I mean continuous through, through the twenty minutes that we were there; it was all of these emotions. And then you see these poor teachers trying to you know help and, and get them to focus on us. So that they can be you know they can enjoy, it was amaz- it was just very, very, it was very, it was very upsetting for all of us. But we knew that we were there to help you know, and we did the best we could. There were some that we just could not, they seen too much. You know then there, it was beyond us, we needed you know but, but, but it was, it was wonderful, I mean Lisa Simon, who is one of our directors and was, was one of our producers and, she actually started with, with, with dealing with casting the kids on the show. And so she went and she actually organized the, the trip and everything. And to see her sitting on the floor with like six, seven kids just leaning on her, holding her it was wonderful. And they just fell in love with, I mean you know I mean it's just, it was really, really, I mean. Very emotional, but, but very worthwhile for all of us, and we, we hit New Orleans, we hit, we, we got on a bus and went to a lot of different places while we were there. It was amazing, I mean I just got back, I just, I did Kansas City [Missouri] where that huge tornado was and we went down and, and did some shows for the kids there and everything. It's very worthwhile to have a show that, that these characters are so popular, so well-loved that you can do something, you know.
Story_ID: 486426
Speaker 1: Why did Elmo testify in [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, Elmo testified in Congress, I mean it's ridiculous what, you know, what, we, we grew up having that my child [Shannon Clash] won't get. You know I mean I, I, I mean I was terrible at it, but I (laughter) was playing trombone you know in music class. And we, we had instruments and, and you know music was a, was a, and arts was an important part of, of school. And it was wonderful and, and so NAMM [National Association of Music Merchants], which you have to find out what the, what the, what that means 'cause (laughter) but it's definitely more of a music organization that, that you know came together with us [Sesame Workshop] to do some projects on about music and also try to get music and instruments back in the school.  That's why Elmo was there to testify you know, try to get instruments back in the schools and, and how important it is. He actually put on a suit you know and it was really cute 'cause the, the guy [Joe Lamond] who represents NAMM, a wonderful guy he was there. And he you know Elmo would start to ask a question you know, answer a question and, and he would tap and put the mic [microphone] over, over his you know over his hand. And whisper in Elmo's ear and then (laughter) it was really sweet, we had a great time, and it took us hours to get in there. But when we did, because there was so many, I mean this was like, this is, you, they, they, this was real stuff. I mean this was not, but when we got in there, boy everybody went crazy, it was really sweet, we had a good time.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Does Elmo play any instruments?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Which instruments does Elmo play?
Speaker 1: Violin.
Speaker 2: I guess folks who are familiar with Elmo and 'Sesame Street' are aware of his instruments.
Speaker 1: Well, he plays the violin, he actually got to play with Isaac Stern which was one of my highlights, it was, it was really wonderful. Isaac is wonderful really, really sweet, sweet man, very talented of course.
Story_ID: 486429
Speaker 1: We really wanna talk to Elmo if we could (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.
Speaker 1: And if you could quickly before you, we talk to Elmo, if we can find out some of Elmo's favorite guests who he has spent time with on 'Sesame Street.'
Speaker 2: Well of course it would be Whoopi, Rosie, Rosie O'Donnell, [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg and--
Speaker 1: And has Martha Stewart been on the show?
Speaker 2: You know Martha is one of my favorites, Martha, I, I just think the world of, of you know, it's some unbelievable women out here. I mean amazing women; I mean re- you know Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], you know. I, I, I'd seen, I'd never got to meet Oprah you know oh, or know you know been friends with Oprah, but Oprah started in Baltimore [Maryland]. You know at, at Channel 13 [WJZ-TV, Baltimore, Maryland], she did 'People Are Talking' with Richard Sher and she was there as an anchor. I mean it was bittersweet (laugher) in Baltimore, but, but she was there and to see you know how successful she's become. And the same thing with, I mean Martha is phenomenal, very classy, very smart, smart lady, and very demanding. I mean she knows exactly what she wants and she ain't, she's not, she's not swaying against that. And god bless her, I mean she's been out there, she knows what she wants, she knows how to do it, and those are the people that she want around her. And I just think she's phenomenal, she, we've had a, I've had a great time, I've done, I've done her shows before you know. When she was on--
Speaker 1: Didn't you do her first show when she came out of--
Speaker 2: I did the first week when she, when she the, the new show ['Martha'] and where you know everybody wore the parker [sic. poncho] you know the par- the crochet parkers that she (laughter), everybody had one on, Elmo had one on. But I, you know I just think the world of her, she's a very, I just respect her so much and just honored to have been, you know work with her. And had a wonderful time, she is like you know I mean it's like you know what I love doing. I mean I become a kid you know with what I do and, not just because of I perform Elmo but I love it so much and I had a great time. And to talk with her about food and about you know just, you know her life is, is amazing.  And you can see that, that, that gleam in her eyes, excitement that she has.
Speaker 1: And real passion.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And talk about Whoopi, you, you mentioned her a couple times (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same thing with Whoopi I mean we, we--
Speaker 1: She's a good friend.
Speaker 2: She's a great, fun spirited lady and I, and I love, I love working with her and love her dearly, she's just, she's very genuine, you gonna, you what you get, what you see is what you get with Whoopi. There's no swaying; she don't go behind doors and be something else.
Story_ID: 486445
Speaker 1: So I wanted to ask you about a few more or your friends, how about Rosie O'Donnell?
Speaker 2: Rosie, man you know it's so funny, I, I watched, I used to watch Rosie on VH1 [Video Hits One; VH1], you know that was the first place that she, she you know she start on TV, she was hosting that ['Stand-Up Spotlight']. And, and then, then after that I saw this stuff in the newspaper and you know PR [public relations] about her talk show ['The Rosie O'Donnell Show']. And I saw an article in one of the magazines where she said she wants to interview people from Mike Douglas [Michael Douglas] to Elmo. And I was like oh, okay, so I called up PR and I said listen I'd love to do her show. And they said well let's wait until you know it comes on so we see what it is, I said okay. And so that week it came on and they said okay, so they called up and she, she, but you know prior to that, she actually did 'Sesame Street.' And we had a great time, you know Elmo and her started rapping and stuff like that and, and she's a sweet lady, we had a really, really fun time. And so I went on and did, and did the show and we just had a great time. We, you know, we, we, we know each other's timing and stuff and fun, you know and she's so open to you know, to, first of all she loves children, she loves 'Sesame Street,' she loves kids and stuff, so you know and I do too. So we, we had something totally in common, and I would, I just you know we never, nothing, nothing was ever written. It was just an outline and we'd just go for it, and we would have a lot, a lot of fun, just a lot of fun. And it just got to the (laughter), I was a semi-regular on her show (laughter), you know I'd travel with her to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] when the show went there, you know for a couple of times and, and it was, it was a really nice run, really nice, you know 'cause we were so, you know respectful of one another. And, and just wanted to play and it's cool, she's a phenomenal lady, she really is, phenomenal, phenomenal lady. You know she, she, she, she's very frank about how she feels and you know she has a right; all of us have a right to, to do that. And god bless her for it you know, she's a very, very giving lady too.
Speaker 1: And what about Emeril Lagasse, has he been on the show too?
Speaker 2: Emeril is such a sweet man he's just a really, really, see I love food, I just love it. I mean I, you, you get me the Food Network and the Weather Channel and I'd be fine (laughter). And I, I'm trying to remember how I even met, I think Emeril just invited me to his show ['Emeril Live'], and we've been friends ever since. He's just a really wonderful, I mean when the, when the book ['My Life as a Furry Red Monster: What Being Elmo has Taught Me about Love, Life and Laughing Out Loud,' Kevin Clash] came out, he said I gotta have you on to, to promote it. He just, I mean sweet and I took, I took Shannon [Shannon Clash] with me and, and the first, first meal that he made, he gave Shannon half of it. He ran out in the (laughter) audience and gave it to her, I mean really, really genuine, very, very sweet. And his wife [Alden Lovelace] is wonderful and his kids are gorgeous and everything, and just a really good guy, really good guy.
Story_ID: 486447
Speaker 1: And why did you decide to write your book, how did that come together (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well this literary agent came to me and asked me, you know would I be interested, he thought it would be a really you know cool thing that, for you to talk, for me to talk about Elmo.
Speaker 1: 'My Life as a Fury Red Monster' ['My Life as a Furry Red Monster: What Being Elmo has Taught Me about Love, Life and Laughing Out Loud,' Kevin Clash].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'My Life as a Fury Red Monster.' Well my thing is I really wanted to write about it, it's just a celebration of being a puppeteer. I mean this is such a good gig, a lot of fun, very personable and just you know you get to do a lot of things, you know. To be a puppeteer you have to act, you have to be able you know be able to manipulate the puppet of course, you have to be able to sing.  There's a lot of elements to it, and it really, you could branch into directing, producing you know all of those things.
Speaker 1: And do you do all those things as a part of your work at 'Sesame Street'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And anything that we haven't mentioned, you do some music kind of coordination?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm involved with the music aspect of the show now and, and you know overall creative of, of Sesame Street Workshop [Sesame Workshop] at this point you know. And, and it's a lot of fun, because I love you know being hands-on other than just putting a puppet on you know. I love being involved with the development of something, so it's, you know it's, a lot of fun. And you know I'm, I'm looking forward to branching out even more, you know I was, I was freelance for a longtime and then I got really connected with Muppets. And I love it, but now I'm ready to, you know to explore some other venues and avenues and, and you know.
Speaker 1: Does that mean that Elmo won't last forever?
Speaker 2: No Elmo will last forever, forever, I don't know if I will be around to, to, to perform him but we'll see you know. I think I will, I think you know Jim [Jim Henson], Jim definitely got to do it and, and, and I hope I can do the same you know. To be able to branch out and do all the things that I wanna do but still come back and you know and put on Elmo, I'd think that'd be fun.
Story_ID: 486450
Speaker 1: Hi Elmo, how are you?
(ELMO): Hello, what's your name?
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones.
(ELMO): Well hello Miss Adrienne Jones, how are you?
Speaker 1: I'm great. It is so nice to meet you.
(ELMO): So what would you like Elmo to talk about?
Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to first hear about who's been your favorite guest?
(ELMO): Elmo has a lot of wonderful friends, but Elmo loves, Elmo loves Miss Rosie [Rosie O'Donnell] and especially Miss Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg].
Speaker 1: And what's been your favorite, what's your favorite activity, when you're working (simultaneous)?
(ELMO): (Simultaneous) Activity, that's too big of a word for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm sorry (laughter).
(ELMO): Go ahead.
Speaker 1: What do you like to do?
(ELMO): Well Elmo love to do a lot of things, what's your name again?
Speaker 1: My name's Adrienne.
(ELMO): Oh watch this (singing), "La la, la la, la la, la la, Adrienne's world. La la, la la, la la, la la, Adrienne's world. You love to interview people and you love fruit too, that's Adrienne's world," (laughter) see, you like that?
Speaker 1: I loved it.
(ELMO): Cool, what's the cameraman's name?
Speaker 1: His name is Neculai Burg- [Neculai Burghelea] (simultaneous)--
(ELMO): (Simultaneous) Oh (singing), "La la, la la, la la, la la, Nicholas' world, Neculai, la la, la la, la la, la la, Neculai's world, you like to shoot people with cameras (laughter) and I'm a hope you love fruit too. That's Neculai's world."
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, why thank you Elmo.
(ELMO): Oh you're welcome.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do, do you speak any, well languages, do children--
(ELMO): (Speaking Spanish) Un beso, that's kiss in Spanish.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
(ELMO): Elmo has a favorite food, it's wasabi, that's why Elmo doesn't have any eyelids (laughter), that's silly.
Speaker 1: Can I (simultaneous)--
(ELMO): (Simultaneous) Mr. Neculai, you gotta stay up high, unless you gonna see Mr. Kevin [HistoryMaker Kevin Clash].
Speaker 1: Who are your favorite friends on 'Sesame Street'?
(ELMO): Big Bird, Big Bird is one of the, Elmo has a pet goldfish too that he loves very much.
Speaker 1: What's your goldfish's name?
(ELMO): Dorothy.
Speaker 1: And have you ever met Snuffleupagus?
(ELMO): Of course, of course that's one of Elmo's friends Mr. Snuffleupagus, but Elmo calls him Snuffy.
Speaker 1: Is he real or is he imaginary?
(ELMO): See, see now you're showing your age.
Speaker 1: I am old.
(ELMO): Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And when I was (simultaneous)--
(ELMO): (Simultaneous) 'Cause, 'cause Elmo, 'cause Snuffy is, is, Snuffy been, been, everybody's been able to see Snuffy for a long time.
Speaker 1: Really, cause I've never seen Elmo on 'Sesame Street'?
(ELMO): Oh really?
Speaker 1: Never, when I was a kid there was, you weren't on the show.
(ELMO): Well, Elmo's not on the show, Elmo lives on Sesame Street.
Speaker 1: Well you have, you have 'Elmo's World.'
(ELMO): Yes, but that's Elmo's world in Elmo's imagination.
Speaker 1: I never got to see 'Elmo's World' before.
(ELMO): Oh sorry, so you have no idea what Elmo just say (laughter), oh boy.
Speaker 1: I think I have heard of 'Elmo's World' song.
(ELMO): Oh really?
Speaker 1: Maybe once before.
(ELMO): Okay.
Speaker 1: And I've seen Tickle Me Elmo in the store.
(ELMO): Elmo doesn't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry.
(ELMO): Elmo pleads the fifth.
Speaker 1: Pleads the fifth (laughter).
(ELMO): (Laughter) What? She's scaring Elmo. She's looking at Elmo.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
(ELMO): (Laughter) But Elmo's gonna go now 'cause Elmo has to pee.
Speaker 1: Amazing, it's so nice to meet you Elmo.
(ELMO): Okay, Elmo has to pee, bye.
