Story_ID: 613718
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers today, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, sir could you give us your full name and spells us, spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Forrest Cleon Crawford [HistoryMaker Forrest Crawford], F-O-R-R-E-S-T, C-L-E-O-N, C-R-A-W-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 19, 1952, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professor of teacher education at Weber State University in Ogden, Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: The date is March 14, 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my private residence.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we're, we're in Ogden or, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're actually in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613719
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: People magazine you say (laughter)? Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People magazine-ish type questions, that's what they tell me to say (laughter) they, so these kind of a warm up.  First question is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: My favorite food actually is really a snack food and that is popcorn. I love popcorn, but foods of substance I enjoy seafood, you know rice is always a, a staple for me.  And I'll eat catfish any day over anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, and wha- what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue, grey and blue, grey, brown, usually like the earth tone type of colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is usually early spring or early fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like those times of the year 'cause the early spring really kind of sets the stage for you know the freshness and the, the renewing of, of, of life and green and vitality.  Early, early fall is, is--kinds of give you that indication that that we are transitioning from the, the, the summer into the colorful time of the year before the onset of winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, let's see it's been so many places in the United States I would say I enjoy the Rocky Mountain West.  I love the mountains and so any of the various scenic areas throughout the Rocky Mountain West are my favorite vacation places.  Outside the United States: Holland [the Netherlands], Copenhagen in Denmark and Spain.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I th- I think my, my favorite saying, well I'll have to, I'll have to thi- thi- think about that one for a minute.  It probably, I, I the one that that I tend to use fairly frequently is a, a Frederick Douglass quote when he says that that, that, that, "Power concedes nothing without a demand."  And what that's, what that's always meant for me is that you'll always have to be persistent in making your presence known if you want to make a change.
Story_ID: 613720
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] side. But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Hazel Geneva Hampton Crawford [Hazel Hampton Crawford]. Okay, and she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what is her, yeah date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The date of birth is 1919, and place of birth is Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, you know what town?
Speaker 2: In Sti- I bel- I think it was Stillwater, Oklahoma. But, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, how far back can you trace them and what did they do?
Speaker 2: I'm in a, I'm in a process of doing some of family research on my mother and father's side that-on my mother's side, I, I know that that many of her ancestors were involved in agriculture where they raised pigs.  They were primarily pig farmers, much of the agriculture work was during the in the South in, in Tennessee I believe it was.  And certainly during kind of post-Civil War, Reconstruction era.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story from that side of the family from your mother's side about how they came to migrate to Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: I don't rem- I don't know all of the, the, the stories that that allowed them to come into the Oklahoma area, but I think that part of, of, what I stand, understand is that as part of the, the westward movement that many of those families were moving west.  And, and settled into the Oklahoma territory as homesteaders and, and found their lives there.
Speaker 1: Okay now there's a book by [HistoryMaker] Nell Irvin Painter from, she's out east somewhere, called the 'Exodusters' ['Exodusters: Black Migration to Kansas After Reconstruction'] about people that came out to Oklahoma and Kansas, many under the leadership of Pat Singleton, Benjamin "Pap" Singleton.  Is there any, any tri- traditions in the family about how they came out and who brought them?
Speaker 2: There are, they may be some stories, I'm not personally fa- familiar with any of those stores, but, I, but I do know that some of the relatives settled in Oklahoma.  And some of them continued west into California, and, and et cetera.
Speaker 1: About what time did they make the migration from Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yeah this, this was probably during the early 19--early 1900s you know late, late 1800s, early, early 1900s until the probably into the 1930s or so.
Story_ID: 613721
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this now did, was your mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] was born in Stillwater [Oklahoma]. Were, were her parents born in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: I thi- I think that--actually I'm not sure about that; I don't think that her parents were born in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would take us to about the turn of the century, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If her parents, we assume they're at least eighteen when she was born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --and we, we can assume they were born in Tennessee may, maybe you know or en route perhaps.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah I don't, I don't know the, the, the full story behind that.
Speaker 1: You're not alone a lot of people are.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Digging now you know trying to get the answers.  But okay so did you know your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did know my grandparents on a, primarily on, on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Of course they, I knew them very well as growing up as a, as a, as a child, and they, they lived in the rural part of, of Oklahoma.  In small town of Luther, Luther, Oklahoma, very, not very far from another small town where the, the predominately black university [HBCU] is Langston, Langston, Oklahoma [Langston University].  And so as children we used to travel there on occasion to, to visit with them.
Speaker 1: Okay did all right so wha- what were their names your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Ralph and, and Laura.
Speaker 1: Hampton (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ralph [Ralph Hampton] and Laura Hampton, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, they have stories about what life was like in Oklahoma for black people in those days?
Speaker 2: Well just from listening to older brothers and sisters and some the stories that I can recall that my mother had, had shared as, as she was growing up.  As a child you know they talked a great deal of course about the, the, the economic challenges that they had.  They talked a lot about the rural, rural life and growing up in rural Oklahoma, and how they had to make ends meet.  They talked a great deal about their involvement in the education system in trying to support and make sure that the kids were exposed to as much education as possible and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the, I guess in the 1930s, maybe late '20s [1920s] going into the '30s [1930s] it was something in Oklahoma, in Kansas called the Dust Bowl.  You know John Steinbeck writes about all the Okies as he called them trying to go to California.  'Cause Oklahoma dried up, had really dried up the weather.  There was a climatic change and just dried up everything in Oklahoma and parts of Kansas, did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah I have not heard them talk about it, they may have talked about it a great deal among each other you know as adults.  But as, as a child I never recall them speaking specifically about experiences during the Dust Bowl era.  But I think that we, we had relatives that were very much a part of that ex- experience.
Speaker 1: You said that some relatives moved to California (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah they--
Speaker 1: --similarly to, similar to I guess the characters in John Steinbeck's novel 'Grapes of Wrath'  ['The Grapes of Wrath'] where they go from Oklahoma to California.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But so- some of them like left Oklahoma went on to California--
Speaker 2: Went on.
Speaker 1: --in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Continued west.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 613722
Speaker 1: Well did your mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] have any stories about growing up [in Stillwater, Oklahoma] that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: She had, she had a lot of st- stories that she shared with us and that, and, and what I remembered most, and of course my mother's no longer living.  But what I remembered most is that a lot of her stories had to do with, they, they sort of had an education theme to them, if you will.  In other words, successes and challenges that she had growing up in school, how she learned to read.  And, and op, opportunities that she had to, to have leadership in her classroom.  And, and, and you know maybe like a student government, if you will, type leadership opportunities.  And so I, a lot of the stories that I remembered, they seem to be more of, of you know focused on the challenges that she had in growing up in trying to get a good education.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a good student then?
Speaker 2: Yes, she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A leader as a student.
Speaker 2: Right and, and, and as I you know think about you know the, the, the vagueness of so, of some of those stories that they all kind of had this education theme.  And I think that really kind of really set the stage and the foundation for how she would raise her own kids.
Speaker 1: Now can you think of a specific story you can tell us that she told you about her educational as- aspirations?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm trying to remember, I mean I, I think that, I remember her sa- you know, you know telling stories of course about being in, in the segregating, segregated conditions, of course.  And, and I, she had talked a great deal about how they were able to make do with the limited resources, limited resources that they had.  And so again they, they are, they're kind of more snapshots of different conversations that I have listened to over time that's kind of had this, this education orientation to it.
Story_ID: 613723
Speaker 1: Did she [Crawford's mother, Hazel Hampton Crawford] mention anything about the, or any of your relatives talk about their relations with the American Indians out in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: The, the extent that I'm aware of, that I know, for example, my, my mother worked a great deal in, in the civic community.  You know civic involvement in the community and through a lot of her community relations that she had interactions primarily with the Cherokee Nation of up in the northeastern part of, of Oklahoma.  And so through her civic and church type activities that she often time found herself working with some of the tri- tribal government leaders and, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay but they men- she mentioned the Cherokees specifically yeah in Oklahoma.  Okay 'cause I, there's a, there's a tradition I know in Oklahoma about cooperation between the, the various tribal groups and the African Americans there.  So I just wondered what kind of interaction happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't recall her sharing any stories with me. I mean she may have these stories with my older brothers and sisters.  But I, I don't recall stories where she may have taken a trip, for example, to the reservation to have meetings and you know and that kind of a thing.  I think that that her experience has been through, if there was a, a, a public policy issue.  If there was some community concern that impacted, usually families that were underrepresented or a poverty families, that she did a lot work in the, in the poverty activist community.  And I think it was through those connections that she interacted with tribal governments, in some cases directly and but most, mostly indirectly.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now were there any Native American people in your family on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side not that I am aware of, but I would not be surprised because of the intimate relationship that my family growing up in the Oklahoma territory.  I would not be surprised if there were some tribal blood, tribal relationships there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But not that I am personally aware of at least you know through some of my research.
Story_ID: 613724
Speaker 1: And I'd be remiss if I did not ask if some of your relatives on your mother's [Hazel Hampton Crawford] side could be described as black cowboys.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do have black cowboys in the, in the, in the, in the Crawford family and, and I think a lot of that is through of course Oklahoma during the early days had a good number, twenty or thirty or so of, of predominantly black towns, townships.  And that it was very customary for those, those towns to come together not only in sports competitions, but also rodeos.  I think that Boley, Oklahoma, for example, was probably one of the most noted places where the, the national black rodeo association hosted the rodeo competition.  And so yeah, I, we, we had relatives that was involved in, in, in the, the cowboy life, if you will.
Story_ID: 613725
Speaker 1: So your mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford], I take it now she finished high school, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And when--did she have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes and, and she actually, she actually went to college at Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma], but it was interesting because she delayed her college work, and begin to raise her family as she had met my father [Dorris Crawford, Sr.].  And, and but it wasn't until the, it wasn't until I think it might've been like the mid-'80s [1980s] that she actually returned to Langston University and eventually finished her degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, that's good, that's shows perseverance.
Story_ID: 613726
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My, my father's name is Dorris, D-O-R-R-I-S, Lee Crawford [Dorris Crawford, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: His, his date of birth (laughter) I'm blanking out.
Speaker 1: Is he; is he older than your mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford]?
Speaker 2: He's, he's, he's older than my, my mother.
Speaker 1: By, by how many years you think?
Speaker 2: I think it's several, several years, I'm blanking out, I think he's born November of 19--so that would have to be what probably 19--?
Speaker 1: She's born 1919, then was he like as many as ten years older than her or?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's about eight or ten years, I'd have to look at the date of birth.
Speaker 1: So somewhere between 1910, 1911 I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd have to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So we, we'll say 1910.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry; I'm blanking out on--
Speaker 1: Nineteen twelve [1912] with a question mark behind it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's close I mean you can get us close that's good.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So and, and, and where was your father born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Carthage, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay Carthage okay, Carthage, Texas, where, what, what is Carthage near?
Speaker 2: It's east, isn't that, yeah east I think that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) East Texas?
Speaker 2: East Texas I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of, lot of his relatives on our family's side are, are still in the Carthage, Texas area, but my father came to move to Oklahoma.  He and, and his sister, who was, who was my auntie now who is the oldest living individual of our, our family to date.  Of course my father's no longer living but I think if they came to Oklahoma in the, probably like the early '20s [1920s] you know, you know mid, mid-'20s [1920s] so he actually came, came to Oklahoma you know as relatively young as a, as a, young boy.
Speaker 1: Okay so he'd be about twelve, thirteen something?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was thinking it was probably around in the, yeah about twelve or so, twelve, thirteen or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know if Carthage is a black town?
Speaker 2: I, I know that it's a, a, a, a large presence of the black community there, I don't know if it's considered predominantly black town.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know there was some in Texas and Carthage being a like an African you know ancient city you know I was wondering if they named it that for that reason.  So okay so your father, moved, so did he move to, to the same town that your mother lived in?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He actually, I think he actually moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma actually Tulsa and actually right outside of Tulsa to Sand Springs [Oklahoma] is, is--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Sand Springs is--
Speaker 2: Yes,  Sand Springs, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And your mother was in--
Speaker 2: She was in--
Speaker 1: Luther [Oklahoma], right?
Speaker 2: Luther, Stillwater [Oklahoma] area.
Speaker 1: Stillwater area okay,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 613727
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your father's [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] side, how far back can you trace them over there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I don't, I don't, I'm not able to trance them back as far as I have on my mother's [Hazel Hampton Crawford] side of, I'm actually starting some early research in that direction.  I do know that of course like many of those families in the Texas area they were you know largely you know common laborers.  Picked cotton and, and so forth and, and so on.  I, I, I'm sure that that they were raised pretty much in you know kind of a rural agricultural base, a working class environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my father's parents were named Grant and Minnie; I think Grant and Minnie Crawford [ph.].  I have no information, no stories in particular about Grant and Minnie Crawford.  And how they, whether they were born and raised in Texas or they migrated to Texas, so I'm trying to, so the father's side, it was a, it's a bit more sketchy for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's no, no stories or, nobody has like a direct recollection of, of slave experience or any of that on that side?
Speaker 2: I, I can only speculate that that slavery was a part of the early Grant Crawford [ph.] experience.  But I can only speculate about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm anxious to find more about that particular development.
Story_ID: 613728
Speaker 1: I was asking off camera if your, when your father [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] came up to Oklahoma with his sister you know who did they come with?  Did they come, did they; you said they came with their aunt and uncle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they actually came with some aunts and uncles of mine who settled eventually into the Sand Springs, Oklahoma area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just right outside of Tulsa [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: So Carthage, Texas is really like the home place for your father's family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: That's where most of them are?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Regardless to where they came from before.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: They, they right now most of them are in Sand--in Carthage?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now so what, what did your father say about growing up, did he say, did he talk about much of what he, you know what he did growing up?  And what lot, life was like.
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean his growing up in a lot of ways was fairly similar to my ma- my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford].  He was certainly you know primary common, common laborer as, as he, as he grew up.  My father had a very strong education orientation but he was also a musician.  And that I remember stories that that led me to believe that he was a very well liked and very charismatic individual.  And that he was very multi-talented in, in sports in, in music, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did he play?
Speaker 2: Oh he pl- I think he played all kinds of instruments you know, I, I, I remembered you know as, as I was growing up the first several years of my school experience.  We grew up in a predominantly black school, Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School] in Sand Springs.  And my twin brother [Dorris Crawford, Jr.] and I had joined the band and we, the band teacher gave us French horns.  And you know we weren't particular about the French horn but you know he says go home and kind of practice on it, and so we take the horn home.  And my father happened to arrive home from, from his work, and, and we told him we had joined the band.  And he says well what's your instrument and we showed him and so he picks up the instrument and start playing 'Basin Street Blues.'  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On a French horn?
Speaker 2: Yeah and we sort of looked at each other (laughter) it's like (laughter) I mean we didn't, we didn't even know how to hold the instrument, let alone play anything on it.  He picks it up and plays 'Basin Street Blues.'  And but I, I think it, it just spoke to the type of you know musical savviness that he, that he had, but he was also very concerned about our education.  But I also think that his life kind of took on sort of a, a different twist in that he worked you know very long hours.  He was out of the house a great deal of the time.  And, and I think as a result of that it really sort of put a strain on, on the family in a way that did not really allow him really to be sort of the primary caretaker of our rearing.  That that pretty much rested with our mother.
Story_ID: 613729
Speaker 1: Did he [Crawford's father, Dorris Crawford, Sr.] work as a musician or did he have other, other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No he, he was not, he was, he didn't work as a musician he just had musical talent.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he did what, what kind of work did he do?
Speaker 2: He, he did, he worked in, in stock or you know packinghouses for those lot of you know you know live, livestock.  That, that he, that he worked in, he worked in a variety of, of situations that, that was really considered kind of labor intensive, labor intensive type works, so.
Speaker 1: Now did he have a chance to finish high school and go on to?
Speaker 2: He, he, he finished high school and but he had some college.
Speaker 1: So, so did he go to Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was at Langston also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah my, my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford], my father, my, and my three older brothers [sic.] and sisters all attended Langston.
Speaker 1: Now did, did he get a chance to play music vocationally you know for extra money and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think he was in you know different bands and, and you know maybe like jazz bands and that, that type of thing so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did that that keep him away at, at evenings?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I think that, the way my interpretation of it that it was probably more of a hobby than something that he's actually making money at.  That I think that his actual income was, was through the, the common labor occupations that he took on over, over, over time.
Story_ID: 613730
Speaker 1: Is there a story that your parents tell about how they met or stories somebody else tells about how they met (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a specific story, again I think that there're kind of bits and pieces of, of, of stories because again my, my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] was in the Luther [Oklahoma], Stillwater [Oklahoma] area.  And my father [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] was in the Tulsa [Oklahoma], Sand Springs [Oklahoma] area, and I think that my father had made visits to the Stillwater, Luther area through you know, course his involvement in Luther and, and Langston [Oklahoma] and in that area.  And, and met my mother at least you know in, in that particular, in that particular area.   I don't remember any specific story that that, that I can recall at, at the moment that where they you know met for the first time or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right but okay but they did meet and got, they got married and, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have six other brothers and sisters, I have old, my oldest sister and an older brother, my oldest sister is Mayme [Mayme Crawford].
Speaker 1: Okay so it's Mayme (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mayme--
Speaker 1: Then comes?
Speaker 2: And then there's Kermit [Kermit Crawford].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there's Kenneth [Kenneth Crawford], and then there's my, myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my twin.
Speaker 1: Yeah you got a twin brother who is same first name as your father.
Speaker 2: Right he's the junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's Dorris, Jr. [Dorris Crawford, Jr.], I was actually born fifteen minutes before my twin brother, so it's myself and my twin brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my youngest brother is Larry [Larry Crawford, Sr.], we call him Wardell by his middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Marva [Marva Crawford Williamson], M-A-R-V-A, Marva is our youngest sister.
Story_ID: 613731
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions who do you think you take after the most (background noise)? Sorry, that's me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Speed.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was asking who you think you take after the most in terms of your parents' personalities and you said your mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] I think.
Speaker 1: My mother, you know it's interesting that you ask me that question because I remember visiting my family during the holidays several years back.  And as we were talking that very question came up and we were trying to determine who among the siblings was more like our father [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] versus our mother.  And it, it was interesting because the, the older sib- siblings in other words the siblings that my, my two older brothers [Kermit Crawford and Kenneth Crawford] and my older sister [Mayme Crawford] tended to be more like my father.  And from myself, the twin [Dorris Crawford, Jr.] and, and younger, tended to be more like my mother with the exception of my youngest brother Wardell [Larry Crawford, Sr.] who tends to be more like my father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah so it's and, and, and I say that because I think that my mother's personality would be probably viewed as a very conscientious, low key you know caring kind of disposition.  That she always wanted to make sure everybody was okay, you know and contrast with my father's person- personality tended to be very you know aggressive.  Call it like you see it and he, you know he always you know he always, he wanted to cut through all of the BS so to speak you know.  And, and, and so it was, and so it's interesting that that as, as parents these two contrasting personalities sort of came together to you know rear these, these seven kids.  That in a variety of ways the kids sort of taken on you know some of those, those, those personalities you know, and, and but I think that when I think about my, myself that I tend to have bits of my father but more of my mother.
Story_ID: 613732
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory, earliest?
Speaker 2: Probably the earliest childhood memory that I have is I, I can remember when my youngest sister [Marva Crawford Williamson] was born.  And I can remember seeing this coin I think it might've been a silver dollar taped on her bellybutton.  And my twin brother [Dorris Crawford, Jr.] and I kept looking through the crib to se- and trying to, we were, I remember thinking whether we should take this coin or not so we could spend it you know.  And I mean I have that vague image in my mind. I remembered seeing this tape on her bellybutton and I remember seeing a coin.  I don't know whether it was a quarter or, I think it was a silver dollar, and how we were looking through that crib and we were just intrigue by that coin.  And we were thinking about spending it.
Speaker 1: Now what is the story behind that, why would they do that, I think I've heard about it before, but I can't quite.
Speaker 2: I, I think it had something to do with trying to you know train the belly button to grow in a, in a certain way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, to grown in instead of out?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think so, that's, that's (laughter) that's what I assume, but that was the last of our concern you know.  We were looking like that's money (laughter).
Story_ID: 613733
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in--now, which town did you grow up in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I actually grew up in Sand Springs [Oklahoma] primarily, Sand Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was born in Tulsa [Oklahoma] but, but grew up in Sand Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay tell us about the neighborhood you grew up in was it like an all-black nei- neighborhood, or were you just in a neighborhood with other people or, or was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was, it was a, a predominantly black neighborhood it was actually all black neighborhood really.  And it was, it was one of those classic situations where you know the whites lived uptown, the blacks lived downtown, and the, the classic barrier that separated us was some old railroad tracks.
Speaker 1: That is classic (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean we used to think that was the only place in the United States that had that setup you know.  And but what I remembered about growing up in that community is that it was of course very tight knit, we had our own school commun- community school, Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma], where you had grade one through twelve.  In fact my, my father's [Dorris Crawford, Sr.], my father's sister was my third grade teacher, my Aunt Bessie [Bessie Crawford Zackery], who's now ninety-four I believe she said she is.  And so it was one of those classic situations where everybody knew each other.  We, we all went to the same church, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you grow up in Baptist church or--
Speaker 2: I grew up in a missionary Baptist church--
Speaker 1: Okay missionary Baptist wha- what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First Missionary Baptist Church [First Baptist Church, Sand Springs, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so our education consisted of our experience in the church, our Sunday school teachers was our classroom teachers.  Our experience in the public school segregated public school and the education that we received through the interaction of our family members and elders in, in that sm- in that small community.  I mean you talk about probably maybe oh four or five hundred people if you will that lived in that specific geographic part of Sand Springs, Oklahoma, kind of the, what we call the south side of Sand Springs.
Speaker 1: Okay, south side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the, the, the Sand Spring school system [Sand Springs Public Schools] at that time was segregated, and so we had very typically the similar kinds of segregating experiences of where you had you know inferior band equipment.  Inferior textbooks and you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Passed down from the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --white schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah pretty much--
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: What our, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, you go ahead, sorry.
Speaker 2: But, but what I remembered was that it was a very rich childhood, that it was always a lot going on that, that we made our own fun.  We, we were mentored not only by our own our brothers and sisters, but other older kids in, in the neighborhood.  That we all sort of took care of, of each other, when somebody died you know, everybody knew about that death.  And they came together to support the family and so forth and so on you know, so very, and that in a lot of ways very, very classic black community America.  But at the same time you have these intimate ties that that uplift, you also had, we had situations in the black community because we were very low social economic typical poverty community, poverty family.  You had the normal stresses and strains of trying to juggle about the next meal, where the next meal is gonna come from.  You know we gonna have enough money to pay the school fee for this; you had you know presence of black on black crime, gambling.
Story_ID: 613734
Speaker 1: My own father [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] was killed by you know some black hoodlums you know in our own community [in Sand Springs, Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Hm, well, tell us about now whe- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's--
Speaker 2: When did that happen, how old were you?
Speaker 1: I was probably just finishing my junior year in high school [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma], so it been, it's 1968.  And it was interesting 'cause it was fall of, of 1968 I just finished playing my last football game.  And a friend of mine was taking, taking me home, and you know by that time we would have 'cause we were--had just of course the--we had integrated into the white schools by then. But anyway I was coming home from a football game that we had out of town, and I remembered you know we got home pretty late, and I, we were driving down through the black community.  And I remembered seeing my father that night must've been around eleven o'clock at night.  And we stopped and, and he told me he says, "Tell you mama I'll be home later," and, and that was only like a, maybe like a Friday night probably when we traditionally played our football games.  Then of course the next morning you know it's like, I don't know, five o'clock or so in the morning we had one of the neighbor kids that came over and knocked on the door on that early Saturday morning and told us that our father was in trouble.  Something that incidentally was not uncommon for us you know, 'cause we grew up, he, we grew up knowing that, that, that he was a alcohol abuser you know.  As I said before largely out of the house you know cared about his kids, but you know largely out of the house.  And so he said, "Your, your, your father's in trouble," and so actually, my, my twin brother [Dorris Crawford, Jr.] and I and I can't remember.  Maybe my sister, youngest sister [Marva Crawford Williamson], we, we put on our clothes where our mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] was you know getting ready too, putting on her clothes.  So we put on our clothes fairly fast, you know we went to the scene where the paramedics, the cops and so forth were around.  And I, we rem- I remembered seeing him laying there and they had just you know finished trying to do some resuscitation on him.  And the short of it is that he was, he was, he was dead pretty much onsite there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wha- what was the place where, where was he killed?
Speaker 1: Just right next to a little speak- speakeasy club and you know just kind of in a, in an alleyway, and of course by the time my mother had showed up, she and some girlfriends brought her over.  You know they had, they had already pro- pronounced him dead onsite there and, and what we learned is some of the local younger kids in the community that who hung out late with the old gamblers and so forth.  They for whatever reasons they decided to jump him and, and he was actually stabbed several times and robbed you know.  And, and so he died from multiple stab, stab wounds, again it was something that was kind of small community. As intimate and close as we were; you know some of those incidents happened you know.
Story_ID: 613735
Speaker 1: Did you know the people that, I mean the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah we knew--
Speaker 1: --that that did it?
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and the interesting thing about that is that I think they spent relatively little time in jail.  And then again that's just from my perception little time 'cause you know, you figured when you murder someone you spend some time.  They didn't spend, in my judgment much, much time at all.  But anyway I mean as much as that was a tragedy, that because there was a lot of hardships that's going inside of our family anyway, that in a strange way it was sort of a--I don't, I'm not even sure if the word inspiration is the, is the right word.  Because it sort of maybe lifted a burden (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's so like a catharsis or something--
Speaker 2: Yeah kind of catharsis and, and because we said to ourselves you know this is an opportunity for us to really start to focus on who we wanna be and our role in our community, in our role in society.
Speaker 1: So, so in a way you're saying that his [Crawford's father, Dorris Crawford, Sr.] problems with alcohol and so forth were kind of distractions from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --higher aims of the family.
Speaker 2: That it, that it created tension and a, and a tenuousness about where our future was going to be, and were we gonna be pretty much stuck in black community Sand Springs, Oklahoma.  And of course our mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] was you know determined to not have that happen you know that that, that that the least of what she required from us is that we continued steadfastly in our, in our, in our education.  And so, but there were, but in that community there were a lot of incidents like that as I recall growing up as, as a youth.  That there was always gambling, and there was always fights and, and there were always family insurrections and, but there was always celebrations.  And that there was always uplifting and that, it was, it was and I mean it was a very alive place in a lot of ways you know.  In a, in a uplifting way, but also in a very tragic way.
Speaker 1: Okay that's, that seems like quite a, you know what a tragic thing to happen you know when you're in high school [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma].  But you said it kind of cleared up I guess the contradiction between one lifestyle and another?
Speaker 2: Right, right, I mean we, we were all very sad of course about the tragedy of how he died, you know.  And you know that's something that you never ever get over, but we also knew from the push and the strength of our mother that, that there was going to have to be more if we was not to meet similar types of demise you know.
Story_ID: 613736
Speaker 1: Let me take you back to earlier life and we, I know this, when you mentioned this I thought we'd better talk about it before you know we forget about it or something.  Or don't you know I didn't want to miss it.  But we're talking about early life as a little kid growing up and the things you learned in the community, and who was there.  We always ask this question, what were some of the can, can well can you describe the house you lived in.  And tell us what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Be- because we lived in the black community and the vast majority of the families were low social economic, pretty much shotgun housing in that area.
Speaker 1: In that you mean I know sa- a lot of people know what that is, but some, some don't.  But what's a shotgun house?
Speaker 2: Yeah a sho- I mean these, these houses were substandard, some of them did not have bathroom facilities.  We had lot of outhouses of as an example; many of these homes, well, some of them were fairly well built, and livable but significantly substandard than the typical house uptown Sand Springs [Oklahoma].  And so when you, when you talk about shotgun houses, you're talking about houses that are largely made livable from substandard material basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was always something that needed to be fixed; there was always you know the, the homes were never large (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they have the three rooms, one room in the front--
Speaker 2: Yeah usually--
Speaker 1: --one room in the middle and one in the back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like that?
Speaker 2: Usually three rooms of, of we had maybe a handful of houses down there that were larger and, and, and that were you know, you know just above adequate you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think the shotgun aspect is because they call it a shotgun because?
Speaker 2: Well they called them shotgun because they, they didn't take very long to make; they were made kind of spur of the moment.  If there was an, an empty space that they bought from the white realtor you know they would kind of, they could throw one up there.  And so the, the shotgun element implied that there was not a lot of significant planning that went into it.  That that it was made from inferior material and that everything about the house was bare minimum and substandard.  That the least of what you had was a roof over your head.
Story_ID: 613737
Speaker 1: I was asking you what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells you know of course there were many, you know I think that when you, when you grow up in an environment like that that your sensory perception and your experiential perception in a lot of ways is very profound.  Because what you see is a, a very homogenous way in which people engage each other, that my family condition was no more, no less than down the street's family condition.  And you saw that on a, on a, on a frequent basis that that what you see is these interesting family configurations where you have grandparents coming to stay or par- children leaving.   Someone just arriving from being out of incarceration for a number of years and so you saw a lot of, you saw a lot of black life in Sand Springs, Oklahoma.  That as I think about it now is, was classic black America, you had very talented, what you saw is very talented individuals, artist, musicians, writers, speakers that came through the community.  That for whatever reasons through their own life's story didn't have that full opportunity but found themselves you know really locked in this, in this, this, this homogeneous subjugation  of, of, of, of community living you know.  And so that's what you see kind of on a daily basis, and you observe it and you, you learn from it, you always have doubt from it.  You ask a lot of questions about it, and but you find a way to navigate the limitations of the environment that you're in.  I think that the sounds typical Friday night, Saturdays night's loud music, gunshots, domino playing you know, you know police chasing somebody.  Church music on Sunday, a lot of the typical nuances that you hear when you live and, and, and walk through a black community.  And the, and the smells was anywhere from the, the stench of outhouses you know to my cousin Charlie Webb [ph.] fixing barbeque ribs down the street.  And, and everything in, in, in between and so I say that its, its, this, this very unique sensory perception that you are exposed to that in a lot of ways on one end validates your condition and your experience.  But at the same time raises doubt and ask a lot of questions, and, and, and that's what I recall most about being in that community.  That I always remembered having a lot of questions.
Story_ID: 613738
Speaker 1: Who were your, who were your community, well what's, well I guess I should ask you what some of those questions were you know, I guess.
Speaker 2: The, the question about why is this community unique from any other community?  You know questions like why are all of these families largely experiencing the same levels of income.  The same levels of, of discrim- discriminations the same level of family stresses and strains you know, why is this happening to this part of the community?  Why is what's happening in downtown south side Sand Springs [Oklahoma] so significantly different from uptown Sand Springs where the white families largely lived?  Why is it that when I went to the all white school [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] that my experience in that all white school was, and what I hear and what I seen and what I experienced was dramatically different from what I experienced in the black school [Booker T. Washington School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 1: Now here's a question I have in, I noticed it in my father's hometown, but and I think it's, it may be universally true.  Was the black side of the comm- wa- was the white side of the community paved and the black side not paved, was it?
Speaker 2: We had paved, we had paved streets, what we had is you know when storms happened as an example, when it rains everything drains downtown.  And so there was consistent flooding, there was consistent utility problems that we always had.  And so yeah we had paved roads, but I think that was most significant is the, the persistent utility problems and the persistent substandard housing that you know just met bare minimum standards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was basically a roof over your head.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If that.
Story_ID: 613739
Speaker 1: Now you had the one school Booker T. Washington School [Sand Springs, Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now did they call it Booker T. Washington high school or did they just call it Booker T. Washington School?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington high school.
Speaker 1: Okay and you started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Booker T. Washington and my, it st- and they might've called it Booker T. Washington community school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think Booker T. Washington high school.
Speaker 1: Okay and you started there in first grade?
Speaker 2: First grade.
Speaker 1: So there's no kindergarten or?
Speaker 2: No kindergarten, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started, started there in the first grade and, and actually my, my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] was a teacher there for a period of time off and on.  Of course my two older brothers [Kermit Crawford and Kenneth Crawford] and, and my older sister [Mayme Crawford] of course graduated from Booker T. Washington.  Actually for sure my, my oldest brother and my oldest sister graduated from Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: So, so you would've started in what 1958, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956]?
Speaker 2: Yeah about fifty--about 1958, yeah somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a first grader.  The school closed down in 1966 I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay is that when integration happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when they closed down Booker T. Washington all of the black kids integrated to Charles Page High School [Sand Springs, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Charles Page was the basically the white school system that was, and so we actually had to walk of course from downtown black community Sand Springs [Oklahoma], to uptown Charles Page school systems you know.  And so when I went to Charles Page I was actually going in maybe like as a junior high student at that time.
Story_ID: 613740
Speaker 1: Now did you have, were there people, teachers at, at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] or people in the community that were mentors to you or you know role models?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Oh yeah, I mean it goes without saying of course that my, my auntie who's also my third grade teacher was, had, was then and is considered even now probably one of the most significant figures in Sand Springs [Oklahoma], Booker T. Washington school system.  And for that matter even when integration took place, that she continued to teach in the Sand Springs white school, school system un- until she retired.
Speaker 1: Now this is your father's sister?
Speaker 2: This is my father's sister.
Speaker 1: And wha- what's her name?
Speaker 2: Bessie.
Speaker 1: Bessie?
Speaker 2: Bessie Crawford Zackery.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was considered the top educator or one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was, she was--
Speaker 1: --or one of the top.
Speaker 2: Among the top educators and beca- and because of her persistence in the, in the Sand Springs school system [Sand Springs Public Schools], she's really been honored on a, on a number of occasions for her significant contributions to both those school systems.
Story_ID: 613741
Speaker 1: I transferred into the Charles Page High School system [Sand Springs, Oklahoma], it's a, it was a lot of kids who wouldn't, was met with a lot of resistance.  You know we were called out of our name of course, we, we were not welcomed with open arms.  I had in my junior high class in addition to my twin brother [Dorris Crawford, Jr.] and I we went to school with probably oh, with eighteen or twenty other African American kids.  By the time we graduated from high school in 1970, I think it was only seven of us from that original class of ours that graduated from Charles Page High School.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so that's out of out of about twenty students.
Speaker 1: Out of about eighteen or twenty.
Speaker 2: Eighteen or twenty-seven, seven made it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's less than half.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, rest of them dropped out I take it?
Speaker 1: Rest of them dropped out, few died, a few left the area and, but I think a lot of it was because there was a lot of stress and strain on, on the families as we tried to make our way through the white school system there.
Story_ID: 613742
Speaker 1: Did you like Booker T. [Booker T. Washington School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] when you were going to Booker T.?
Speaker 2: Booker T. was very, fond, fond memories, I en- I enjoyed the, the community school orientation that you always felt like that your older brothers and their friends always protected you.  Always mentored you, they were always teaching you something that you always looked up, you always looked up to them.  And my, my two older brothers [Kermit Crawford and Kenneth Crawford] as, as an example they were also exceptional athletes and, and I can remember when they were playing football for Booker T. Washington.  The, the talents that they, that they displayed, they were also good musicians, they were leaders in their class.  And so the, the Crawfords really had a solid namesake going through the black Booker T. Washington.  And, but also as we transferred to the white school system [at Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] that, that Crawford name was very well known, and, and, and our mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] of course made a special of point making sure that would be the case.
Story_ID: 613743
Speaker 1: Now did your brothers go on to Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] or, or college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now my older brothers [Kermit Crawford and Kenneth Crawford] and sisters [Mayme Crawford and Marva Crawford Williamson] went on to Langston. I don't think that they--they did not finish at Langston. They, they I think went to like sophomore and junior year.  My oldest sister finished Langston, she graduated from Langston, and she actually continued on to, to teaching as part of her profession.  She earned her master's degree down at Durant, Oklahoma and then taught and eventually ended up going to Germany, where she spent the vast majority of her career as a school teacher and principal in the [U.S.] Department of Defense, Department of Defense system.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, now that's interesting job, we, I interviewed another person that that did that, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah spent her--most of her time in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Germany.
Story_ID: 613744
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I enjoyed social studies, I enjoyed science, I was a fair student but my experience is that I really enjoyed athletics.  And so a lot of my being successful in the predominantly white school was result of my deciding to participate in sports once we transferred to the predominantly white school system.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are they, you're saying that they, they accepted you faster because you're a good athlete.
Speaker 2: In retrospect I probably had an easier time than some of my other peers who transferred to Charles Page [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] in part.  Because I was on the same team and competed as a teammate you know in football, wrestling and track and, and so I, I was able to gain a lot of teammate friendships as a, as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Were there any mentors or role models on, at, at the Charles Page [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Yeah probably one of the early mentors, he's, he's no longer living now was really my first coach, my first football coach, Coach O'Neal Adams [ph.].  Who really, I wouldn't say he took me under his wings. I would say that he, because I was very small, I was always small of course playing, playing football.  So size was never, I was never big enough to play football, but I loved playing football.  But Coach O'Neal Adams really helped me to overcome the fear of being small, that he always asked me you know, or he always said to me that, "You can't be faint of heart if you gonna put on pads."  In other words he was saying to me that, "You cannot be afraid, that you can't allow your opponent to put fear in you.  Because not only does it keep you from playing the sport, but you only get hurt, you know."  And so I learned early on that that size was going to not be a major factor for me in my in competitive, in competitive sports.  So I was always the smallest, and I always knew that I was smallest and, and you know and I never the, the best athlete on the field.  But I knew that I was gonna be sm- among the smallest, if not the smallest, but I never saw it as a, as an obstacle per se.  That I was just like okay, I'm the smallest one out here, but I'm gonna play the game you know.  More important to that is that I always went out on the field keeping in the back of my mind is that you cannot allow your opponent to see fear in your eyes you know.  You can't allow them to know that that you are feeling inferior to them, and, and that, and I think that's how I was able to survive high school football.  I think that's how I was able to survive junior college football, because as I went through college football, I mean the talent got more significant.  The guys got more bigger, faster, but you know I, I, the same way I felt in high school is the same way I felt in junior college [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma], was the same way I felt when I played football for Weber State [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah].  Don't allow them to put fear, put fear in you because you are in deep trouble.
Speaker 1: So, so you played in three different levels, that's you know, so you must've been pretty good?
Speaker 2: I was descent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I, I, when I say that, you know, you know I wasn't the top athlete, but I, but I, I played you know pretty good football.  I was known as a, as a solid athlete.
Speaker 1: You played defensive back, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You play safety or, or?
Speaker 2: Safety and halfback.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And but you know the thing that was interesting about it is because in junior college as well as Weber State College.  At the time Weber State College, we're university now, that my teammates elected me as one of the co-captains in both of those situations.  And so not only did they look at the, the talent that I had but they also saw me as a, as a leader of the team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I wasn't necessarily the best athlete on the field though in any event by a long shot for that matter.
Speaker 1: But they liked your attitude and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and your leadership--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --abilities.
Story_ID: 613745
Speaker 1: When you're in high school [Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma] did you, now you're in, in small town Oklahoma wha- what were your college prospects?  You know, you're you know in a, in a class where I guess over half of the black students had already dropped out.  And you know who, what were you, were you, were you thinking you were gonna go to college and?
Speaker 2: I was interested in playing college football. I wasn't sure if that was gonna happen, and in fact, what was going through my mind at the time was I wanted actually to play for University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] you know.  'Cause that's, that's you know Big Eight [Big Eight Conference] football at the time was Big Eight football.  And, and I knew that it was gonna be a formable challenge for me to play at my size, at my speed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there were some, there some big stars then right.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Some black stars playing for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --playing for Oklahoma was it, was it Billy Sims was he playing then?
Speaker 2: Let's see I think that--was Sims playing during that time?
Speaker 1: Who was the, who were the people then?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to that's the, I'm trying to think back.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I, I keep think Billy Sims is the most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It might've been--
Speaker 1: He might've not been playing when you were playing but--
Speaker 2: 'Cause, 'cause you're talking about you know, you know '69 [1969], '70 [1970], '71 [1971] during that span of time.
Speaker 1: He might've come along a little later.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think Sims was a little later.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I--
Speaker 2: But it, but, but you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] had [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers--
Speaker 2: Yeah Gale Sayers yeah, but yeah they, and of course Oklahoma had an exceptional talent you know and so.  But anyway the short version of that is, it was no way in the world I was gonna play for Oklahoma.  And it was actually suggested to me that I maybe tryout junior college football, rather than jumping to a four year, or a four year school, and try my luck there.  So I actually ended up after high school going to Northeastern Oklahoma A&M junior college [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma].  It's right up in the northeastern corner, almost on the border between Oklahoma and Missouri, Joplin, Missouri.
Speaker 1: So this is 1970?
Speaker 2: This is 1970, right. (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 613746
Speaker 1: August of, of 1970 I went to, transferred to Northeastern Oklahoma A&M junior college [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College].  A little small agriculture town in Miami, Oklahoma, and incidentally they had, had actually had a couple of national junior college football championships under their belt at that time.  So they, they, they, they recruited a lot in Texas, so more than half of our team were you, you know young guys from Texas, Alabama, Arkansas and so forth.  As I mean and these was serious athletes you know, the, the, I mean Texas had such a large system you know.  That and in fact, our junior college was kind of seen for lack a better word as a sort as a form as a temporary stop perform team for University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma].  So once you've established your talents very well as an athlete at NEO that oftentimes you were able to transfer to University of Oklahoma.  For myself I knew that wasn't gonna be the case, I knew I wasn't going to University of, of Oklahoma.  And if anything if I went to Oklahoma, potentially it might be for wrestling, but even then I wasn't that, I wasn't an exceptional wrestler.  I was decent again, but you know Oklahoma was a wrestling school, you know, top notch, so I knew by the time I ended my freshman year at NEO that I knew that I didn't have top talent.  And I mean and these guys that were coming from these different states were just three times the speed, three, I mean just exceptional athletes.  You know but I knew I could play football and I, I, I was, I was a solid athlete.  Junior college experience worked out very well for me, because that's really--not only was I able to kind of establish myself as a decent athlete and as a, and as a good teammate, but also my academic orientation started to kind of come a bit more into focus.  Although I wasn't considered a serious academic athlete at that time that you know I begin to see how important academics was.  And part of that was driven by you know if you're not taking care of your academics, you're not gonna play football.  And so they were sort of connected and so really what inspired me to, to have more discipline in ac- academics is that, 'cause so I wanted to play football.  That carried on through junior college and after I finished junior college, 1970, 1972--
Story_ID: 613747
Speaker 1: I was at a stage where I needed to make some decisions about where I was gonna continue my, my, my football career.  And it just so happened that a, a coach of mine, a junior college coach who's also a mentor even to this day.  Coach Dick Guinn [Richard Guinn] who's now retired, living in, in Bella Vista, Arkansas was, he was a coach at NEO [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma] at that time.  And he had actually left I think at the end of my freshman year, but he ended up in Utah at Weber State College [Weber State University, Ogden, Utah] as an assistant coach.  Well when I finished my sophomore year of eligibility in Oklahoma, he gave me a call and said, "Well we don't have a scholarship for you at the moment.  But you might maybe even wanna try to come up here and you know do a tryout you know kind be a walk on if you will, try your luck."  So I saw it as an opportunity to get out of Oklahoma for a while, but also the, you know to try to get into a four year college.  Knew nothing about, little about Utah, nothing about Weber State and but I said, you know I said unique opportunity.  I get on the Greyhound bus you know summer of 1972 and heading to Ogden, Utah.  And, and you know as it was those that, that, that decision you know worked out very well for me.  Because not only I was able to establish myself as a solid athlete but also a solid academic athlete, where I was also able to participate in student government and those kinds of things.  But you know kind of found myself as a student athlete, found a little niche if you will for myself under Coach Guinn's advisement and, and, and mentoring.  But that was a long bus trip as I recall from Tulsa [Oklahoma] to Ogden, Utah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How, how far away is it from Tulsa?
Speaker 1: You're talking about two thousand miles probably [sic.], yeah about two thousand miles roughly.
Story_ID: 613748
Speaker 1: Tell us about the experience on the bus, on the way to Ogden.
Speaker 2: Well as, as I was saying earlier that I, summer of 1972 took a Greyhound bus from Tulsa, Oklahoma to Ogden, Utah.  Now knowing really sort of going into this Rocky Mountain abyss, not really sure what, what's gonna happen.  But our final stop or, or the stop before arrived in Ogden was Salt Lake City [Utah], and as we were preparing to leave, an elderly African American gentleman [Robert Harris] got on the bus and asked could he sit next to me, and I said sure.  And we met each other and, and he says, "Where you're headed?" I said, "Well I'm going to a place called Ogden, Utah."  And he says, "Oh that's where I live." I'm going like, you've gotta be kidding me, Ogden, Utah?  He said, "Yeah, I been there for many years," he said "I have a church there."  And, and he proceeded to tell me that he had just returned from the Democratic National Convention [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida]. I believe it was in Florida, I'm not sure.  But I think it was in Florida.  But he said he when involved, he was involved in some protest actions there and he had got beaten up and pushed around.  And he might've, they might've even put him in jail for a while or whatever.  And I wasn't sure if he was you know, you know pulling my leg or, or whether he was very sincere about the story that he was sharing with me, as we were proceeding in into Ogden.  But it, in any event, he had talked a lot about his life, he said he had a church here as a local Pentecostal minister.  But as we arrived in Ogden you know he had, he had invited me to his church and invited me to have dinner with his family once I you know settled in.  And with the, the, the, you know we were having our three a day or two a day football training before the season started.  And he said, "Well once you get settled in," he says, "give me a call and I'll come pick you up and we can have dinner and visit more."  The, the short of that is for one it was amazing that I met an African American the first person that I met in U- that was a Utahan was a black man who owned a church.  Who also by the way had a local grocery store, and, and, and, and so that relieved a lot of my anxiety about Ogden.  Although it was clear that I was going into a very white community that was very different from the community that I had grown up in.  That it was a relief to know that at least there was some blacks in, in, in Ogden.
Story_ID: 613749
Speaker 1: The short version of all of that is that he was able to introduce me to his family and for that matter other local black family members.  And he had introduced me to some community activists that were involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and so forth and so on.  And so almost early on I was connected with some of the people and the work that they do that sounded very familiar with some of the people that did the, the type of work that I was familiar with in my own community that I grew up in African American, Sand Springs [Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Now, now what was this reverend's name?
Speaker 1: His name was Reverend Robert Harris.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's no, no longer living and I had the privilege of, of speaking at his, at his funeral and recalling that, that story.  But you know I'll, I'll, I'll never forget that, that early experience of my coming into Utah.  And I've since that time of course had other African American professionals who have served as mentors and role, role models, role models for me since I've been in, in Utah.  But you know I had a fairly for a lack of better word non-traumatizing experience it was certainly an uneasy feeling coming to Utah.  But my, my transition, part of it helped because I was an athlete, so I automatically connected with a community of, of athletes and coaches.  But the other part that is being connected to Reverend Harris and his ability to connect me other people.  So I felt some sense of grounding even you know despite you know, you know being in a, a very unusual climate.  And I say unusual because I'd begin to learn more about the Latter-day Saint community [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] and some of the, the, the orientation and belief systems.  And, and you know I had roommates that were LDS you know and so forth and so on, so learning about if you will the Mormon culture was a an, an interesting layer of enlightenment.  You know as I found my way in, in Utah.
Story_ID: 613750
Speaker 1: Yeah I think you said before we started the interview that many of your fellow students assumed you had to be a Mormon to, to be you know in Utah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Going to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah generally they assume that you know, you know they having to be, you don't have a reason to be here unless you are either interested in the Mormon church or that you have been baptized in a Mormon church.  And that was more so I was sharing with you earlier more so when I was working on my doctorate degree at Brigham Young University [Provo, Utah], where they pretty much assumed that I was LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints].  But working on my doctorate at Brigham Young was very interesting and very different experience as a, as an African American non-LDS person.  But you know as I found myself in Utah and find myself entrenched in the Weber State [Weber State College; Weber State University], Ogden [Utah] community.  You know you begin to, to crystallize ways in which you can sort of navigate the system you know.  I can earn my degree you know I have some contacts of people who are mentoring and care about me.  And, and so you begin to have a sense of yourself in a lot of ways that was very contrastingly different from this community that I, that I, I grew up in.  And, and, by the way that the black community in Sand Springs, Oklahoma is no longer there.  That they, there was some like what they call it, eminent domain issues that the Sand Springs government decided that they needed to expand.  And basically bought out and negotiated with the remaining black families that lived in that community.  And so the black community of Sand Springs, Oklahoma no longer ex- exists, it sort of, and actually, and that's a whole another story.  Because I actually had written a number of, of letters of, of letters of editorial and, and opinion about why I felt like the black community should be preserved.  And, and different ways that they can reconfigure ways to preserve the community.  But you know that was of course to no avail, but, but I found myself in, in Utah really begin to Utah begin to become my new home.  You know this was Utah was beginning to be home away from home for me.  And as I finished my football career by 1974, I was pretty well supplanted in the Ogden community.  I was involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; I was involved in other local organizations, involved in the church community and so forth and so on, and eventually graduated from Weber State University in 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I graduated in 1975, I was faced with the dilemma of either returning home to Oklahoma or continuing my education at the, the master's [degree] level.
Speaker 1: What did you graduate in and what, I mean what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I graduated in department of sociology at Weber State with an emphasis in social work practice.
Speaker 1: So this is a B.A or B.S?
Speaker 2: It's a B.S.
Speaker 1: B.S. in sociology,
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613751
Speaker 1: So what did you decide to do to?
Speaker 2: And I decided I, I remember talking with my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] at the time about you know should I come home, I haven't been accepted into, to a master's [degree] program yet.  Maybe I should just return home and find a job and, and you know help out with the family, and you know live in Oklahoma.  And just about the time I was gonna make that final decision to return to Oklahoma, I actually received an acceptance letter to University of Utah in Salt Lake City [Utah].  University of Utah's Graduate School of Social Work [College of Social Work].  So I moved to Salt Lake City, attended the Graduate School of Social Work from 1975 to 1977.  And finished my degree there in, in '77 [1977] in clinical social work practice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's call- it's called master's in clinical social work pra- practice?
Speaker 2: It's, the actual degree is master's in social work.
Speaker 1: Okay so that and that's the em- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the emphasis, the major if you will is in clinical social work practice.
Speaker 1: Do they refer to it as an MSW?
Speaker 2: MSW, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613752
Speaker 1: In the interim during that, actually in 1976, I actually worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Alaska.  It was an internship where I worked as a, a researcher for the B- BIA education division in Bethel, Bethel, Alaska.  So I was way up north in the tundra working among the Eskimo people.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how was that experience, I mean that, that's, that's gotta be really different from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a great experience. It was the ultimate rural social work experience (laughter).  'Cause you'll you know in rural communities like that you're a little bit of everything to everybody.  You know you's, you're the teacher, you're the counselor, but our, my official role was a, was a graduate research assistant for the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was collecting some data for, for, for research proj- project that we were involved with.
Speaker 2: Okay so do they, do they call them officially the Eskimos or, or the Inuit or what?
Speaker 1: Yeah Eskimo, yeah primary tribe there is Eskimo.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah but I think you have five major tribes in, in Alaska.
Speaker 2: There, are there any stories from that experience you know?
Speaker 1: You know probably yeah there are, there are a lot of ex- experiences, the, there was another graduate student, a colleague of mine who was also my research assistant.  They assigned us to Bethel, Alaska and we were living in a construction camp, and, and what we would do is that there were very small village areas that we would have to go out to, and interview Alaskan Native high school dropouts and so forth and so on.  But one, the one particular experience again there was many, but one particular that I remember is that I flew into you know I, in one of these little single engine prop planes that they had.  Flew into a very small village called Hooper Bay, Alaska, and I got off the plane and it was customary for the, the village people to meet the plane.  Because usually not only did they have two or three passengers but they also had cargo that they were transporting into each of these rural villages.  And of course as I was getting off the plane and the, the bush pilot said we have to help take some of the, the boxes off the plane that that were supplies for the village.  And some of the villages came to meet us and as this one gentleman was all, walking up, you know we kept looking at each other and I was saying to myself, that guy's face look awfully familiar to me.  And I said, okay don't let your stereotypes you know get in the way or anything that you, you know that you're in Hooper Bay, Alaska.  It is not likely that we would've seen this guy before.  We were taking the boxes off and we kept looking at each other and I had introduced myself and, and, everything.  And he says, "Are you from Utah," and right, then I was thinking, I think I know this guy.  I said, "Yes, I am from Utah," and I said, "I'm a graduate student at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah]."  He says, "I go to school at University of Utah," and we looked at each other and we, and I said, "I have seen your face on that campus before."  We didn't know each other, but we would actually you know couple of times a week, we would see each other, but we would wave at each other.  You know, just kind of acknowledge each other in passing, but we knew each other's face enough that you know a couple times a week you know we'd wave.  And I never had a conversation with him or, or anything.  All of a sudden this guy way up in Hooper Bay, Alaska meets me at the airport [Hooper Bay Airport, Hooper Bay, Alaska] and it's the same guy that I wave at twice a week at University of Utah.  And it helped me realize how small sometimes the, the world can, can, can really be.  And as a result of course I had a very positive experience at the, in the Hooper Bay, Hooper Bay village, and it was, it was a, a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 613753
Speaker 1: The only other experience I remember is that at the construction camp you know they had these, you know real burly guys who you know at the end of the day they would come back into the construction camp trailer.  And my research partner of our, had a little small room in, in the trailer there.  Where the cut- construction camp workers lived, and but on, on occasion during their downtime you know they would come out and they would shoot pool.  And, and of course they would, they would gamble you know of course.  And Alaska you know you gamble with twenty-five and thirty-five and fifty bucks [dollars] you know, and so we happened to go out and just kind of observe them shooting pool.  So the one guy cames up to me and says, "You wanna shoot pool," and I, and I said, "I'm not very good at pool," and he said, "Oh, we'll just shoot for fun you know."  So we, we shooting and, and actually I was pretty good at it you know, so I thought.  And he says, "Well you wanna place some bets?" And I said, "Sure let's place some bets on it."  And at this time we was drinking little shots of, I don't know what it was at that time.  But I got a little bold and I said, "Ah yeah, let's, let's play you know."  So I won the first couple games you know and here I am I was like I got like two hundred and fifty bucks here just on a couple games of you know, you know shooting pool.  And so the short version of all that is by the time we went through maybe five or six games I was like completely broke.  I'd lost all of the money that I won, of course I completely lost, and my friend was saying, "Forrest [HistoryMaker Forrest Crawford] you know this guy was just taking you for a ride you know."  And I said, "Well yeah," in retrospect, I, I realize it, but, but what was interesting about it is that up until that point, they never really talked to us you know.  They were out and we were out and then they came in, we came in and then occasionally we would eat meals together.  But they never really talked with us 'cause we didn't really have anything you know, you know similar experiences to share anything.  But after I'd got taken from my pool sha- pool hall shenanigans they would always come around, they would talk with us you know.  It sort of broke the tension you know and, but they were really a wonderful group of men that we had an opportunity to, to come to know.  And they had families in the, as they called the lower forty-eight and, and we had a chance to learn more about who they are.   And the work that they do and so forth and so that construction camp experience was--ended up really being a very fun and positive experience.
Speaker 2: Okay so, so you spent the whole--a year in Alaska?
Speaker 1: I spent, it was about like eight months (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Roughly a research project [for the Bureau of Indian Affairs].
Speaker 2: Okay, eight months, all right.
Story_ID: 613754
Speaker 1: So well, what do you do when you got out of grad school [University of Utah Graduate School of Social Work, Salt Lake City, Utah] now then?
Speaker 2: When I got out of graduate school I was of course I was job hunting and found a few interim job opportunities.  But there was a position that was available at Weber State University [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah], the same institution that I had attended as an undergraduate.  There was a position available for professional counselor and a professional counselor, an advisor to the Black Scholars United student organization.  And I applied for it, the short version of it is that I was successful in getting that position, and so that started really my career at Weber State University in September of 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've, I've actually been at Weber State professionally since 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm on my thirty-first year (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you are a counselor and advisor to the Black Scholars United. Now that's the black student union (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's the black, black student union.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: We called ours Black Scholars United, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did they have a physical space--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah they had physical space and, and, and part of what we did was in addition to the academic part of, of, of their taking care of their majors and et cetera, we also put together a little training programs.  Black heritage programs and, and we did an outreach service projects in the community and those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what, what was their biggest concern as black students on, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Oh their, their biggest concern was they didn't feel like they had access to the same resources as the white organizations.  There was a concern with that the faculty were very insensitive to their academic experiences.  That the curriculums had little or no meaning for them, you know, there were, you know, difficult challenges in trying to find an identity in a place at the university.  Of course Weber State is predominantly, predominantly white so there was some, some, some academic adjustment issues. There was some social and enrichment issues that they were concerned about.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: I was involved with that oh several, several years up until about the mid, mid-'80s [1980s] or so.
Speaker 1: Now did you report to the president or who did you report to?
Speaker 2: No, I, I at that time, I, I reported to the dean of student affairs, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --the--working with, in the division of student affairs at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613755
Speaker 1: During the time I was, and I was also doing some adjunct teaching with the social work department there also.
Speaker 2: Okay, now did you have a specialty that you taught?
Speaker 1: Just in- introduction to social work practice, and then also community, community organization involvement and, and also working with ethnic communities.  But, but also at that same time I had started to work on my doctorate degree.  That I took some classes, I specifically taken some classes from Brigham Young University [Provo, Utah]. These were like summer courses that I was taking.  And I originally, I originally accepted to go to be involved in a doctorate program at University of Northern Colorado in Greeley [Colorado].  And but saw that our, if I moved to Greeley I would end up actually paying more money as an out of state student than if I stayed in Utah.  And was paying non LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] fees. They, they actually had at BYU--you have LDS versus non LDS student fees.  Because I was non LDS, of course I had to pay for those fees which were higher than LDS fees.  But it was cheaper for me to stay in Utah not have to move anywhere, but pay non L, L, LDS fees at BYU.  So I took classes over two or three summer period of time up to the point where it was time for me to really make a commitment about whether I really wanted to go to BYU or not.  And it was at that point I decided that you know I was gonna make a commitment to, to finish my doctorate at Brigham Young University.  And continue to take coursework there and finish, officially finish my degree in 1989, and, and, and graduated in 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay so you got your Ph.D. in 1990?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's education doctorate.
Speaker 2: Okay so Ed.D.--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --from BYU okay so, and all the while you were working, right, you're still working?
Speaker 1: Um-hm all the while I was still working with Weber State University [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah]--
Story_ID: 613756
Speaker 1: What position did you, I mean were you offered another position right away or did you seek another position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually in, in 1990, it was at that time I was offered a tenure track position in the Department of Teacher Education at Weber State University [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah].  And have been in that department since then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now, now you were I know you've been like a director of diversity?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, assistant to the pres- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Assistant to the president.
Speaker 2: Yeah diversity, yeah it was actually--
Speaker 1: This is '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: Yeah I was in that position in, in '92 [1992] for about a year, but it was at the time that I did not officially have tenure.  And I deci- so I was the manager of our diversity policy during that time and then I had to step away from that position to finish my tenure, finish my tenure work.  And then a returned to that position in 1990, 19--when did I go back then?  Yeah, 1999, I went back to assistant to the president for diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been in it since then.
Speaker 1: All right so you're still assistant to the president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and diversity as well as a professor in--
Speaker 2: In teacher education right by--
Speaker 1: --teacher education.
Speaker 2: My normal contractual assignment is in teacher education, secondary education trainings, secondary at school teachers, but also it's kind of a split assignment where I have an administrative part of my responsibility.  But also I have classes that I teach.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are the classes that you teach?
Speaker 2: I teach the foundations of, of education. I teach multicultural education class- classroom strategies, current issues, current issues in public education.
Story_ID: 613757
Speaker 1: Well, I guess we need to get into details about what your duties are as the assistant to the president in- for institutional diversity at Weber State [Weber State University, Ogden, Utah].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah my primary responsibilities there is I'm actually responsible for managing the, the diversity policy for, for the institution.  That for the most part I offer technical assistance, financial support for various leadership, as well as faculty, faculty vitality initiatives.  In other words, if, if students wanted leadership training that they might have an opportunity to go to some kind of a leadership institute and I might support them in that effort.  If faculty wanted to present papers at professional conferences, particularly if there was a conference.  If there was an international conference, so if there is a conference that had a diversity theme, multicultural theme to it an equity theme to it.  Then I might support them in, in that travel and in that, in that in that endeavor.  So largely my job gives me really an opportunity to do a variety of things on a, on a day to day basis.  Part of my time is spent in the classroom teaching, the other part of my time is, is interventions and working with faculty and staff around curriculum issues.  Issues that relate to making sure that we promote a full and inclusive and equitable environment for our students, faculty and staff.
Story_ID: 613758
Speaker 1: What are some of the different strands, diverse strands of interest I guess in, at Weber State [Weber State University, Ogden, Utah]? I know you got, we have, we have like the black community.  But we also have like other communities too, right?
Speaker 2: Ab- absolutely yeah, yeah we have because Weber State of course is a, is a public university. We have a quite a diverse community of, of, of learners that are from various indigenous tribal affiliations from a lot of international students.
Speaker 1: What, what are some of those tribal affiliations that?
Speaker 2: Primarily in our area is Navajo, Hopi, Blackfoot, Paiute, Northwest Band Shoshone [Northwestern Band of the Shoshone Nation], a few, a few, a few Cherokee and Seminole.  And so basically what you're talking about is mainly the tribes that are in the West, Rocky Mountain West region.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Cherokee and Seminole were, are groups that came over during the Trail of Tears (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --back in 1840s--
Speaker 2: Right the Trail--
Speaker 1: --from the East and Southeast--
Speaker 2: Yeah we have had some students that were from those tribe, tribal affiliations.
Speaker 1: Well you know one of the, this is I, the first I ever had opportunity to talk to a black person actually knew what a Blackfoot Indian [Native American] was.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause we hear this a lot when I interview people, they say they're part Indian and I ask them what group and a few have actually said Blackfoot.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they're like in the South and the East and stuff and I say well, that seems impossible because Blackfeet are Indians (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --from--
Speaker 2: They're West part--
Speaker 1: --Northwest, yeah.
Speaker 2: Part, primarily, Idaho probably, yeah Idaho they have a large Blackfoot reservation [sic.] that's in like Idaho Falls, Idaho and that area, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, I think the name seems to suggest they're black or something I guess to people that say that.  I guess I don't know what the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That has nothing to do with it, I don't believe.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now and what other, now, now there're Pacific Island groups too, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm yeah we have Pacific Island groups. Tongans, Samoan and, and it's interesting because that group largely find their presence here as a result of their affiliation with the Mormon church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  A, a vast majority of the, the Polynesian community have fairly close ties to the LDS church.  But they also have, you know they have a very growing presence in the, the greater Salt Lake area [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay, I would think that, maybe I'm wrong; but I would guess maybe that they might have some ties to the [U.S.] Air Force too, but I don't, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah some, some ties to the Air Force but you find more traditionally is the African American community, the Hispanic community and the Japanese community have pretty strong ties to either the railroad or the [U.S.] military, primarily Air Force.
Speaker 1: Okay, but the Pacific Islanders have more of a tie to L- L- LD- LDS?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 613759
Speaker 1: Is the women's movement like strong in the--?
Speaker 2: The, the women's movement in Utah surprisingly is, is quite strong.  That, yet what you find is in the public universities in the State of Utah you have a, a, a, significant number of women scholars who are very activist in the women's movement here.  There's a very active chapter of the American Association of University Women that's here in Utah.  There's a very active track--chapter of the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Utah] that are here.  There's an active chapter of you know of, of several women's societies that have really found themselves very, having a very strong presence on the political scene.  Having a very strong presence in the educational arena, as well as in, in public health.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, then for that matter you know as you're looking at the variety of ethnic groups and, and various constituent groups you also have a very solid presence of, of groups that are members of the gay community in the, in the State of Utah.  I know a lot of people assume that the gay community in the Rocky Mountain West is relatively invisible.  And I would say that's the complete opposite. That they are very visible, they are very present, prevalent.  That they are very well known in the political arena in terms of their active engagement, that they advance a variety of types of, of equity based legislation.  And so you have a very activist gay community in, in Utah; and for that matter, in the West.
Story_ID: 613760
Speaker 1: I know that there's a lot of emphasis on arts in, in Utah, the ski resorts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and those sort of things, yeah like--
Speaker 2: Yeah and--
Speaker 1: --movie stars coming here, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah absolutely, 'cause you, again you have Park City [Utah] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Snowbird [Utah], you have some of the permanent ski resorts here, and of course keep in mind also that I mean we were the host of the Olympics in 2002 [2002 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City, Utah].  And so we have a very, even before the 2002 Olympics, we had a very solid infrastructure for ski industry.  Where very high profile individuals that would come into Utah and you know spend a few days a week or so skiing.  But because we now have the solid infrastructure that we had in place for the Olympics, now what you have is on a consistent basis world class skiers.  Ski jumpers, cross country skiers, mogul so forth coming to Utah to train.
Speaker 1: Yeah I just wonder how many of them stay. I know just strolling through Park City the other day you know I, I heard so many different languages.  And so many European languages, especially you know spoken on the main street in Park City.  And in the grocery store you know.
Speaker 2: Park City is, is, is one of those, it's one of those ski resort cities that's a, a, a, sort of a cosmopolitan collection of people from all over the world.  You go to Park City and as you say you can find multiple languages, you, of course we have the, the Park City, the, the film, and film festival (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Sundance--
Speaker 2: Sundance Film Festival that's in, in Park City, and so Park City is known across the world that, that in, in my international travels when I tell them that I'm from Salt Lake City, Utah, and they say, "How, how far you away from Park City?"
Speaker 1: Okay, so all this says in a lot of ways that Utah is a lot more diverse than people would think, and maybe not as conservative as some people might think.
Speaker 2: Salt Lake City as, as a city is probably more diverse than the vast majority of the world assumes, and that it's probably more moderate than people assume it to be.  Although clearly there is a, a, a, a constant presence of the, and influence of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.  So even though the LDS church is in Salt Lake City, what you see is actually more moderate to progressive liberal ideals that advance in Salt Lake City than in any of the other cities in the State of Utah.  In other words most of the cities in the State of Utah are considered fairly LDS, fairly conservative.  Salt Lake City is considered to be pretty moderate in and probably even teetering toward you know you know progressive kind of leftist ideals.  And that's taken place really over the last--solidly over the last fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you do--you do have quite a diversity of, of individuals, citizens in, in Salt Lake City.
Speaker 1: And you know what? I guess it was maybe ten years ago when Dennis Rodman was in town there playing with the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] in the (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the NBA [National Basketball Association] championship, that he, he made you know a crack that it was the whitest place that he ever been in his life (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right and most, most people say that, yeah Utah's very white you know, no, no doubt about that.  But what, what we have seen in the last in the, in the last fifteen to twenty years is a very significant migration of people literally from far west than California into the Rocky Mountain region.  And from the, for that matter from the eastern seaboard into West and, and the Rocky Mountain area.  So Salt Lake City, along with the other Rocky Mountain states have experienced a significant growth of, of mi- migration of people into the western region.
Story_ID: 613761
Speaker 1: Now you do quite a bit of travel, I mean, you were showing me a map I think as we came in of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --red flags you know stuck in various places around the world that you, on a map--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that you--so why do you do so much traveling and what is the purpose of all your travel?
Speaker 2: Yeah probably what you were, what you were looking at was that what happens is when I travel out of the country I usually have little flags that sort of map out the various places that I've been over, over the years.  That part of my career as I've worked at Weber State [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah] since 1977, part of my career, particularly in the last ten or twelve years has really given me an opportunity to travel international.  Part of that is embedded in my being actively involved in the International Society for Teacher Educators [sic. International Society for Teacher Education].  I'm an, an active officer in that organization and each year this society meets in of a, a selected countries each year.  And so as a result of that, that has given me an opportunity to travel in behalf of Weber State University to places like Canterbury, England; Copenhagen, Denmark; Cape Town, South Africa.  Let's see I've been to Paris, France; Netanya, Israel; Kuwait, quite, quite a number of places.  Taipei, Taiwan, I'm actually next month as it is preparing to go to Melbourne [Australia] and Sydney, Australia to do some lectures.  And so it's really given me an opportunity to travel in other countries, get a perspective on how they view their educational challenges.  And be able to articulate some of the similarities and differences that we have here in the United States.  How we train our school teachers, as an example, versus how they train theirs and, and so.  But yeah it's given me an opportunity to do a lot of travel.  And, and actually the society that I'm in, involved with this, this international teacher education society of Weber State University, is actually going to be the host site for this international society next June, 2009 for a week.  We're gonna be hosting these individuals coming into the State of Utah to have an app- opportunity to, to talk about international education.  And we're looking forward to being the, the, the host for, for, for that that program.
Story_ID: 613762
Speaker 1: I think that part of the reason why offices of diversity exists is stave off various crises or cultural crises that occur on college campuses.  What have been some of the cultural crises that have, that you've had to meet at Web- Weber State [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah]?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I think a lot of the, the cultural crisis often times are, are imbedded in mixed matches between the types of experiences students bring on campus.  Versus the type of traditional conservative climate that all of our universities have.  So as an example you might have an international student who's cultural and, and, and religious differences they might some kind of way clash with the, the campus.  The, the campus policy or campus atmosphere, you might have, for example, a inner city African American student, for example.  Who finds it difficult to communicate with a well educated school teacher that grew up in, in rural southern Utah.  You might have athletes who have come to the area from a large inner cities and find themselves in an environment where the experiences that they've had in their inner city are dramatically different from the experiences that they would have at Weber State.  And, and, and in our Utah, in our Utah communities.  And so I think that over time, because Weber State higher education system, as an example, is an, is an open system.  In other words, we, we encourage a quite a diversity of students to come to Weber or attend University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] or Utah State University [Logan, Utah].  Or we have an, an open policy where we're not exclusive, you certainly have to have certain characteristic, a certain standards that, that we want to attract students.  But we're not a, we're not a, an institution that that eliminates you because you don't have enough financial aids, as an example.  We're not an institution that that don't restrict you because you're from Saudi Arabia.  That Weber State is open admissions, and when you meet the basic qualifications to attend, you know, we find a place for you.  And most of our institutions are, are in that manners, so what happens that really invites quite an array of types of cultures and, and types of languages and types of, of experiences among all of our learners.  And as a result of that, you inevitably find clashes between the teacher and the student about what the teacher said.  You mi- you inevitably find clashes between what the coach expects and what the student's experience is.  You know you inevitably find clashes between the Black Scholars United and some white fraternity or sorority you know those, those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 613763
Speaker 1: In the age we live in today with war in Iraq and 9/11 [September 11, 2001], one and that sort of thing are Arab American students or, or, or foreign students who are, who are Muslim I think do they have more cultural crises in a place like Utah than, than they used to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah that's a good question. I, it, I mean I, I, think that you know there was a, there was a period of time where we were less concerned about Arab students being on our college campus [Weber State University, Ogden, Utah].  And, and as a result of 9/11 and since that time, you have a, a higher level of scrutiny and in some cases even restriction.  Where this Homeland Security [U.S. Department of Homeland Security] policy implications have really forced us to make sure that we are taking appropriate duty of care in ensuring that the students that we have in our university settings have the proper cre- credentials if you will.  And but also that they have the opportunity to learn like any, any other student.  The international students know that there is a very different climate now than it was ten, twelve, fifteen years ago.  And, and I think that through the various federal government adjustments that they've had, that they had to make that they understand some of those re- restrictions.  And, and so and in fact what you, we've find in most of the institutions is that that a post 9/11 that there was a significant decrease in the number of international students.  But what we're finding now is that those numbers are moving back to, to normalcy in terms of the presence of, of these students.  And I, and I, and I'm, I'm really happy that we're moving back toward this normalcy phase.  Because I can remember, for example, in '77 [1977] '78 [1978] '79 [1979] when these international students were major contributors to the cultural life of the university.  And when that 9/11 hit, I think that we hit three, four, five year period of time where there was a vast emptiness.  And lack of opportunity to engage and, and learn more from these students.  And so but I do see that regaining its proper place.
Story_ID: 613764
Speaker 1: As an educator, a trainer of teachers, what is your philosophy of education?
Speaker 2: My, my philosophy is really, it's really based on three things: knowing, caring and acting.  That when I teach my students, I teach them with the philosophy that you have to have the proper knowledge to be able to influence your students in the way that you want them to learn.  If you, if there's a particular learning objective that you wanna have the proper teaching or pedagogical knowledge that allows that student to learn in a way that you expect from them.  So I think this knowing part then has to do with how do we construct, not only what we want them to know but how we want them to come to know it.  So this knowing piece then becomes a very important part of, of my su- philosophy.  Because it says what do I want my students to know? What I want when I want to prepare them to be good teachers, what's the knowledge?   Ho- what do I want them to leave with that they didn't have when they came to me?  I think the second part of that is the, is the caring part, that is not enough to be knowledgeable 'cause we have student teachers as an example that are very good in their content areas history, math, science or whatever.  But you put them in front of a classroom and they oftentimes are detached, they're disconnected, they don't really care.  All I'm here to do is teach math or all I'm here to do is to teach science. I don't care about their lives in the community.  I don't care about their families or whatever, so this caring part in a lot of ways it doesn't make sense to have a lot of knowledge, but be disconnected.  And not care about the students that you're, you're teaching this information.  So there's knowing and then there's caring piece then has to be connected, and then in a lot of ways it makes even less sense to have knowledge and care about the students but not do anything about it.  Or not teach them to do anything about it.  And so part of what I do in my classes is, not only do I want you to have knowledge.  And not only do I want you to care about these students, but I want you to teach them how to go out and do something about what they've come to learn.  To become--the acting part is really about I don't know, becoming active you know in, in civil society you know.  Becoming a, a part of the democratic ideal, you know, participating to try to make your community a, a, a better place.  And, and so when I teach my classes, I teach them on the basis of philosophical basis of knowing, caring and acting.
Story_ID: 613765
Speaker 1: Now what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Part of my concern is that is that there is a, a lot of rhetorical discussions that's taking place on a national basis.  That gives the impression that our national black community is fragmented and that that we don't have quote, the old school's sense of connection, and sense of unity that we had back in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  And I think that there's some accuracy to that but I also think that it's important to keep in mind that the black community in my mind has, has always had these divides among each other.  They're probably more pronounced now than they have been before. We've always had, as an example conservatism among blacks.  And so I guess all I'm saying is what I, what I'm concerned about, but also what I hope for is that we don't allow ourselves to see these various divides within the community as a sign that the community has weakened.  That I think that what's missing in my mind is that we need to work harder to show the articulating differences between these varying ideals that are part of our community.  That we need to do the work of the diversity within our own community. That if we assume that that unity is not necessarily the old school version of all of us thinking and feeling and being and acting the same way, that we have to maybe redefine what unity within the black community means.  And in my judgment, that means better understanding the nature of conservatism and how it relates to uplifting the black community.  The role of, of progressive liberalism and how it serves to uplift our community and so forth. So we have to, I think that we have to come up with new ways of articulating what the diversity of experiences and voices mean in the context of unity.
Story_ID: 613766
Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back at everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Is there anything I would different, you mean in terms of my career, or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, major thing.
Speaker 2: I don't think so and the only thing that I can think of is that I would probably, I'd probably would be more, I would've been more aggressive toward finishing my degree much earlier.  I mean that's the only thing that I can think of that that but, but I think in terms of how my career path has evolved from Oklahoma to Utah.  And I look on that in, in, in retrospect and I you know, I'm very proud of you know the few things that I've done you know to this point.  I mean you always, I always feel like that I could have and should have done things more efficient, focused more attention to, been more professional at you know those kinds of things.  But, but in looking back, I, I've I feel like that my career has really evolved in a very unique way.  That there are a lot of things that have happened in my career that I would've never ever anticipated, that would've happened to me.  That I never would've anticipated, as an example that my career would've taken on sort of the international route over the last twelve years or so.  I never would've anticipated that I would be at the University of Navarra in Spain [Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain] as a lecturer, as a visiting lecturer at, at that university for a semester.  I mean that was sort of one of my nebulous career goals that I thought you know probably never happen.  But you know it's something you keep in the back of your mind and the next thing you know you're at the university of, of Spain you know teaching.  And so I, I don't think I would have done anything significantly different other than I'd probably would've probably tried to get it in faster and earlier.
Story_ID: 613767
Speaker 1: Now once again if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would say that my legacy is really the ability to be able to have the dexterity to work in a variety of communities.  That I serve on a variety of community councils and commissions and so forth and so on, I do a lot of community service leadership work.  Whether it's with gay coalition or it's with women's societies, whether it's with the Utah Coalition of La Raza [Salt Lake City, Utah].  Whether it's the American Indian Movement that I work in a variety of, of constituent circles, if you will.  And people have come to recognize my contribution and, and the ability to have access to these varying communities.  That I serve on the Utah Disability Law Center [Salt Lake City, Utah]. I am not a disabled person but I see that I guess what I saying is that I see all of these things as part of my view of what I call civil rights activism.  Is, is, is my civil rights activism is the ability to work in these, in these communities you know for, for justice.
Story_ID: 613768
Speaker 1: We haven't talked about your family now.  Are, are you married, do you have children?
Speaker 2: No I don't, I'm not married, I don't have, don't have children, I have many, many nieces and nephews that, that I stay in touch with.  And, and that I support and encourage in their educational aspirations. Our, our family is a very education orientated family.  When somebody is graduate, graduations are a big deal in our family.  If somebody is graduating from junior high school, it's a reason to get together and have a family gathering you know.  And, and, and so my mother [Hazel Hampton Crawford] in particular really sort of set the foundation for the importance and value of, of education in, in my family.  I have a niece that's working on her doctorate degree at Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas], my twin brother's daughter.  And she is really sort of the next person in line to have a doctorate degree and I'm determine to not, I want her to finish that degree.  'Cause I kept telling her I'm tired of being the only one with a doctorate degree in my, in my family.  And so I'm really encouraging and mentoring and pushing her to, to, to finish that degree.  Because I think that she, she has the talent, she has the motivation. We just wanna make sure that she has all the resources that allow her to be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you and your brother [Dorris Crawford, Jr.], are you identical twins or?
Speaker 2: We're not identical.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean we sort of look more alike when we were younger than, than we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --than we do now.  I mean you can tell we're brothers but--
Speaker 1: So you don't have that bond they say identical twins have when they, they often have the same ideas and the same--
Speaker 2: Yeah, not, no I, I thi- because our, our personalities are very different. We are very close to each other.  But, but you know if he got a headache and I got a headache I don't think so (laughter) you know what I'm saying?  No, I think that personality wise we're, we're very different. Our careers--part of the education careers very, very similar.  But our lives are sort of taken very different, different paths you know.  He's pretty much stayed in Oklahoma, he's kind of ol' home boy you know and I kind of like been all over the place literally.  And but, but we are very close as, as twin brothers, but I don't think that we have the same experiences in terms of this, for lack of a better word, intuitiveness that some people say that twins tend to have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I might've been maybe different if I stayed in Oklahoma and, and we had a more constant contact and communication with each other in that, in that manner.
Story_ID: 613769
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't, I don't think so.  I think that the questions that you've asked been very, very thoughtful and you know it's you know I kind of see it more as a snapshot more than anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir how would you liked to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well I would, I would like to be remembered as a person who really cared about his community, a person who really sought out opportunities to lift up those individuals who needed support.  Who needed guidance, who needed mentoring.  I would like to be viewed as a good friend and someone who would be seen as an individual that you can lean on and that you can trust.  And, and that the, my disarming approach you know allowed you to forge a friendship.  And you know make the community and, therefore, make society a better place that, I mean I think that's in its simplest form that's.  I don't necessarily wanna be remembered for all of my degrees and all my travels, and I mean I think that's wonderful stuff.  But yeah I think in the, in the final analysis is that you know this guy made a contribution and more importantly made a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you sir.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 613770
Speaker 1: Okay this is a, a photograph of some teammates of mine at Weber State University [Weber State College; Weber State University, Ogden, Utah].  This was just as I transferred from my junior college [Northeastern Oklahoma A&M College, Miami, Oklahoma], to, to, to Weber State.  And we were having our spring, spring training.  And I'm pictured in there as number twenty-eight, and the rest of these guys have been lifelong friends of mine that I still have contact with.  And so they're just former teammates of mine, Weber State University, 1973.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay 1973.  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This photograph is of my father when he was in the, he was in the Korean War and so he was a, a, a private, private first class it believe it was.
Speaker 1: The Korean War?
Speaker 2: In the, in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seem like he would be in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: No this was Korean War, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a, a photograph of my mother, Ha- Hazel Crawford [Hazel Hampton Crawford].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The, the date of that photograph was like 19--like 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my speaking at a conference in Netanya, Israel in 19--I think it was 1997 in Netanya, Israel at an International Teacher Education Conference.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a, a lecture that I was doing in 1996 at an International Teacher Education Conference.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my twin brother and I on prom night, spring of 1970, high school graduation [from Charles Page High School, Sand Springs, Oklahoma], or, or in preparation of high school graduation.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of a photograph of my involvement with Weber State, Weber State College football in 19--I think that photograph is actually in 1970, it should be 1970. Seventy-four [1974], yeah 1974.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 2: This photograph is the photograph of the Ogden [Utah] alumni chapter of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], my involvement with this group is that I happen to be the cofounder of this professional women's society.  We're in, we're in, we're preparing for our twentieth anniversary this May of 2008.
Speaker 1: You, you're the cofounder of Ogden chapter?
Speaker 2: Of the Ogden alumni chapter of Delta Sigma Theta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a, I think this was a, a Easter right after church in 1960 had to be like 1964, '63 [1963] '64 [1964].  This is a photograph on the far left of my mother, Ha- Hazel, my oldest sister Mayme [Mayme Crawford], my little brother Larry [Larry Crawford, Sr.], my little sister Marva [Marva Crawford Williamson], behind the two of them is my father Dorris, Sr. [Dorris Crawford, Sr.] and next to him is myself and next to me is my twin brother Dorris, Jr. [Dorris Crawford, Jr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is actually one of my favorite photographs because this is the First Baptist Church, Sand Springs, Oklahoma, missionary Baptist church.  This is a church where I grew up. In fact most of my family grew up in this church.  It was in an all-black community, all black part of Sand Springs, Oklahoma.  And as you see in the photograph it's very young Forrest [HistoryMaker Forrest Crawford] and Dorris, Jr. Crawford as young kids.  Probably four or five years old, outside of the church during a, church anniversary.
Speaker 2: Where, where are you, point to yourself.
Speaker 1: This is me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay that's you?
Speaker 1: This is me and, and the, the--not that one but the right there, and that's my twin brother Dorris, Jr.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And actually in that, in that same photograph is my two older brothers and sister if you were interested; if you just wanted my brother and I that's fine.  But I have my, Kermit [Kermit Crawford] is my oldest brother and Kenny [Kenneth Crawford] is my youngest brother.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is?
Speaker 1: Kermit is my oldest brother; Kenny is my next to the oldest brother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Is that your sister?
Speaker 1: And then one and then one last person is Mayme.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: With the white on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Mayme and then, and then that's my mother is right where's Hazel, or that's Hazel right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that your mother right here?
Speaker 1: So that's my mother Hazel, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and right.
Speaker 1: This was a, a national award that I received from the Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1994.  And so I'm here receiving an award in Washington, D.C. with Coretta Scott King in the center and to the right of her is my oldest sister Mayme.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This photograph is a photograph of myself along with Utah State legislators with the governor signing a bill that I was actively involved in doing some citizens' lobbying.  This was a, the governor signing the Utah hate crimes, hate crimes legislation that was in 2006.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of in roughly 19--1964, '63 [1963] '64 [1964] sitting on a couch at my auntie's home.  To the far left is my photograph and then next to me is my little brother Larry, and next to him is my little sister Marva.  And next to her is my twin brother Dorris, Jr. and next to him is my next to the oldest brother Kenny.  And you have an inset of, of everyone except Kenny back in 1999.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 1: This photograph is a, a photograph of some relatives that's on my mother's side.  These individuals, the last name is Peck in fact the gentleman this particular gentleman is a, is a direct descendent of my mother's family side of the, the family tree.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know his name?
Speaker 1: His name is Ernest, Ernest Peck [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And he's the gentleman standing in the back?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Mr. Peck.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that it, all right.  Just guess.
Speaker 1: I would say probably in the 19--ear- early 1900s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 1: Okay this is a photograph of, of my father when he was a young boy and standing above him is his sister, my Auntie Bessie [Bessie Crawford Zackery].  Who is a currently the, the eldest in our Crawford family, they are standing with their, with their parents [Minnie Crawford (ph.) and Grant Crawford (ph.)].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) this is school days 1958 actually is when I first started the first grade at Booker T. Washington segregated community school [Booker T. Washington School] in Sand Springs, Oklahoma.
