Story_ID: 532089
Speaker 1: Today, our subject is Donald Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell].  The interviewer is Jacques Lesure.  The videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name completely with your middle name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Donald Russell Campbell, with the middle name is R-U-S-S-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And your birth date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 14, 1935, Elizabeth, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: July 13, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: We are at Southminster Presbyterian Church, 1923 East Broadway [Road], Phoenix, Arizona, 85040.
Speaker 1: And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: Current occupation is retired.
Story_ID: 532090
Speaker 1: Now, we have a few questions we'd like to ask you regarding, we call them People magazine questions and they're just very general questions we like to get some answers to.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I really don't have a favorite food.  Whenever I'm hungry, I just eat.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Don't have a favorite time of the year.  As long as I'm alive, all of it's favorite.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Have no favorite color.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination place?
Speaker 2: Wherever I, I can afford to go.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or a saying that you like to use or you live by?
Speaker 2: Keep hope alive.
Story_ID: 532091
Speaker 1: What I'd like to do now is go into some details about your past, your early life starting with your mother.  Can you tell me her name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well my mother's first name was Lobita Luvenia Fisher Campbell [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] and she was in Elizabeth, Louisiana.  She was born in a different city of which I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Now, did your mother grow up in Elizabeth, Louisiana?
Speaker 1: No, my mother was from another city in Louisiana and I think that was Kentwood [Louisiana], where she grew up with her brothers and sisters and family there.  And then she eventually moved to Elizabeth, I think where she met my dad who is John Estes Campbell [John E. Campbell, Sr.], and that's where they got married, raised their family.
Speaker 2: Do you have, know much about your mother's background growing up as a child?
Speaker 1: Not a lot other than she had several brothers and sisters.  She had four sisters and I think they were all teachers.  During those days if you went to high school and finished, then you could become a teacher.  She had one brother who was a minister.  He eventually moved over to California and he lived there until he was about ninety years old.  In fact, we have his--one of his great-grandsons, Terry Johnson, who was the mayor of Oceanside [California], that's a cousin of mine, and he's still there in California.
Speaker 2: Do you know the names of her siblings, your mother's siblings?
Speaker 1: Let's see.  One was Elizabeth [Elizabeth Fisher], they called her Aunt Beb and one was Aunt Cora [Cora Fisher], and the other one I cannot remember her name.
Speaker 2: And how about the brother?
Speaker 1: I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: How would you describe your mother as a person?
Speaker 1: Now, I--my mother died when I was twelve years old, so I really didn't really get to know her so to speak, but she was a family person.  She was very disciplined, very structured, and she, you know, really looked after the kids, took care of the family.  In those days, that was the primary purpose even though she did teach, but to look after kids, very religious person, so was my dad.
Speaker 2: Are there any stories that you can recall that she may have shared with you about her life growing up?  Did she share anything that you can recall?
Speaker 1: Not at--not that I can remember.
Story_ID: 532092
Speaker 1: Let's move on to your father.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Name was John Estes Estelle Campbell [John E. Campbell, Sr.].  He did not like the name Estelle, so he just took his father's name which was John Estes Campbell [John Campbell] and he named my oldest brother John Estes Campbell [John E. Campbell, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: My knowledge, he was born in Westlake, Louisiana.  That's where his grandmother had a farm, which we eventually moved back to.
Speaker 1: And do you know much about his background growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember in Elizabeth, Louisiana, he worked at a sawmill.  That's what he did and I was told that he had to quit school when he was in the fourth grade because his father died and he had to stay home and help his mother [Catherine Campbell].  And his mother who was--I can't recall her first name, but I was told that she was released from slavery when she was thirteen years old and she was basically responsible for raising him and his brother and his sister.  His brother died when he was thirty-nine, from what, I don't know.  And his sister died when she was pretty young, too, and I'm not sure why.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father as a person?
Speaker 2: I would think if I could recall and keeping in mind, he died when he was forty-five and I was about nine, he was very strict person, very disciplinarian, and the kids didn't cross him.  He was the boss and whatever he said do, we did it.  But I remember when we were in Elizabeth, Louisiana, and he worked at a sawmill, he also raised hogs and grew chickens in a little farm around the house and all in order to supplement the small income that he made to take care of all the kids he had.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that he shared with you that you can recall about his life growing up?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Story_ID: 532093
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], how far back can you go into your ancestry?  I heard you mention some grandparents.  Can you go back any further than that?
Speaker 2: That's as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have other brother and sister, they may know a little bit more about it.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to your, to your mother's [Luvenia Fisher Campbell]--your mother's parents, your grandmother [Sara Fisher] or your grandfather [Moses Fisher].  Do, do you recall who they were on her side?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I knew some of--the grandmother [Catherine Campbell] on my father's [John E. Campbell, Sr.] side, but I can't recall the ones on my mother's side.  Now, my brother who's a little older than I am and my sister who's older than I am, they may recall those people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now on your father's side, do, do you recall your, your grandmother and your grandfather [John Campbell]?
Speaker 2: Only, only the grandmother.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Good question (laughter).  Off hand, I can't think of it.  It may come to me.
Speaker 1: And do you recall any interactions or have any stories about her?  Do you remember any kind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  She was pretty strict, too, and I remember she used to smoke a corncob pipe and it would remind me of Mama Yokums [Mammy Yokum] in the--with the, the comedies the guy had there.  What was his name?  Momma Yokums was the--in with--what's his name?
Speaker 1: Li'l Abner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Li'l Abner, yeah.  But I remember, too, when I was small, the only thing I ever wanted to eat was syrup and biscuits.  And she would fix the food, doing breakfast and lunch when my dad's gone to work and my mom's gone to work, and she would get mad 'cause the only thing I would eat was syrup and bread and she would always tell me, say, "I'm gonna tell your pa when he gets home," and that scared the hell out of me (laughter).  I was so afraid all day long that she was going to tell him and when he got home, I was gonna get a beating, you know.  The good thing about it, she was older at that time and by the time he got home, she had forgotten about it and that's what saved me.  Other than that, I would've been in a world of trouble.
Speaker 1: Now, is she in the same town that you all grew up?  Was she in the same general area?
Speaker 2: In Westlake, Louisiana, when we moved back to her place from Elizabeth.  And we moved--after, after they closed the sawmill in Elizabeth, Louisiana, we moved back to Westlake to the farm where she was.
Speaker 1: What year would this have been?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  My dad died in '45 [1945], so it must've been somewhere around '42 [1942] or '43 [1943] or somewhere along in there.
Story_ID: 532094
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your early years growing up.  Can you recall your earliest memory that you can recall and what age were you?
Speaker 2: Seemingly, I was in Elizabeth, Louisiana, and I think it was just before we left there, moving back--moving to Westlake [Louisiana], I was about, I don't know, six years old, somewhere along in there, and there were three boys named Donald, and there was another one named Donald Smith [ph.] and another Donald [ph.] whom I can't recall his last name, and another cousin I had, his name was Mickey [ph.].  And they--in Elizabeth, Louisiana, they had three different locations where people lived.  They had the mill quarters, the P quarters, and some other quarters, and then the black people lived in the mill quarters and the P quarters and the white people lived in another section, and that's where the grocery stores and all those things were, but they were all segregated at the time.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about the street you grew up on, the name of the street?  Do you recall it?
Speaker 2: If I recall, it was 12th Street [ph.] or something like that.  And most of the house--I remember the house we were in, it was a red frame house and whether all the houses in that area were red frame, I really don't know.  But here again, most of those things, my older brother who's still alive and my sister, they would be able to recall those things a little better than I can (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 532095
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Speaking of your older brother and sister, how many siblings did you have and could you list their names in order including yourself?
Speaker 2: There were originally nine kids.  The oldest one was Alvie Bible [Alvie Campbell Bible], Alvie Campbell who eventually became a Bible.  Another was Mabel [Mabel Campbell].  She died when she was sixteen.  And there was John who--John Campbell [John E. Campbell, Jr.].  He was named after my father [John E. Campbell, Sr.].  And my sister named Carol [Carol Campbell Hurd], she's still alive.  Then, there was Walter Campbell.  He died when he was twelve, almost thirteen.  And there was Cloves Campbell [Cloves Campbell, Sr.] who just died here in 2004.  And there's Roland Campbell [Roland Campbell, Sr.].  He'll be--he's seventy-three.  He's still alive and he just left, going up to California for vacation.  And then myself, Donald [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], and my youngest brother, Charles [Charles Campbell], who passed away in June the 16th--June the 26th of 2006.
Speaker 1: There were some early demises out, out of some or your siblings.  Back in that time, was that common for young people sometimes because of some reason?
Speaker 2: Different because I know my sister they say she died because she didn't wanna wear coats and things and she caught pneumonia.  My brother Walter died because he had an appendic- append- appendicitis and he died from that in the hospital.  But like my father, he had some kind of lung disease.  My mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell], I was told she had cancer, and during those days, they probably didn't have a lot of treatment to help people with.  So, it was common for families to have a lot of people who would pass on out of them.
Speaker 1: Was there--was there ready access to medical care or--and no treatment or was there not even access to it?
Speaker 2: In my opinion, there was very little access to treatment, especially when we were moved back to--moved to Westlake, Louisiana, 'cause that was removed from--remote from everything.  The nearest big town was Lake Charles [Louisiana], which was about nine or ten miles, and there was no transportation.  Basically, if you didn't have a car, people have to walk to that city.
Story_ID: 532096
Speaker 1: Can you describe the community that you grew up in around that time?  Was it segregated?  Was it--what--how--what was your area like?
Speaker 2: In Elizabeth, Louisiana, everything was segregated.  You had black communities and white communities, and that was basically it, and there was no interaction, no involvement.  The blacks worked for the whites if they had jobs and that was basically it.
Speaker 1: What kind of jobs would they have done for these people?
Speaker 2: Probably maids, janitors.  Those who worked in the sawmills had, you know, the most difficult jobs in those places and so forth.  I don't recall any professionals in Elizabeth, Louisiana, other than one guy, he owned the--a cleaners.  His name was Smith [ph.] and he was the father of the young kid I told you about, Donald Smith [ph.].  He owned the cleaners.  Someone may have owned a nightclub or something like that, but I don't recall anybody else owning businesses.
Speaker 1: What was basic life like in your home growing up with those many children and your life in general?  What were holidays and special times and just general family life like?
Speaker 2: Basically, life was built around just the family and church.  Most people would spend a lot of time in churches.  There were several days during the week or evenings in the week in addition to Sunday and basically all of Sunday was in churches.  And the rest of the time, we were in school and we were at home doing little chores around the house that the family required us to do, you know.
Story_ID: 532097
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, sounds, and smells that you can recall growing up, especially in that part of the country?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds, and smells?  It would be hard for me to remember that far back and any of those things.  I know they had clubs where they had music, what type of music I don't know.  The only type of music I can recall was religious music because that's what my family was involved with and I could hear my mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] sometimes humming religious songs or if I went to church, they would be singing religious songs there.  But I wasn't old enough to go, you know, around the clubs and things like that, so I don't know what kind of music they had there.
Story_ID: 532098
Speaker 1: So, your elementary school, the first elementary school that you went to.  What was the name of that school and where was that?
Speaker 2: That was in Elizabeth, Louisiana, and it was a all-black school and there were--you went there from the first grade through the twelve grade.  And once they finished the twelve grade that was basically it for those who did go through the twelve grade.
Speaker 1: Do you recall the name of the school?
Speaker 2: No.  We didn't stay there that long.  I think I went there a couple of years.  Then, when we moved to Westlake, Louisiana, I went to a grade school down there, but I don't recall that either.
Speaker 1: And, and do you recall the, the grade school in Westlake, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Do, do you know what grade standing you may have been when you went to Westlake?
Speaker 2: What grade I was in?  Well, let's see.  When I moved here [Phoenix, Arizona], I was, what eleven, twelve years old.  No, I was nine years old, so I was in the third grade.  So, I think I went to the second grade in Westlake and probably the first grade in Elizabeth.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or people that still stand out from those early grades for you that you can recall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on stood out very well, my aunt who was called Aunt Beb [Elizabeth Fisher], and she was the one who decided that I needed to spend an extra year in first grade and that's where I flunked the first grade (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, she said I wanted to play all the time, so she just called my mother and said, "V [Luvenia Fisher Campbell], this boy wants to play all the time, so I'm gonna keep him here for another year."  There was no debate, no discussion, no nothing.  That was it.
Speaker 1: So your own aunt was the teacher, was your first grade teacher?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And she was the one that told my mother that I was gonna be there for another year.  So, I went around telling all the other kids that she wanted me to stay there with her 'cause she liked me and they knew I was lying (laughter).  But, in a sense, I suspect that was a wakeup call 'cause I never really had any other problems with school after that.
Speaker 1: So, your wakeup call occurred in the first grade for you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first grade, second year in the first grade (laughter).
Story_ID: 532099
Speaker 1: Then the family moved to, moved to Westlake [Louisiana], and why is that?
Speaker 2: Hm?  That was because they closed the sawmill and I was told they had a sawmill and a paper mill in Elizabeth [Louisiana], and they closed the saw mill where my dad [John E. Campbell, Sr.] worked, and I'm assuming they closed the paper mill, too.  Why, I don't know.  But the jobs were no longer there and, and not being able to find any other jobs, my dad decided to take the family back to our--or to take the family to Westlake where his mother [Catherine Campbell] was.
Speaker 1: Was this a common occurrence or common job that, that, that a black man would have either at the sawmill or the paper mill?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Were these easy jobs to have at that time for--
Speaker 2: I don't know whether they were easy, but probably it's the only jobs that they could get at that time, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, when I say easy, easy to acquire the job.
Speaker 2: I would--I would say, yes, 'cause there were a lot of black who worked there and I don't think--they probably had the, the menial jobs there.
Speaker 1: So, you stay in Westlake for a year on the farm, on your--on your--
Speaker 2: I think we stayed in Westlake for a year or two years and then moved to Arizona [Phoenix, Arizona] when I was about nine years old.
Story_ID: 532100
Speaker 1: And what caused this move to Arizona [Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 2: That was because my dad [John E. Campbell, Sr.] came here.  He had contracted his lung disease, he went to a doctor either in Lake Charles [Louisiana] or some inner city around there.  They told him to go to Arizona.  The dry climate would clear up his lungs, so he came out to Arizona.  We were still in Westlake [Louisiana].  And while we had gone back to Elizabeth [Louisiana] to visit I guess, and then he stayed out here and three months later I think he was dead.  So, they brought his body back to Westlake.  Then, we went--we went to a church in Lake Charles.  That's where they had his funeral, see.  But he had told my mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] that there were opportunities in Arizona, to take the family to Arizona, so she brought everybody to, to Arizona.  And one of my thoughts if I can remember correctly was that, well, if he died out there, why you wanna take me out there, you know?  And she was the boss, so she brought us out anyway.  And three years later, she was dead.
Speaker 1: And we'll move forward into that.  Tell us more about your feelings of your father's demise in the family?  He had been the breadwinner for the family, correct?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what were the thoughts of, of the children and yourself at this time?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, my feeling at that time was, I think most of the kids who were at the age were closer to the mothers and as long as the mother was there, they felt pretty good, you know, and naturally, you hate to see your dad die, but the mom was the person that most kids, you know, cling to and stuck to and all that 'cause she was the one whom the kids were with most of the time while the dad was either working or doing something else.
Speaker 1: And that was the common structure in most households, is that correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 532101
Speaker 1: So, 1945, you decide to move, your mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] decides to move to Arizona, the whole family.  You're approximately (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Keeping in mind, we did have a sister, Carol [Carol Campbell Hurd], who's still alive, she had gotten married at an early age, but she moved down to Lake Charles [Louisiana] or Westlake [Louisiana] with us, and she had her daughter there with us.  And then she moved to Arizona with us, too.
Speaker 1: So you're approximately now going into the third grade.
Speaker 2: If I remember, it was the third grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you move to Arizona.  Which city in Arizona did you move to?
Speaker 2: Phoenix [Arizona].
Speaker 1: You move to Phoenix.
Speaker 2: And I went to a school named Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington School, Phoenix, Arizona], which is now the newspaper [Phoenix New Times], one of the local newspapers over on the 12th Street just south of Jefferson [Street].
Speaker 1: And how did you feel when you--when you hit the streets of Phoenix, when you hit this community?
Speaker 2: Sort of odd, unsure, not knowing what's going on and trying to, you know, fit in a little bit.
Speaker 1: And did you feel a larger--since this is a larger city, did you feel like you were in the big city?
Speaker 2: Not really because Phoenix was still pretty small.  I guess we had, what, less than fifty thousand people.  And Phoenix stopped at Van Buren [Street], you know, and once you got there, you're out of the country.  This was all country out here and it stopped at Buckeye Road.  So--and it was still pretty small, but it was larger than Westlake.  And we, we were confined to a predominantly black area of town anyway, so it was pretty small.
Speaker 1: You mentioned this confinement.  Was, was Phoenix still segregated heavily at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  Everything was segregated.  You had schools for blacks, schools for whites, schools for Hispanics, and schools for Native Americans.
Speaker 1: So, not just white to black segregation, there was even other, other nationalities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: --also, ethnicities also.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Up until 1954, '53 [1953], when the Arizona Supreme Court desegregated the schools.
Story_ID: 532102
Speaker 1: So, during the first year in the third grade, you went to Booker T. Washington School [Phoenix, Arizona], you said.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you recall any teachers or friends or influential people there that, that stood out in your life at that time?
Speaker 2: I had a very influential teacher at that time, but I can't recall her name.  Because I remember my first basketball game to go see the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], she took me with her and at that time her boyfriend, who was an attorney in Los Angeles [California] and who came down here to see her.
Speaker 1: And do you recall, what stood out about that, that trip or her in particular?
Speaker 2: The thing that stood out, she always treated me, at least, as if I was almost one of her relatives and I would go to her house, which wasn't too far from mine, and sometimes I'd go there and eat a meal with her.  But she even took me to a--to a ballgame downtown when the Harlem Globetrotters was playing a basketball game, and that was the first time I'd ever seen them, and that was in 1946 I think it was.
Speaker 1: So you would've been about in the fourth grade, possibly?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--no, I think I was still in the third grade then.
Speaker 1: Now, do you feel that teachers in the--in that--during that time period were more involved on the whole life of the student versus just the classroom situation?
Speaker 2: I think so 'cause I think they related more to the parents than a lot of teachers do today 'cause the cities are larger, people are tied up with so many different things.  But they knew the families because--well, mostly the overall (unclear) family groups were smaller, so they didn't have--and they all lived within the same area whereas like today, the teachers who are teaching at the grade school down the street may live out in Peoria [Arizona] or Scottsdale [Arizona] or some other place, see, but then, the teachers had to live in the areas 'cause that's the only place they could, could live.
Speaker 1: Were there any friends or people that--of note whom we might know or anybody that just stands out in your mind that you can--that were in your class?
Speaker 2: In my classes in third grade?  Not that I can think of at this point.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at that school?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Story_ID: 532103
Speaker 1: So, you left that school [Booker T. Washington School, Phoenix, Arizona] in the fifth grade, after the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  After the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: After the fourth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was there the third and fourth grade.  Then, we moved to the west side of town to the housing projects.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that project?
Speaker 2: Matthew Henson Housing Projects [Matthew Henson Public Housing Project; Matthew Henson Apartments, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Matthew Henson.
Speaker 2: 7th Avenue and Buckeye [Road], which has been torn down and completely rebuilt.  And if you had the chance to see the new facilities, that would be a good experience.
Speaker 1: Tell us about life at the Henson Projects.
Speaker 2: Matthew Henson Housing Projects, again, was all black.  You had--down the street on 3rd Avenue, you had a housing projects for Hispanics.  Then on the 16th Street and Roosevelt [Street], you had a housing projects for whites, but they're all segregated.  And the funny thing about it, the blacks would go to Dunbar Elementary School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, Phoenix, Arizona] by Matthew Henson, the Hispanics would go to Grant Elementary School [Phoenix, Arizona], and then right down the street was the boys club, they'd all go down there and play together in the evening.  And this was operated partly by a--a Catholic church was there, there at that same time.
Speaker 1: Were the housing projects with the same tone or feeling as they are now?  Nowadays, when we--when we discuss a project, there's a certain connotation that goes along with it.  What was the project like during your years?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of, you know, the projects for us, the housing was better than any other housing because the only other houses that you could find in the community was kind of dilapidated if it was available.  So, the housing projects was more modern, it was newer, and it cost a little bit, but it was cheaper than a lot of other things there.
Speaker 1: So, at that point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And people did--there are certain people who saw it as well those people lived in the housing project so they were less than, see, but being kids, we didn't see that.  It didn't mean that much to us 'cause we didn't have those values that had been passed on to us.  All we knew is that's where we slept at and we ate and we played outside wherever we were.
Speaker 1: So, the project was considered to some a step up from what they had been, been dealing with?
Speaker 2: To a lot of housing, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the community like in the project?  Was it a--was it a group--how, how was life at that point in the projects?
Speaker 2: Most of the people in the housing projects were on welfare.  Very few people were working jobs.  If they were, they weren't letting the housing project know it because they would charge them more rent and all.  So it--but everybody there was, was basically welfare recipients and trying to, you know, survive off of that.
Speaker 1: Now, in today's terms, a lot of times the projects, projects are considered unsafe.  What was safety and life like in the neighborhood or the project itself?
Speaker 2: In those days, here again, the communities were much smaller.  There was very little if any violence in the housing projects.  I never did see people shooting.  I never did see people with weapons.  I never did see people with guns, knives, anything like that.  But everybody was just trying to survive.  Plus, there was never a great movement like drugs that you have today and maybe the drug movement didn't start until in the mid-'50s [1950s] when we were up in California.  And--but everybody was just trying to survive during those days.  And I can't recall--there was a street not too far from the housing project called Buckeye Road where they did have a lot of joints and people would be fighting and fussing and probably killing each other down there, but the kids knew not to go down there, see.
Speaker 1: So you went to Dunbar Elementary School and you ended that at the fourth grade or the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: No, fifth grade.  Dunbar, went there one year.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Basically, Dunbar, again, was a segregated elementary school and most of the kids who lived in and around the housing projects went to Dunbar Elementary School.  And most of the teachers had, you know, the requirements for teaching elementary schools and so forth.  I'm trying to think--I don't think any of the teachers lived in the housing projects because they at that time could afford--
Story_ID: 532104
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're at Dunbar Elementary School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, Phoenix, Arizona]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're in the--what grade are you in at this point?
Speaker 2: Fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Fifth grade.  Were there any teachers in particular that stood out?
Speaker 2: There was one teacher--two teachers.  One was a Mr. Weems [Carl C. Weems] and I think he had been in the [U.S.] military and he came out there and started teaching and working with us.  But he worked mostly at the boys club.  And he would pick us up out of the housing projects [Matthew Henson Public Housing Project; Matthew Henson Apartments, Phoenix, Arizona] on the weekend, take us down 7th Avenue to the riverbed.  Because, see, this riverbed you cross out here now, water used to flow through there until they dammed it off, see.  And we'd go down there and go crawfishing and all that type of stuff, playing in the water.  He would take us there.  And the other was Mr. Hutchinson [ph.].  He was the teacher in the, the fifth--well, let's see, fifth grade there, and he was also a minister.  In fact, his wife is still alive and she still has his church that he ran years ago.
Speaker 1: What's the name of the church?
Speaker 2: It's a--it's a Baptist church over on 17th [Avenue] and Jefferson [Street] but I can't recall the name of it.
Story_ID: 532105
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Earlier, you, you mentioned how--that, that your mom [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] and dad [John E. Campbell, Sr.] were both very, very into religion and religious people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What religion were you all?
Speaker 2: At that time, my family, whole family, was Methodist.
Speaker 1: Was it African Methodist, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A.M.E., and which most of them still are in there.  Some have switched to the Baptist and like myself, I switched to the Presbyterian.
Speaker 1: Now, when you're in Phoenix [Arizona] and you come to Phoenix, did you all have a particular church home here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to Tanner Chapel A.M.E. [Tanner Chapel A.M.E. Church; Historic Tanner Chapel A.M.E. Church, Phoenix, Arizona], which is on 8th Street and Jefferson [Street] and it is still there.
Speaker 1: And do you recall who the minister was at that point?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Story_ID: 532106
Speaker 1: So, now you're at Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, Phoenix, Arizona], you're in the fifth grade.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: What's going on at home now with, with your mom [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] and trying to raise all these children?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Basically, we was living with our mother and with our sister in the housing project [Matthew Henson Public Housing Project; Matthew Henson Apartments, Phoenix, Arizona] and this was, what '47 [1947], and she was doing, you know, odd jobs, cleaning people's houses and things like that to help get extra money.  We were still just going to high school--to grade school.  During the--during the weekends, we would go down on 15th Avenue and Buckeye Road and catch a cotton truck about three or four o'clock in the morning and we'd go out there and pick cotton all day long.  If you pick one hundred pounds of cotton, you'd make three dollars.
Speaker 1: Now, when you say we, who are you referring to?
Speaker 2: Me, my brother Roland [Roland Campbell, Sr.], and other kids.  In fact, I don't know if you've ever heard of a guy named John B. Wooten [John Wooten], professional football player.  He used to play with Jim Brown at the Cleveland Browns.  He lived in the housing projects with us.  And his brother, Foxy Wooten [ph.], who is now retired with--from the construction business, they were in the housing projects with us, too.  And that--you know, that was the people--some of the people we associated with.  But their families, their parents still lived and survived while they were growing up.  But we'd go pick cotton and I recall we'd go to this store on Buckeye Road which is where all them joints were at night, but we would only be there during the day.  We'd stop in this one store.  In fact, a Jewish guy owned this store for selling clothing and so forth.  I could go in there and for two dollars, I could buy a pair of Levi's, see.  And for two dollars I could buy me a pair of tennis shoes, see.  So, if I picked 150 pounds of cotton, I could buy me a pair of Levi's and a pair of tennis shoes, which I could use to go to school, you know, in the next time or the next week and all.
Speaker 1: So, you were relatively young at this point and you felt the urge to buy your own clothes.
Speaker 2: That was the only way I was gonna get them.  Ain't nobody else gonna buy 'em (laughter)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Unless you wanna take all them hand me downs all the time.
Speaker 1: So at the same point where you realize, okay, I'm gonna buy my own clothes and kind of be self-supportive, did you have an aspirations or dreams about who you might want to be in the future in your life at that point?
Speaker 2: None whatsoever at that time.  I didn't even think that far ahead in the future.  All we could think of was where the next meal is coming from and, you know, survival.
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned the cotton truck and you're pretty much in an urban situation now, and was this cotton truck a regular occurrence where, where folks could get day labor, get day work, working for this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they'd pick people up on Buckeye Road and take them out to Buckeye, Arizona, to pick up cotton out there.  In fact--
Speaker 1: And what was that like, picking cotton?
Speaker 2: Well, it was picking cotton out of the field, making--you know, it's something that we always thought we gonna make some money out of it.  Then we learned how to put some big balls of dirt in the cotton bags and make them heavier, see.  And we'd always empty our own 'cause we'd leave the dirt in the bag and go back out there (laughter) and put--fill it up again with some more cotton and let the guys weigh it again, see.
Speaker 1: Was it real hard work?
Speaker 2: I don't know what you would compare it with 'cause I'd never had any other jobs before.  We had fun in the things we were doing because we knew we were gonna make some money.  And we didn't know anything about anybody making more money or bigger money.  To us, three dollars was big money, you know, 'cause we'd never seen that before.  And there were some kids who probably--you know, didn't go out there or wouldn't go, but there were a lot of them--in fact, some of them are still alive today who went out there and picked watermelons and cantaloupes and all that stuff 'cause that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, as early as the fifth grade, you were allowed to go out and, and work?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Story_ID: 532107
Speaker 1: Now, your home life, this is nineteen forty--
Speaker 2: Seven [1947].
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947].  And you're getting ready to move into another school soon (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, after '47 [1947], I left the fifth grade there and went over to Bethune [Mary McLeod Bethune School, Phoenix, Arizona], which was on 15th Avenue south of Buckeye Road, you know, which is down where we used to pick up--pick the cotton truck.  They had built a new school down there, which went to the eighth grade for blacks only there because there was no school for blacks past Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, Phoenix, Arizona] that went past the fifth grade at that point.  So, when we went over to Bethune, I went there 'til the sixth and seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Was there anybody there that you can recall that stood out in your mind, famous people or teachers that stood out in your mind?
Speaker 2: At the--
Speaker 1: At Bethune.
Speaker 2: Bethune?  There was a number of them.  There was some of them--I can't remember their names offhand, but there were a number of instructors there who--you know, I can see their pictures and if, if it was three o'clock in the morning, I could remember their names, see (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, from '47 [1947] to '49 [1949], you were--you were at Bethune.
Speaker 2: Forty-seven [1947], '48 [1948] 'cause forty--'49 [1949], we went over to California, yeah.
Story_ID: 532108
Speaker 1: You moved to California in '49 [1949]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And why was this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, wait a minute.  Let me see now.  I recall when I went to California, I was there in the sev- eighth, ninth.  Well, I was in what they call the high seventh grade over there and seventh, eighth, eighth, ninth, and part of the tenth grade, and then came back here [Phoenix, Arizona] in the summer of '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, why did you move to California?
Speaker 2: That was really--my mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] died in '48 [1948].  My sister had her family in the housing projects [Matthew Henson Public Housing Project; Matthew Henson Apartments, Phoenix, Arizona] and I think the people in the housing projects found out she had all them brothers and sisters in there with her, so they said somebody had to move out.  And she couldn't take care of us and her family, so she talked with my older sister as I was telling you, Alvie Bible [Alvie Campbell Bible].  Well, now she was teaching in California.  'Cause (unclear) when we were in Louisiana, my dad [John E. Campbell, Sr.] sent her to college with the thought that if he got her through college, that would be a road for the other kids to follow, see, which was true.  But, we went over to California to live with her and her husband and she was Alvie Bible at that time, married to a fellow named Steve Bible [Steve A. Bible], who worked for the post office and also on weekends cut hair, see.
Speaker 1: Now, what city in California did you go to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was Oakland, California.
Speaker 1: So, in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].
Speaker 2: Bay Area, right.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question.  These families now, there are siblings that have developed and done very good with themselves, right, or not--or have--at least have a great life, they're, they're trying to survive and making it.  And here comes all the brothers and sisters.  What was that reception from possibly their spouses or was that a normal occurrence back in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, and this was probably new to our family, but I think my sister was a professional, she was teaching, she was making good money.  Her husband was working with the post office and they--whatever agreement they made, but they agreed to have us come up there and there was four of us.  But, the oldest brother, Cloves [Cloves Campbell, Sr.], he did not stay.  He wanted to come back to Arizona 'cause he was in high school here and he was into sports and he wanted to come back and, you know, work with the kids here.  Well, we were still in grade school.  I really didn't want to go to California 'cause I wanted to be at the Bethune School [Mary McLeod Bethune School, Phoenix, Arizona] with my friends there, but once I got to California, I--that was the greatest thing in the world for me and didn't want to come back to Arizona (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what school were you in in California?
Speaker 2: In California, I was over--well, I lived over on 1419 East Chestnut Street near Oak- McClymonds High School [Oakland, California], which we used to live on--near Market Street until they moved it up to 26th Street, and that was where Bill Russell and all them guys went to high school with my brother.  But I went to what they call Herbert Hoover Junior High School [Oakland, California], which is on 39th Street and Market 'cause I went up there and stayed with a--with a cousin to help her with her kids, you know, 'cause she was working, her husband was working, and I'd be there with her kids in the evening and I'd go to grade school up there.  And my brother, Roland [Roland Campbell, Sr.], would stay with my sister and Charles [Charles Campbell] would stay with my sister there (background noise).
Story_ID: 532109
Speaker 1: So, what year are we in Oakland, California?  Now, what year would this have been?
Speaker 2: Okay, well we first got there in forty--'49 [1949], I guess, when my--after my mother [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] died and we went there to live with our sister called Alvie Bible [Alvie Campbell Bible].
Speaker 1: And you're going--
Speaker 2: And I went--
Speaker 1: You're going to Herbert Hoover School.
Speaker 2: Herbert Hoover Junior High School [Oakland, California].  They had seventh, eighth, and ninth grade there and you got the high seventh, low seventh, and all that type of stuff.  And when I left there, we--my brother was still down on Chestnut Street near McClymonds.  He went to McClymonds High School [Oakland, California].  I went to the one called Oakland Tech [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California], which was down the street.  Why I went to Oakland Tech, I never--don't really know.  But, I was real good in track in junior high school and high school and there was this one guy who went to McClymonds High School with my brother, Roland [Roland Campbell, Sr.], and he always tried to talk me into being--playing baseball and learning how to play baseball, which I never did 'cause I thought the guy was crazy.  I said why would I want to this baseball?  You may have heard of the guy.  His name was Frank.
Speaker 1: Frank?
Speaker 2: You never heard of him?
Speaker 1: Last name was Frank or Frank Morgan?
Speaker 2: His name was Frank.  He played in both leagues.  He was a--the all-star in both leagues in the--
Speaker 1: His last name was Frank?
Speaker 2: No, first name.
Speaker 1: And his last name was?
Speaker 2: What was Frank's last name?  It'll come to me in a minute.  But anyway, I didn't play baseball and I just stayed with the track team, and my idea was to stay in Oakland, finish high school at Oakland Tech, and go to Berkeley, California, University of Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], on a scholarship and run track over there.  And then my sister [Alvie Campbell Bible] and my husband--and her husband [Steve A. Bible] got to fighting, and they decided we had to come back to Arizona (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell me this.  Any, any other great stories about Oakland, California, anything that you can recall, humorous stories or stories that stand out in your mind about your time in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember my Roland--my brother, Roland, went to McClymonds High School, and he and a guy you may have heard of named Bill Russell, they were the number six man on the basketball team at McClymonds, and they both had one little t-shirt that they had to switch into 'cause they, they only had one extra shirt, see, and they was the last men on the team.  And Roland eventually left McClymonds and went into the service 'cause he was afraid he might've been drafted by the [U.S.] Army.  Bill Russell still hadn't developed completely at that point, but he began to start developing his senior year, and then he went over to a college [University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] in--across the bay.
Speaker 1: San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: San Francisco.  He went to a college over there.  And from there, he eventually went to Boston Celtics where he got eleven rings and all that stuff from.  Frank Martin [sic. Frank Robinson] I guess was the other guy, was the baseball player.
Story_ID: 532110
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit.  Now, you--there have been--there's been some transitions in your life at this point from moving around and your mom [Luvenia Fisher Campbell] has passed away, and she was a very important figure as you already told us in your life.  What were your thoughts and feelings about this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --as you're going in all this transition and your mother has passed away, and she was your rock so to speak--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And she was the one that, you know--it, it really probably hurt more so than with my father [John E. Campbell, Sr.].  But we had began to develop into early teen years then and we began to learn how to survive and how to make it.  And I had gotten a paper route up there in Oakland [California] and I was working a paper route while going to junior high school [Herbert Hoover Junior High School, Oakland, California].  I became real good in track and started, you know, breaking some records in junior high school.  So, I began to get a separate identity from my family because I was beginning to get a--an identity, quote, as a star among the kids in my community and all, and that began to, you know, take over some of the space where parents were or relatives were, and I stuck with that even when I came back to Arizona.  And the big problem was when I came back to Arizona, we had a brother who was here, Cloves Campbell [Cloves Campbell, Sr.], and he had told my sister [Alvie Campbell Bible] in California, "Well send those boys back to Arizona and they can stay with me 'cause I have a job."  And he was just turning eighteen.  He had a job at Memorial Hospital [Phoenix Memorial Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona].  Charles [Charles Campbell] and I came back here.  Roland [Roland Campbell, Sr.] went to the [U.S.] Air Force, so--because he didn't want to go to the [U.S.] Army and he was afraid he might get drafted.  We came back and started staying with Cloves, and I guess for a few months things was good.  And Cloves got drafted, so that left me and Charles, and I was sixteen, almost seventeen.  Charles was about fifteen.  So, we had to take care of ourselves.  Fortunately, I was--started working part-time at Memorial Hospital, which is over on 7th Avenue and Buckeye Road.  I was a night janitor there and I was going to Phoenix Tech High School [Phoenix Technical High School, Phoenix, Arizona] during the day.  Charles was going to Phoenix Union High School [Phoenix, Arizona].  And I got a--I had a part-time job and this guy who had been the night janitor, he either quit or died or something, and the lady who was in charge of the housekeeping department, she, I guess, fell in love with me so to speak, and she gave me the night janitor job, and that saved my butt (laughter).
Story_ID: 532111
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's back up a minute, Mr. Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], and go back to the point where your sister [Alvie Campbell Bible] and brother [sic. Campbell's brother-in-law, Steve A. Bible] evidently had some domestic dispute about you all being there.  Do you recall what, what the--what the bottom line was?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the problems with my brother-in-law, he, too, was a alcoholic.  And when he was off on the weekends, he would get--start getting drunk on Friday and he would stay drunk until Sunday afternoon when he knew he had to get sober to go back to work on Monday.  My sister was one of them sorority girls and she had all the sorority sisters and, and that status as a teacher, and he had a different status, so the conflict I think occurred between the two of them with her being up here at this level and he being down here, and they eventually split up.  Although, they eventually got back together and she eventually passed and they--she had adopted a cousin of ours from out in Louisiana who came to stay with them and then she eventually passed away.  And then the brother-in-law, somehow he quit drinking and he quit smoking.  In fact, I distinctly remember he quit smoking when cigarettes went to twenty-five cent a pack.  He said, "That is too much for me," and he (unclear).  So, he stayed there and took care of the cousin and her kids until those kids got grown.  Then, he eventually passed away.  He was eighty-one and she stayed there, the cousin stayed to take care of her kids until they got grown, and she eventually sold the house that they had moved to in Berkeley [California] out of Oakland [California] and then moved down to the--in fact, Los Angeles [California] area where she had a sister living.  In fact, she's still down there.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name is Carolyn [Carolyn Bible Bates].
Speaker 1: Carolyn.
Story_ID: 532112
Speaker 1: So at the dispute, your, your brother, Cloves [Cloves Campbell, Sr.], said, okay they can come back to Arizona and live with me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And stay with him.
Speaker 1: And you're in what grade at this point?
Speaker 2: I was a sophomore heading into the junior year, I think.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel about having to go back to Arizona?
Speaker 2: I hated it.  I had fell in love with California 'cause I had me a little part-time--a little part-time job--are we still talking?
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Had me a little part-time job, I was very good in track, and I was convinced that I was gonna get me a scholarship to the University of California at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and I was gonna be going there and getting me a degree out of college, Berkeley, and become a super giant in California.
Speaker 1: So, you had it laid out pretty much already, your plan of action for the next few years.
Speaker 2: Even though I was a sophomore in high school.
Speaker 1: Were there anybody--was anybody in the school a teacher, anybody that really kind of set you down and helped you organize your life?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, other than my older sister [Alvie Campbell Bible].  She always insisted that we stay in school because my daddy [John E. Campbell, Sr.] had, you know, employed that--implanted that in her mind, and she said everybody had to go to school, and there was no ands, ifs or buts about it, you know.
Speaker 1: Was dropping out an easy option back in those days?
Speaker 2: Dropping out of school?  Not in our family (laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean in general in the community.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go--and going to work.
Speaker 2: There were--yeah, a lot of--a lot of kids dropped out and went into different things.  Some went to the [U.S.] military, some went to work, but it probably wasn't as prominent as it is now 'cause there wasn't as many options for them, see.  Nowadays, they can drop out--drop out and become drug dealers.  In those days, that was very limited.
Speaker 1: So, in those days, dropping out was for a reason and usually a, a job of some sort.
Speaker 2: Usually for a job or going into the military 'cause the kids very want that--usually, it was kids who weren't that good in school.
Speaker 1: So, you moved back to Cal- to Arizona, pardon me, and you were with Cloves.  You told us that he started working or--and he got drafted (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Memorial Hospital [Phoenix Memorial Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona], yes, and then he got drafted.  And then that's when I got the full-time job at Memorial Hospital.
Speaker 1: And what year would this be for you in high school?
Speaker 2: That would've been my junior year and that would've been in 19--well, started in 1953, '54 [1954], I guess.  And I was working at night at Memorial Hospital, going to Phoenix Tech High School [Phoenix Technical High School, Phoenix, Arizona], and at the same time, I was playing football, football team, and during track season, I was on track team.  But, I'm--I have to say, because of the job, I was not able to do as well in the sports as I probably would have done, although I did make the senior all-star team in football and I played in the all-star game in Flagstaff [Arizona] in the summer of '54 [1954].
Story_ID: 532113
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your senior year.  This is your last year of high school coming up.  What happened that year?
Speaker 2: Last year of high school?  That was when I was with the--still on the--now, we're in--let's see, I said we came back here in '52 [1952].  That was '54 [1954], that was my senior year of high school, and I was going--working at Memorial Hospital [Phoenix Memorial Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona], going to Phoenix Tech High School [Phoenix Technical High School, Phoenix, Arizona], and playing on the football team, playing on track, and eventually, finishing there.  And I didn't get a scholarship, which was very disappointing 'cause I thought sure I was gonna get a scholarship to the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona] 'cause I was still, you know, doing pretty good in track.  But I pulled a muscle in my senior year and I thought I'd still recuperate.  And I went down to the--and I went to the all-star game in August of '54 [1954] and I was the superstar in the all-star game out of all the high school guys, and they had my pictures in all the papers and all that stuff, so I just knew I had me a scholarship to the University of Arizona.  And I got down to University of Arizona and the coaches had left and--that I had been communicating with or my coaches had been communicating with and I had nobody to work with down there, so I said, oh, what the hell am I gonna do now (laughter)?  Finally came back up here and I said, well, I'll go to Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] for a year or so and then see what I can do from there.
Speaker 1: And that would've been what year?
Speaker 2: That would've been the fall of '54 [1954], September of '54 [1954] 'cause I just graduated from high school in June of '54 [1954].  And I was on the football team there, but at Phoenix College, this--all these guys come from all these different high schools, see, and by then, all the schools are integrated, too, 'cause in '53 [1953], they had integrated the schools in Arizona.
Speaker 1: Let's back up to that point.  So, you're--when the--when, when Arizona desegregates and--by law and the next year in '54 [1954] Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], pretty much you were finishing up your career, is that correct, in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In high school.  And see we integrated the schools in Arizona one year before Brown versus Education.  Kazel Daniels [sic. Hayzel B. Daniels] who was the only black attorney in Arizona interestingly had finished the University of Arizona, had been a football player at the University of Arizona, and another Jewish attorney, they both went in to the Arizona Supreme Court and fought the case and the--I think Judge Lorna Lockwood was on the court and she then got the courts to desegregate the schools here in Arizona.  And of course, that meant all the movie theaters and the restaurants and all the other things gradually desegregated as well.
Story_ID: 532114
Speaker 1: So, you stayed at Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] for how long?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until I graduated from there.
Speaker 1: And what was your major?
Speaker 2: Well, in junior college, you don't major, you just take your basics, your English, math, science, and all those things.  But my thoughts in Phoenix College was to go to--then go to ASU [Arizona State College; Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] into political science, history, liberal art, and then go to the University of Arizona school of law [University of Arizona College of Law; James E. Rogers College of Law, Tucson, Arizona].  So I went--after I left Phoenix College, I went to Arizona State University for two years, got a degree in political science with a minor in speech and Spanish, went out and worked a year full-time while I was still at ASU trying to get an engineering degree.  Then, I discovered that I was terrible in chemistry and math and I forgot about the engineering degree and I applied for the University of Arizona school of law.
Speaker 1: Let's back up a moment.  After you get your or during the time that--time or maybe right after you, you get your associate's degree, your--what do you do right after that?
Speaker 2: After that?  I kept on working during the summer.
Speaker 1: As a--in what area did you work in?
Speaker 2: At the hospital [Phoenix Memorial Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona] as a janitor and trying to save money to go to ASU.
Speaker 1: And did you have any other aspirations in business, any other business thing that you did at that time period?
Speaker 2: Not at that point, no, not until I finished ASU.  I might mention in '59 [1959], this fellow I mentioned to you named Travis Williams, another fellow, and I went to his office because he was trying to find real estate salesmen, so even though I was going to ASU with talking about engineering and all that and still working at the hospital at night--or rather I switched from the hospital to a janitor at an elementary school.  We went to his office and start studying real estate and he would teach us out of the real estate book.  We both finished that, drove down to Tucson [Arizona] because the next real estate test was being given in Tucson rather than Phoenix [Arizona].  We went down there, I passed the test, Lester Knox did not.  So, Lester then eventually went to barber school where he became a barber, opened his own barber school and college, and bought up all the real estate and became a multimillionaire (laughter), which he is today.  But, then I went to--was working in real estate with Travis Williams and started helping him sell these houses out here.  But then I also went down to U of A [University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona].  By the way, this was in--that was in '59 [1959].
Story_ID: 532115
Speaker 1: Then, the summer of '60 [1960], I got married here in this church [Southminster Presbyterian Church, Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 2: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Doris Campbell.
Speaker 2: What was her maiden name?
Speaker 1: Doris Elizabeth Hosley [ph.] from Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: How did you meet her?
Speaker 1: Well, there's a guy here named Bill Dickey [William Dickey, Jr.] who worked with this fellow named Lincoln Ragsdale [Lincoln Ragsdale, Sr.] with the mortuary.  Bill Dickey was in a real estate insurance--well, in fact, Bill Dickey is still alive and he has this national golf program for youth, that you might want to talk with him before you leave here.  But, he married this girl [Alice Dickey] from Barber-Scotia College [Concord, North Carolina] who had gone to my school--my wife went to Barber-Scotia with her.  'Cause this was an all female black college [HBCU] ran by Presbyterians.
Story_ID: 532116
Speaker 1: So, you meet your wife and she's from Charlotte [North Carolina].  You--tell us the story again.  You were getting into the story of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  I met my wife here in Phoenix [Arizona] through a fellow named Bill Dickey [William Dickey, Jr.] who married her classmate [Alice Dickey] who went to Barber-Scotia College [Concord, North Carolina] with her.  So, Bill Dickey was a fraternity brother of mine, so naturally his wife only wanted to bring to Doris [Doris Campbell] as she had gone to Chicago [Illinois] to teach after she left Barber-Scotia.  Then, she came out here, got a job in the Roosevelt Elementary School District.  They introduced me to her.  She started going to this church [Southminster Presbyterian Church, Phoenix, Arizona] 'cause she's Presbyterian, so I started, you know, gradually dating her.  Then, I started gradually going to this church and before I know it, I was getting married in this church (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960], summer of '60 [1960].
Story_ID: 532117
Speaker 1: And what else are you doing during 1960?
Speaker 2: Let's see, in '60 [1960], what did we do?  Okay, I was still messing around with real estate with Williams [Travis Williams] and Jones [J.S. Jones] and then I think in '60 [1960], '61 [1961], I was accepted in the law school [University of Arizona College of Law; James E. Rogers College of Law] in Tucson [Arizona].  So, I went down there in '61 [1961] and stayed for, what, a year.
Speaker 1: How was that in law school?
Speaker 2: It was--I thought it was interesting.  I loved it.  But, my biggest weakness was all of their exams were essay and I was terrible at essay exams.  And had I taken courses in writing essays, I probably would've passed, but I didn't.  Of course, I thought I knew better than anything in the whole school, was contract law was the one I flunked and I was never able to redo it and get back in there.  So rather than keep trying, I gave up on that.
Story_ID: 532118
Speaker 1: Came back here, was in real estate and I went to--I went--started going full-time with the National Guard.  And 'cause I had--well, I got in the guard in the summer of '58 [1958], I hadn't mentioned that.  The reason being was when I graduated from ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] in '58 [1958], they sent me the notice, the [U.S.] Army, that now that you have finished college, your exemption no longer (laughter) in existence.  And there's another guy named Jimmie Kerr I was taking business courses and, of course, he was from the City of Casa Grande [Arizona] and he was an Anglo guy.  In fact, he eventually became the mayor of Casa Grande.  But, we decided to go down to the National Guard and join, so March the 7th, 1958, just before we got our degrees.
Speaker 2: So, so, so you had been deferred up to that point.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, been deferred up 'til then.  We went out there.  Now, the National Guard had never had an African American in the--in the National Guard, but Jimmie and I went out there together and we both got our degrees.  So, they took both of us in at the same time.  So, I became the first African American in the Air National Guard.  And during that summer of '58 [1958], we went to Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio [Texas] for I guess three or four months, whatever it was, to do basic training.  Then, we came back here and we just went to the guard one weekend a month and we'd go to basic training during the summer to different places, wherever.  Sometime we go to Utah, sometime we go to Flagstaff [Arizona], sometimes we go to Montana, wherever they decided we had to go for those two weeks, see.  But that kept us out of the Army.  And I stayed in the guard until the summer of '74 [1974] because then, my six year term was up.  And I got out of the guard then and I was a--I guess I was a serge- a sergeant, you know, when I got out.
Speaker 2: Let's back up a bit.  So, in '60 [1960], you're in law school [University of Arizona College of Law; James E. Rogers College of Law, Tucson, Arizona], you get married [to Doris Campbell], and I guess in '61 [1961], you said you decided to do something different.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, what did you do in '61 [1961], between '61 [1961] and '62 [1962]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] and '62 [1962], I was in real estate with Travis Williams, the guy I mentioned to you 'cause I was still going to school part-time, but I was selling real estate with Travis Williams at that time, and that's how I learned and got into the real estate business.
Story_ID: 532119
Speaker 1: Did you go abroad with the guard [Air National Guard] or do anything at that point?  Did you have to--
Speaker 2: Not until '62 [1962], when they activated the unit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Okay, in 1962, they activated the guard unit.  This was with the Berlin [Germany] build up and, you know, you had two separate Berlins at that time.  So, they sent our Air Guard unit, which was a one--we had one-sixteens [sic. General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon] at that time.  Well, we were 135 [Boeing KC-135 Stratotanker] unit, and we went over to Ramstein, Germany [to Ramstein Air Base], and they kept us there for three or four months and they had the guys flying and things like that.  And there was nothing for us to do, so they sent our--some of us to France, Dreux Air Base [Dreux-Louvilliers Air Base] in France where I was assigned to the Alabama Air National Guard.  And that was the first time the Alabama Air National Guard had ever had an African American in their unit.
Speaker 1: How was that experience?
Speaker 2: That was interesting.  It was a learning experience for me and it was a learning experience for them because they had never had any contact with an African American on an equal level, and it's particularly the ones who were also there from Tennessee along with the unit.  And there were some who would try to make, you know, certain mark--remarks and things like that.
Speaker 1: Like what, for instance?
Speaker 2: Well, like one guy, he called me a nigger.  I just called him a nigger, you know.  And he, he couldn't deal with that, see.  But I said, "Well, hell if you--if I'm a nigger, you're a nigger," now, I kept on walking.  And then the other guys from Alabama, they looked at me and they started laughing.  They said, "I never heard that," (laughter).  I said, "Well, we all learn."  But, I was put in the finance office with a captain, and I can't recall his name.  But he took a strong liking to me for some reason and he made sure that everybody in that unit accepted me as an equal person, and we got to, you know, relating and talking about each other.  We began to share certain experiences and the fact that they had never had, you know, contact with African American.  Like one guy from Tennessee, he said, you know, he said, if I--you was talking about you'll take me to your house in Arizona, he said, "I couldn't take you to my house in Tennessee because they would throw me out of my house," (laughter).  But, so you learn those type of things and share those type of experiences.
Story_ID: 532120
Speaker 1: Was there any active mention maybe in the papers or anything about you being the first African American in the Air National Guard?  Was there any ceremonious events around that?
Speaker 2: Not at that time.  It didn't occur until it was later years after I had gotten out of guard in '74 [1974].  It was '73 [1973], I guess the guy I mentioned, Lincoln Ragsdale [Lincoln Ragsdale, Sr.], who had been with the, you know, the [U.S.] Air Force with the blacks, he jumped on the Air Guard out here because they didn't have any African Americans then.  That's when they pointed out that I had been in the Air Guard.  And then one of the guys who was a Spanish fellow, he was in charge of personnel.  He and I were doing consultant work together.  He had a consultant firm.  He said, "Look man," he said, "we got a problem out at the guard."  He said, "You know, they don't have any blacks in the guard anymore.  Why don't you come on back into the guard with this?"  I said, "What the heck I'm gonna do back in the Air National Guard?"  He said, "Well, you may be able to make--get into an officer's rank."  So, he took me out there one day.  We went out on a Saturday, talked to one of the colonels there.  There was a guy named Colonel Angulo [ph.], Spanish guy, and he took me in to see another colonel.  And I talked with him and the guy was pretty impressive 'cause he's also a full-time principal at one of the high schools.  So, he sold me on the idea of coming back in and they signed me up right then.  He said, "Now what we're gonna do, we're gonna bring you in as a top sergeant."  He said, "When the commissions come back from Washington [D.C.], because you have a degree, you will be coming in as a lieutenant colonel--I mean, as a lieutenant."  I said, okay, that sounds fine.  And I didn't have to go back to basic training.  I was going back on the weekends.  I said, heck, I was gonna take this money I got through the guard and buy me some more real estate (laughter), which I did.  But, I got in there and then after about two or three months, the commission came through and I was appointed a captain.  So, I became back in as a captain and I was the first black in there initially, I was the first black officer, and I was the first black captain in there.
Speaker 1: A series of first. So, back--backing up a little bit, were there any other blacks in the other branches of the National Guard, i.e., the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: In the Army, yes.  For whatever reason--
Speaker 1: Naval reserves [U.S. Navy Reserve].
Speaker 2: --in the--I don't know about the [U.S.] Navy, but in the Army Guard [Army National Guard], there were a number of guys.  In fact, there's a guy named Charles Lucky [ph.].  He's still here.  He has a whole bunch of real estate.  But he was in the Army Guard--I mean in the Air Guard, but he didn't stay in there.
Speaker 1: Why do you think the Air Guard, guard was so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think--
Speaker 1: --slow?
Speaker 2: --the Air Guard considered itself elitist because most of the people in there had degrees and all that type of stuff.  And the Army Guard, they had had blacks in the regular army long before they got into the Air Force, so it was easier probably for them.
Story_ID: 532121
Speaker 1: So, you go to Europe.  Tell us about your European experience.
Speaker 2: Well, that was when I was stationed with the Alabama Air National Guard, Tennessee Air Guard [Tennessee Air National Guard].  And we would go into Paris [France] every weekend and it gave us an opportunity to go to see the whole city, to see the Eiffel Tower [Paris, France], the Louvre Museum [Musee du Louvre, Paris, France], all of the things in Paris and many of the things that we had seen in Germany.  Then, it also gave the guys from Alabama a chance to see all of these people from Africa there in France with French people with French women and everything, you know, so they saw a whole different environment than they had saw in Alabama.  And I saw a whole different environment that I had seen in Arizona.  'Cause I went up to one guy, a black guy there, I said, oh, here's a black guy.  I can go talk to him.  So, I went up there and started talking to that guy and, hell, all he started speaking was French.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And it dawned on me that here was these black guys in France but they were speaking French and they didn't know anything.  And there was only one guy that I could talk to who could speak Spanish, so I could talk Spanish with him and learn a little bit.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're experiencing almost dual cultures, two different cultures, not just the European culture, you're also experiencing this Alabama culture--
Speaker 2: The Alabama culture (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and Tennessee culture.
Speaker 2: Tennessee culture and also the French culture.
Speaker 1: And you're doing it in a foreign land.
Speaker 2: In a foreign language and foreign country.  And they were doing the same thing because they began to see that people from different races, different roots could react and work together, too, so it--so, so it--so it changes their values and their beliefs.
Speaker 1: What was the reaction of those Alabamans that--when they saw this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think then, initially, there were some of them that were opposed to it, but as they begin to see more and more of it, they begin to accept it as reality.  Some of them never accepted it and that--and probably to this day still don't.
Speaker 1: Do you think that the, the, the black French gave your--gave you a more, more camaraderie with the Alabamans?  Did, did they feel closer to you, all being American--Americans?  Did they change their relationship or the way they treated you at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think they just saw us as Americans and they saw themselves as French, you know, people from Africa who had the French culture, all that stuff.  But, I don't think they saw it 'cause we didn't really interact on a constant basis, we just--sometimes on the weekend when we'd go there and see some of them.
Speaker 1: So did--so did the Alabama unit change their opinion of you after this experience?  Did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think some of them did and some of them never changed, you know.  But, some people had been programmed from, you know, well from the time they were babies that the races had to be separate and, you know, there was no equality and that was stuck in their minds all their lives.  And there were other guys, they changed quite a--quite--very quickly.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Europe?
Speaker 2: I was there about six or nine months, I guess, something like that.  Then we--they integrated or they brought the East [German Democratic Republic] and West Germany [Federal Republic of Germany] back together.  They didn't need us over there 'cause they weren't gonna be any fighting, so they started bringing all the troops back home.
Speaker 1: So, this is '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: About the latter end of '62 [1962], somewhere like that.  And we had to come back here.  We thought we were gonna be off active duty.  We had to spend the rest of the time out at Luke Air Force Base [Arizona].  So every day, we'd go out to Luke Air Force Base, which in a sense, it was a positive because each day I went out there, that added to my military retirement, see.
Story_ID: 532122
Speaker 1: So you get back and you, you go into the guard [Air National Guard].  Are you doing anything else during that time period?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  That was '62 [1962] and then after they let us off of active duty, I went back to real estate for a while.  And then, they started the War on Poverty in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], there were people with the City of Phoenix [Arizona], Mayor Milt Graham [Milton H. Graham], and before they had the War on Poverty with the community council.  And they were looking for people for--and particularly from the inner cities who had some experience in health, welfare, and housing, and so forth.  So, this guy got to talking.  I was one of their volunteer committee on their commission, and he talked me into taking a job full-time with them, and they was paying me big bucks [dollars], man, paying me $10,000 a year.
Speaker 1: And what was--what was the, the agency?  What were you--was the official title (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was--well, this was the United Way [United Way Worldwide] community council, which they eventually took the War on Poverty and transferred it to the City of Phoenix, so I became a City of Phoenix employee.  And I remember interesting, there was a principal over here at the elementary school and he was on the commission and found out that they had hired me for $10,000 dollars, and he says, "That was the most ridiculous thing in paying, paying those people $10,000 a year."  My wife [Doris Campbell], I think she was--as a teacher, she was only like making four or five thousand dollars a year, so it was a big difference, you know, at that time.
Speaker 1: So, so this was a--more like a social agency, a social service agency and there were people upset because you were making $10,000 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Making that kind of money and--which was big money at that time.  But, I stayed with the City of Phoenix on the War on Poverty until I guess '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  Then, there was a guy named Junius Bowman who's still here and he's retired from the Urban League [Greater Phoenix Urban League, Phoenix, Arizona].  And he conned me--he got a contract with the City of Phoenix to run a manpower training program, so he conned me into coming to work for the Urban League, and I think he paid me twelve, thirteen thousand dollars a year, so I went to work for the Urban League.  And I was with them for about, I don't know two or three years.  And there was a guy named--oh, what's his name?  In fact, he's with the governor's office.  He's a top administrator assistant with the governor and--Bill Bell [William Bell].  He's there with them making $125,000 a year now.  He--the people at ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] tried to talk him into coming over there to run a community services program and he said he couldn't leave because he was tied in with the utility company at the time.  And he said, "But you know Don Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell] is over at the Urban League, he might be interested in it," which they contacted me and I went over there and talked with one of the vice presidents, and I think they started me off at, I don't know, fifteen, twenty thousand dollars a year, so I went to work with the university.
Story_ID: 532123
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's back up a moment, just one second.  Did you--you mentioned the War on Poverty, that department.  What were those experiences like?  What was the War on Poverty and how was it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Basically--
Speaker 2: --how was it initiated?
Speaker 1: This was started in the, was it the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, and through [U.S.] Congress, you know, they passed the War on Poverty laws because at that time there had been a lot of civil rights conflicts and movements and so forth, and there was a lot of poverty, which still is.  And the thought was that the federal government needed to get involved with trying to solve poverty throughout the country and it would impact a lot of the minorities more so than other people, but it was an opportunity to change the American society, you know, and give minorities an opportunity.
Speaker 2: What experiences did you--did you get out of doing that--doing that job?  Did you really start to see a major despair?
Speaker 1: One of the biggest things we put emphasis on was education, getting more people to stay in education, to go into the school systems to get those degrees.  The other was working with low income housing, trying to improve the houses for poor families and even started a home improvement repair program.  The other was looking at the welfare situation and trying to get people either on welfare who needed it or people who were on welfare into training programs and education, which would eventually get them out of the welfare system.  So--
Speaker 2: So, how was the success rate on that?  How did that work out?
Speaker 1: I would say it was fair up to a point.  But, the thing about it, the more people you got out, the more babies and people you started having, more people started coming into the country.  Like now, you got, what, 10, 12 million illegal people who probably most of them are still in poverty, so you--we still have that problem today.
Story_ID: 532124
Speaker 1: So, you stayed there a couple years and then you moved to the Arizona state employment office.
Speaker 2: No, I moved to Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --after I got out of there.  And then I spent most of my time with the university from the, I guess, the late '70s [1970s] until 1990 when I left the university.
Speaker 1: And you started working there in the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it was, sixty--was it six--no, late '60s [1960s], yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your actual title when you went in?  What, what did--what did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I first went in, I was the director of the center for community services.  The--there was still the concern for the War on Poverty and the universities wanted to get involved with the communities in solving problems and maybe bringing those poor people, disadvantaged people into the university systems and taking some of the services from the university into the communities and so forth, and that's how they started the community services center.  And one of the things was getting some faculty, some staff to go out and work in community programs and many of the students to do volunteer work in many of the community service programs.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you feel at this time?  Because you found your niche, so to speak in this social area.  Did you find that this was an area that you really liked?
Speaker 2: Well, I was learning to like it because in the back of my mind was still the thought of eventually going back into law, getting back to law school 'til eventually I got so involved with the social services and still doing the part-time real estate that I just, you know, forgot about the real--the--going back to law school and so forth.
Story_ID: 532125
Speaker 1: So, it's the '70s [1970s] and you're working--you're, you're working at Arizona State (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].  And then after I--I think in 19--well, too, I started having kids in the '63 [1963] and '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: How many children did you have?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Was Dar- Darren Campbell, Darren Gerard, he was the oldest, and Derek Jerome [Derek Campbell], he was the youngest.  Derek who was born with brain damage and epilepsy, so he had limited mental facilities.  He passed away--chronologically, he was fourteen, mentally he was about five or six when he died.  Darren got caught up in the drug world when he was in high school, his last years in high school, although he did go onto college, but he eventually got killed in 1996 when he turned thirty-three on Monday, June the 17th, and he got stabbed the death the next day, Tuesday, June the 18th.
Speaker 1: So now, this is a very solemn point for you, I'm sure, but could you just tell us a bit about that and how you feel?  Here you are, an educator or working in administration and social services--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --trying to help people.  Tell us about this, how this has affected your own life if you don't mind (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the main thing is when we had so many problems with trying to look after Derek and we tried to--Darren was always--kids were making fun of him 'cause his brother was retarded and we tried to tell him that he had no responsibility for that, and that he had to keep on, you know, with his own life.  But he eventually went on and finished Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] in electronics, went to ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] in engineering, but he just kept getting worse into drugs and all.  And it was kind of hurtful because here we were both in education, wife [Doris Campbell] teacher, I'm at the university, and we're trying to keep him on the straight and narrow because we'd had so many problems with the other kid and we hoped we would get him to, you know, at least achieve and become successful, which it was not to be because the--he eventually passed away.
Story_ID: 532126
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mr. Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], there's a myth sometimes that we hear that the drug--the drug scene affects people of certain income levels only--that this can only affect people who are uneducated.  Sometimes there's a belief in that.  But, now you--here we are, you are a middle class family and this affects you.  Do you have any thoughts about that and, and how the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I would say that that's not true because I know a lot of middle class, upper class families who had children who were affected by drugs and their kids wound up doing nothing or they wound up getting killed from the drugs.  In fact, this lady running this youth program, her family sent her to the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona].  She was going there to get degrees and all, she got caught up at the University of Arizona in drugs.  The fellow who was the minister of this church, retired, his daughter was sent to the University of Arizona.  This was an upper class family and this girl was very intelligent.  She got caught up in drugs down at the University of Arizona.  And just to the opposite side, she had a brother who went to Arizona--to NAU [Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona], but he also got a Ph.D. in biology from the University of Arizona, he never drank or smoked.
Speaker 1: So, so you don't think there's any, any particular socioeconomic position you can be in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: It just depends on the person.
Speaker 2: The ones in the lower socioeconomic ladders, they probably get caught more often 'cause the affluent ones can send their children to retreats and hide them in different places where they--people won't detect that they have drugs.
Speaker 1: So, do you think that your experiences now in social service or in those years, you, you had a more--a closer relationship because of your own family?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have a nephew who is forty-one years old and he screwed up his life in drugs.  And, I mean, he was a top athlete, had several scholarships and everything, and he got caught up in the drugs and he's still out there doing the same thing.
Story_ID: 532127
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Phoenix Board of Adjustments [sic.].  What, what, what was that?
Speaker 2: Phoenix Board of Adjustments?
Speaker 1: You served on the board from, from '70 [1970] to '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm trying--Board of Adjustments or for the airport [Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, Phoenix, Arizona]?
Speaker 1: It's probably the airport I would imagine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the airport board [Phoenix Aviation Advisory Board] for three years and I think they probably made a mistake on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, what happened, there is a fellow here named Cody Williams who is the director of the Black Chamber of Commerce [Greater Phoenix Black Chamber of Commerce].  He had their--he was on the city council at the time and he used to go to this church [Southminster Presbyterian Church, Phoenix, Arizona].  His dad still does and so does his mother.  He was given the, I guess the authority to find someone minority, to put on the airport's board of directors.  And this was a young girl, he was trying to get her to get on there, which I'd known her since she was young.  She decided she didn't want to be on it.  So, I just happened to talk with him one day and he asked me, "Would you serve on there?"  I said, "Well, I don't know."  I'm al- still on the community college board, but I agreed to go on the airport board of directors.  And it was, it was an experience because you learn how airport boards are operated, how airports function.  You get to participate in the national conferences and things like that and overall help to try to improve, hopefully improve this operation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How are you being received on these boards 'cause here you are coming into something that's been predominantly white most of the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well most of the times, the boards I went on, I was more--higher educated than the people who were on there so, you know, they had to deal with that (laughter).  But, that's part of the game.
Story_ID: 532128
Speaker 1: So after that, between '72 [1972] and '80 [1980], it's been told that you also served on the Roosevelt Elementary school board [Roosevelt Elementary School District].  How did you first get on that board?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  When I got on the Roosevelt board, the people on the Roosevelt board was complaining that they did not have a special education facility for handicapped kids, and I mentioned I had a handicapped kid [Derek Campbell].  My wife [Doris Campbell] was still teaching in the district.  Someone, I can't recall who, had talked to me about being interested in serving on this board.  And Reverend Brooks [George Benjamin Brooks, Sr.] who had been here, I think he was the one that talked to me 'cause he was no longer on the board at that time, and anyway I saw it as an opportunity to help get special education facilities 'cause it might also help my son.  So, I ran for the office and I ran in '72 [1972] and I won in an election, five member board.  Interestingly, in '74 [1974], the federal government appropriated money for school districts around the country to have special education facilities.  So, we put a facility together for kids who were handicapped, special education.  And interestingly, once we got it completed, it still wasn't sufficient type for my kid.  He couldn't function in that 'cause he was too far gone, but it was beneficial for the other kids.  So, I was elected to a four year term.  And then after that term was off, they talked me into running again for another four year term.  Plus, I got to travel to--around the country to other school districts, to national boards to see what was taking place in the school systems around the country.
Speaker 1: So, you served two terms on the school board?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And, let's see, my son--I'm trying to think, that son, I think he passed away in the summer of '80 [1980] in the hospital and that was the same year I got my doctorate from ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and I decided not to run again, so I then kept working for ASU.
Speaker 1: So, at this time, all this time while at school--while you're having the midst of these, these different things in your life that are occurring personally, you're still achieving education.
Story_ID: 532129
Speaker 1: So, how many terms were you on the school board?
Speaker 2: On the Roosevelt school board [Roosevelt Elementary School District]?  Two terms.
Speaker 1: Two (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-two [1972] 'til 1980.
Speaker 1: And when, when you were running, how was your campaigns when you ran for these?  Were they--were they strenuous?
Speaker 2: I really--you know, interesting, I was still with the ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and I had a lot of volunteer students in my community service program, so a lot of those students actually joined my campaign and came out on the weekends and helped pass out materials for me, and they never been in this community before and never been in the elementary system, but they came out and helped me put up materials.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your opposition during your--during your first and second campaign?  Who were some of the people running against you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not so sure I had any opposition (laughter).  The big problem is--was school boards were trying to get people to run for them and a lot of people don't want to do it because, one, they don't pay anything and, two, they got to spend a lot of time, make a lot of decisions, and a lot of people don't wanna make those kind of decisions.
Story_ID: 532130
Speaker 1: Now, during this time period when you were on the school board [of the Roosevelt Elementary School District], there were some tragedies in your family, you were also in school getting your Ph.D., and where, where did you get your master's [degree] from to begin with?
Speaker 2: ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], same place (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) ASU.  So your--so your tenure had been pretty much all of your--all of your advancement had been at ASU.
Speaker 2: At ASU, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, your, your bachelor's [degree], your master's, and your Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, ASU.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you--your son passes, you get your--so that--so that's a bittersweet year.  You get your Ph.D.  So, from '74 [1974] to '84 [1984], it says that you worked for the Arizona National Guards [Arizona Air National Guard].  Was, was that a paid position or was that just part of your--
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] 'til eighty--I don't know whether it was '84 [1984], '74 [1974] to '80 [1980], somewhere along in there, I was running a program for the Air National Guard and called a affirmative action officer for the Air National Guard.
Speaker 1: And what, what were the duties there?  What did you actually do in that position?
Speaker 2: Basically trying to help integrate the system more than it was, get more minorities involved with it, making sure people were getting fair treatment within the system and so forth.
Speaker 1: And how was your success with that?
Speaker 2: Moderate because we didn't get that many minorities, Hispan- particularly blacks.  Hispanics, we were successful, but the blacks we didn't get that many.  As time went by, more and more blacks began to get involved with it like I mentioned, a guy named Stanley Kyle, he had retired as--he'd come out of the [U.S.] Air Force as a captain and he was working for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], so they got him to join the Air Guard.  He came in as a captain and he eventually left the guard as a lieutenant colonel, too.  Colonel Greene [ph.] who came in from the regular air force and he became a full colonel.  He's still out there flying airplanes, and eventually got a young lady from Tucson [Arizona].  She's a pilot.  And we got Leon Ray, he came in as a sergeant out of the regular air force, eventually retired from the Air Guard as a full colonel.  Now, he's a full-time real estate person even though he's retired from the Air Guard.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you're--so you're, you're working in that division, helping to diversify the Air National Guard.
Story_ID: 532131
Speaker 1: But at the same time, you're also still at Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].  And what was your position during that time period when you were still there?
Speaker 2: Basically, with Arizona State University, I think I eventually get--well, in the mid-'80s [1980s], we start trying to develop a campus in the western part of the county over on 4701 West Thunderbird [Glendale, Arizona].  Five hundred acres of land had been given to ASU.  So, but prior to that, we had started the campus and metro center with a, a big shopping center and we had four classrooms, a office, and a computer room in their basement, and that's how that campus got started.  Then, when we got the five hundred acres, we put a huge library facility there and gradually put in other classrooms and things.  Now, they have a complete full campus out there on the west side with about eight or ten thousand students out there.
Speaker 1: Now, you were the director of community services at that point--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you were influential in getting some of the course and curriculum work started.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, basically I actually taught some courses when I was out there after I'd got the doctorate.  I taught basically some of the introduction to management courses and talked with other people in getting curriculum brought out there to that campus because that's what the people in that community wanted, and got some of them to go to the Glendale Community College [Glendale, Arizona] for a while and put courses out there as well.
Speaker 1: Now, in doing some research, I found there was some nontraditional courses like gold panning.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Gold panning was a course which was on--we did from the Tempe [Arizona] campus.  That was a part of the community services program.  What we found out was that in addition to helping people in the inner city with education, jobs training, employment, affirmative action, there were older citizens who wanted to do something else, and they would be willing to take courses, but they didn't want any credit courses.  And we found out that they had been going out gold panning out on the riverbeds, all that stuff.  So, we then got be--got involved.  Some people called us from Scott- from Sun City [Arizona], and said, "Well, can't you start some gold panning course?"  And I laughed like the dickens 'cause I was like, what the heck are we gonna do gold panning?  And they talked me into it.  And so I went out there, set up a gold panning course, found a guy who was in the geology program, graduate student at ASU to go teach the gold panning class on the Rio Salado river [Salt River].  We went out there on Saturday, there must have been forty or fifty adults from Sun City out there wanting to take that course (laughter), and from then on, it was set.  I mean, darn near every other week, we'd have--even when that student graduated, we found another guy who was teaching gold, gold panning courses.
Speaker 1: How was that received at the university?  How did they take it at first?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: They--it was questionable, you know.  But because of the fact that the senior citizens had asked for it and there was this guy who had been a national gold panning champion willing to teach it, it was questionable but because those people had been requesting it, they said, well, let's give it a try, you know.
Speaker 1: Did the media get a hold to it or anything?
Speaker 2: Eventually, the media found out and they start--asked us about it and they wanted to know, could they come out there?  So they said, well, yeah.  They came out there and they saw all these senior citizens out there, you know, who were retired people, paying taxes and doing everything else, but they wanted to go out there and do gold panning.  And come to find out, the guy who was a national champion gold panner, he had been teaching these courses all over the country, man, for years, and people go out there and find some gold panning.
Story_ID: 532132
Speaker 1: So, that was kind, kind of revolutionary for the school [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], but it worked out for you.  So, now while you're doing your--while you're doing your--what we'll call your day job, you're still very much involved through the '80s [1980s] and into the '80s [1980s] with the Air National Guard.  And did you further your education in the Air National Guard or take any other courses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would have some courses on the base, but I also went to Birming- Mobile, Alabama [sic.], to the Air War College [Montgomery, Alabama].  I had to go to that.  Plus, I had gone prior to that to Florida.  I'm trying to think what's--where it was.  It was a base there in Florida to an Air For- affirmative action school.  And I think I went there for six, seven, eight weeks.  I think that was in the '70s [1970s] 'cause about the same time that Elvis Presley passed away.
Speaker 1: I think my research says you were there for sixteen weeks and, and it's about '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay, that was when Elvis Presley passed away I think, so I was there at the affirmative action school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Alabama?
Speaker 2: No, that was in Florida.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that 'cause here you are now, you have a lot of work to do in your regular job, and, and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --are you doing now?
Speaker 2: A lot of times you could take leave of absence from your job as long as you was tied in something like the [U.S.] military, and I would take leave of absence plus combine it with my milit- with my vacation and meet the requirements of the university that they would want you to have.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you took various (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Plus the guy in the personnel office had been a retired [U.S.] Air Force colonel, so it made it a little easier (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're in Florida.  Were there any special, special things you learned at that school?
Speaker 2: At the affirmative action office?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, or any things you ran into and encountered.
Speaker 2: Nothing that I can recall specifically other than we were learning how to, you know, work with problems that people have in affirmative action and learn what some of the laws were at that time or where to find information on the laws or who to go to see in the outside community that could help us with affirmative action.
Speaker 1: If you can recall since that was a new thing, what were some of the problems people were having with it?  Was it the acceptance of it?  Was it how to implement it?  What was the--what were some of the problems they were having?
Speaker 2: I think basically, the acceptance of affirmative action in the military to accept the fact that, you know, basically people were equal and everybody should have the right, equal opportunity for job training, for job openings, and for promotions within the system, and that we should make sure that whenever we made promotions, we made sure that this was equal opportunity for promotions, for badges and whatever else that people were getting and that.
Speaker 1: So, do you think it was easier in the--in the military because they had a structure already in place?
Speaker 2: Sometimes yes, sometimes no, depending on who happened to be as the head honcho at the time.
Story_ID: 532133
Speaker 1: You do that and through the '80s [1980s], you take various courses along with your regular position [at Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona].  In about '82 [1982], you get--you get elected to the Maricopa County Community College District ward [Maricopa Community Colleges, Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Explain what that is and how you--that came about, please.
Speaker 2: Okay, well first of all, the Maricopa Community College governing board consists of community colleges.  At that time, they were called junior colleges.
Speaker 1: How many were there?
Speaker 2: In 1982, there were five.  Prior to that, the district, if you go back far enough, at one time, there was only Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] and it was a part of the Phoenix Union High School system [Phoenix Union High School District].  Then, in 1962, the voters of the county voted to set up a community college district.  Then, the district bought Phoenix College, which I don't they ever paid them for, but it was the first college in the district.  And then they set up Scottsdale College [Scottsdale Community College, Scottsdale, Arizona], Glendale College [Glendale Community College, Glendale, Arizona], and Mesa College [Mesa Community College, Mesa, Arizona], and then one other because there were five when I came on the board, and we then began to set colleges based upon what the population was in a given six mile radius, and we would say once at a certain population, in that radius, we'd set a camp- a college up in that campus.  At that time, finally, Paul Elsner [Paul A. Elsner] was the chancellor of the district for like twenty-two years.  And then we had a couple other guys there for a while.  And, what, three years ago, we hired the first black chancellor for that district by the name of Rufus Glasper who had been for fifteen years the financial officer for the district, and he had a CPA [certified public accountant], and at the same time, he was working on a Ph.D. through the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona].  So, we eventually hired him as the chancellor of the district and he got right in the middle of all the controversial problem, which we are having now.
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he's still trying to resolve those.
Story_ID: 532134
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To go back a bit now, you're teaching a little bit, you're teaching courses at ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], you're doing things with the Air National Guard, what made you want to, to join the school board [of the Maricopa County Community College District; Maricopa Community Colleges, Tempe, Arizona]?  Was someone--did someone encourage you and how was your run?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a guy named Joe [ph.], which I forgot to shoot him (laughter), and he was in the community colleges.  I met him at ASU or something and he knew that I had been on an elementary school board [for the Roosevelt Elementary School District], and the fellow who had been in the district position that I had, I forget his name, it was a Spanish fellow, and he was an attorney and he quit the board, and they didn't have anybody to put in there.  So, Joe recommended me and I agreed to serve out his term, which was not that long, but I then begin--I then ran for the position afterwards.
Speaker 1: Now, when this was available, you--did you consult with anybody, your wife [Doris Campbell], maybe the dean of the school or did you ask anybody else?
Speaker 2: Well, I talked with a number of people at different colleges, particularly those who were teachers that I knew in the system.  I didn't know the chancellor at the time and I didn't know any of the presidents of the colleges at the time, but I was working with ASU and I talked with my boss who was the vice president and asked him about it, and he said, "Since that is a part--we consider that a part of community service, we would not object to your being on the community college board."
Speaker 1: And what was his name, your boss at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Might have been Keegan?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Dennis Keegan?
Speaker 2: Keegan was one, but there was another vice president before Keegan.  Dennis Keegan was my immediate boss, yeah, and I talked with him about it.  He took it to the vice president and then brought it back to me.  But, Dennis Keegan, he was the engineer and he was running the summer sessions in the extensions office where the community service program was working out of his office, and he was the one saying, "Okay, the president and the vice president, they don't have any problem with you being on that board."
Speaker 1: So, after you served the term that was resigned by someone, you had to run again for the next time, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.  Did you want to run again or, or had your experiences (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had gotten involved with it and I found it pretty interesting, and at that time, we were operating out of Maricopa Technical College [GateWay Community College, Phoenix, Arizona] over on 40th Street and Washington [Street].  I get to meet more people and I begin to meet some of the students, some of the faculty and staff, and I saw it as a way of not only helping people at the community college level, but also pulling more students to the university, see.  So I would be serving a number of purposes, by letting them know that they could come on to the university and get involved there, too, and that was one of the real motivators to stick with it.
Speaker 1: Because you stayed with it quite a while, actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'm still with it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, each area--so, the terms were at first--I'm, I'm noticing when they were four year terms and then the terms got longer?
Speaker 2: Six year terms, which we have now.  In fact, I'm just finishing up the first year of a six year term come December.  I still have five years left on this term and when I finish that five years, I will have put thirty years on the community college governing board.
Story_ID: 532135
Speaker 1: In these years that you've been here doing this, what have you learned about education, higher education in response to--from the student side of it and also on the administrative and board side of it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the, the main things about education, that is the, quote, boardwalk of this country.  Without education, we probably wouldn't be where we are today.  And that's not just the Stanfords [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and the Harvards [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Princetons [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and all, but all of the systems around.  Because the community college system first started in 1900 in Joliet, Illinois, as junior colleges.  Then, they became community colleges because they wanted to broaden the things they were doing.  But, the fact that we have probably the largest college system in the world in this country at its four year schools, two year schools, high schools, elementary schools, and even private schools like the University of Phoenix [Tempe, Arizona], you know, and others, which is the thing that allows this country to elevate its, its academics, its, its, its whole system of functioning and move not just from the traditional farming systems that we were and then to the manufacturing industrial system, but now into the academic, the technical systems that we're moving into now.  And that's why so many young people have to stay in school because a lot of the jobs that used to be available here are gonna be in other countries and people there will be doing those jobs.
Story_ID: 532136
Speaker 1: Now, just for the sake of the viewing audience, we didn't go over it before.  What are your--are your personal majors, majors were in as far as your bachelor's [degree], master's [degree], and Ph.D.  Which were--which were, were they in?  What, what, what was your bachelor's in?
Speaker 2: Bachelor's was political science history with a minor in speech and Spanish.
Speaker 1: And your master's?
Speaker 2: Administration, higher education.
Speaker 1: And your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Ph.D., higher education, higher and adult education.
Speaker 1: So you've had a long time association with that.  In your dealings on the school board [of the Maricopa County Community College District; Maricopa Community Colleges, Tempe, Arizona], did you see any opposition or to really bring in minorities into the schools or any drive or did you see an ambivalence toward this or did you see an actual urge to really make the junior college system work for everybody?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there are a lot of people in the junior college system probably just like the four year system.  They were really concerned with their immediate environment, and if their immediate environment didn't have minorities in it, they were not going to move from this area to go out and get the minorities unless you push them in that direction, and that included similarities within the system because they wanted to do their thing and they weren't concerned about going out and bringing other minorities into the system or bringing women into the system, see, so, you had that element as well.  Nowadays, you find more people more willing to listen and bring forth minorities and, and women into the systems.
Speaker 1: What were some of your greatest challenges as far as your, your ideals being implemented?
Speaker 2: I think the greatest challenge is trying to get people to change their old ways of doing things, their old value systems, their old beliefs and say it's gonna take a little bit of extra effort on my part, but I'm willing to take that chance or I'm willing to do that, and if it means I have to spend a couple of extra nights per week in a Keys Community Center [Phoenix, Arizona] or a Southminster Presbyterian Church [Phoenix, Arizona] or even out on Buckeye Road, I'll be willing to do that if it's gonna help bring some other people into the system.
Story_ID: 532137
Speaker 1: Now, at the same time, I--there's an underlying theme here running that you also were very much involved in Phoenix [Arizona] real estate at this same time.  Was this only in, as far as income properties or was this also in development?
Speaker 2: No, basically just selling, selling properties.  The development was basically the fellow mentioned, Travis Williams, and other companies, real estate development companies whereas before as going out, finding property, and developing property, that, no I never got into that.  I bought property and I still own property, but not with the thought of developing it.  My thought was just making a fortune after I sell it (laughter).
Story_ID: 532138
Speaker 1: You're on the school board [of the Maricopa County Community College District; Maricopa Community Colleges, Tempe, Arizona] for many years and in 1987, getting to the late '80s [1980s] now, you go and get some more [U.S.] Air Force education.  Can you tell me about that?
Speaker 2: I go get some more--in the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: The, the Air War College, Maxwell.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's Maxwell Air Force Base [Montgomery, Alabama].  That's what I mentioned earlier in Mobile, Alabama [sic.].  That, too, was a part of my thinking as far as getting promoted and to a--to a colonel, that's mandatory that you have that, the Air War College, and that was one of the things that helped move me in that direction and that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, would it be safe to say that you had two things running between the Air Force Guard [Air National Guard] and also the school system, that you were actually doing the same thing in just two different ways and two different entities?
Speaker 2: Basically, in a sense because, you know, it's education and the [U.S.] military is education and the school system.  So--and because I had had a history of education, then I think that was overlapping into all the other areas as well.
Speaker 1: And the thing with diversity in both of these situations, was, was, was that a part of your thinking also?
Speaker 2: It would diversify my thinking, my training, my knowledge, which may be able to use at some other level.
Story_ID: 532139
Speaker 1: We go through, gonna go into the '90s [1990s] as we move forward and there seems to be a new position for you in '89 [1989] at the university.  You have a new position.  You become the interim vice provost.
Speaker 2: That was at the ASU [Arizona State University] west campus [Glendale, Arizona], which was developing at that time 'cause I had been out there since '84 [1984] when we first got that campus started.  But, I might say that if, if I had gotten a permanent position there, I probably would've stayed with the university maybe even 'til now.  But because I did not get the permanent position for whatever reason, I then decided it was time for me to leave.  And now I might admit, though, Lattie Coor [Lattie F. Coor] was the president because I didn't get the permanent position out here had also invited me to come back to the Tempe [Arizona] main campus to serve on his staff and I don't know, that could've probably lead to another possible presidency at some other school, but you can always speculate, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts as to why you think you didn't receive that particular?  'Cause you were well qualified education-wise.
Speaker 2: I think one of the things is a person who was the head honcho out there had their own, you know, people that they wanted to put in and I wasn't one of their people at that point, you know.  That's the only thing I can think of.
Speaker 1: Do you feel that that, that happens a lot in the--at that level when it comes to who gets certain positions, that it boils down (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know whether it happens a lot, but I'm sure it happens because if somebody is the head person and you're being held accountable for the success of that program, what you want to do is put people in place that you can count on and that's gonna help you keep your job, you know, and not just put someone else in there because they've been around (laughter) and, you know, that's--to me, that's just common sense.
Speaker 1: It's everyone covering themselves, so to speak.
Speaker 2: Yeah, either you can cover yourself or otherwise you put somebody in and they don't function, and what happens?  Look at all the people who are leaving their corporate executive positions now?  They're throwing them out right and left.
Story_ID: 532140
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], you, you leave ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and decide to go into other areas of career choices.  And so in 1993 after you leave--well, you left--when did you actually retire and leave?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't actually sort of retire, I just left in 1990.  My thought then was I was going to set up a consultant firm.  But then, this General Don Lawrence [ph.] at the Air National Guard started a program called Project ChalleNGe [Arizona Project ChalleNGe, Queen Creek, Arizona].  And another lieutenant colonel named Louis Olivas whom I've known for years over at ASU had written a proposal for this program.  The federal government funded it.  And then the general wanted Louis to run the program, but Louis couldn't leave the university 'cause he was in the middle of trying to get his full professorship.
Speaker 1: His tenure.
Speaker 2: Tenure there so, and he wanted to stay there, and that's all he had been doing.  So he said, "But you know what?"  He said, "Don's no longer with the university and, you know, he, he'd been with the guard, get him to do it," (laughter).  So, General Lawrence called me and said, "Well, go and see down at the office."  So, I went down there to his office.  He said, "Well, you ever heard of this program called Project ChalleNGe?"  I said, "No, sir, I have not."  He said, "Well you gotta get used to it 'cause I want you to start it up."  And I said, oh my god.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What was the program?
Speaker 2: Project ChalleNGe was a [U.S.] military funded, military operated, federally funded program for high school dropouts between the ages of sixteen and eighteen years old from throughout the state initially, boys only, eventually girls added, and eventually people from Nevada because they did not have a large National Guard to operate from, so they sent their students over here.  So, we took over the old Williams Air Force Base [Arizona].  They had a great big dorm there and we would house the students in that dorm and we'd tell them that they could volunteer for the program.  That's how they got into it.  But, once you get into it, you have to live by military discipline, which means you're up at 4:30 each morning, up doing your PT [physical training] and all that stuff, and you don't have your mother to make up your bed anymore or to wash your clothes, none of those things.  You have to do it all yourself.  And they all said, yeah, until they get into it.  Then, the find out what they're into.  And so you see a whole lot of them who eventually drop out.  But you also, those who stick with it and keep doing their studies and everything their supposed to, they could then get their GED [General Educational Development] in the program.  And so if they wanted to, they could then go back to their high school, so some of them did, went back and got their high school diploma, or you go into the military, or you could go to work or you could go to one of the community colleges or whatever.
Speaker 1: How long was the program in residence?  How long did they have to be there?
Speaker 2: Students were about four months, four and a half months, and they'd have a graduation every, you know, four and half months.  In fact, we just had one June 2nd.  I think that was class number twenty-seven 'cause it's been going for about fifteen years now, since 1993.
Speaker 1: Is there anyone of note that, that we might know who's been through the program as a student and now are doing very well in the community?  Do we know anybody?
Speaker 2: There's one person who is a medical doctor.  I don't know him and I've not seen him.  But according to the people running the program now, they have been in contact with him.
Speaker 1: So, he was once a high school dropout and now he's a medical doctor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. And there's many of them who have gone to the community colleges and, you know, went into other fields and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you do that and you also--you work for--as the director for the [U.S.] Department of Defense?
Speaker 2: Well that was part of it.
Speaker 1: It was all part of the same program (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, same program.
Story_ID: 532141
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a very illustrious career in the [U.S.] military and educational system, so as we close out--and you've also sat on several boards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any one board that, that, that you--really stands out in your mind you'd like to talk about for a moment?  Any board?  You've been on the Phoenix Aviation Board [Phoenix Aviation Advisory Board].  You've been on the Society for Training and Development [American Society for Training and Development], the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you've been a life member there.  You're--Terry Goddard's board.  Is there anything that you'd like to talk about in particular that was really--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm still on the NAACP board here and I'm still a life member.  But I think that, the fact that I've been on the community college board [of the Maricopa County Community College District; Maricopa Community Colleges, Tempe, Arizona] so long is evidence that that's been the most prominent thing because it's tied directly into education and it's an opportunity to take people from down here and pull them up to the top, so forth.
Story_ID: 532142
Speaker 1: If you had something to tell or had an aspiration or a dream for the African American community, what would that be?
Speaker 2: Education, education, education.  Get as much education as you can in as many areas as you can, and once you get the degrees or what have you, education doesn't stop there.  It is a lifelong learning experience.  'Cause things are constantly changing and the more you learn, the more you know, the more you can enjoy life and experience whatever there is, you know, to offer.
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for someone that might be struggling in the education system or kind of--kind of betwixt on what they should do?  You say education, but do you have any advice on how to hang in there?  Because a lot of times education can be difficult (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or seem difficult.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Accept the fact that if it's difficult, recognize it, admit it, and then tell other people that you need help and ask for help, you know, and go find that help.  'Cause many of the schools now have student T- TAs that can--teaching assistants or students can help you monitor your work and do your training and things.  And don't be afraid to say I don't know, but I want to learn.  I'm willing to learn and I want somebody to help me.  'Cause that's one of the big problems, particularly with African American males.
Story_ID: 532143
Speaker 1: Now, how would you like to be remembered in the future?
Speaker 2: Oh, as a guy who tried to live for two hundred years and didn't make it (laughter).  I don't know.  I don't--I really don't know.  You know, maybe I did whatever I could to help other people improve their lives through education 'cause that's the thing I'm most familiar with.
Speaker 1: Is there a one sentence or a couple sentence thought of encouragement?  There'll be a lot of young people watching and people in general that you could give--you've given us education as the thing, but is there one, something that you have held very dear to you that you could share with us in closing?
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure there's any one thing other than to keep trying regardless of what happens to you.  You know, like I said, the tragedies that I've had with my youngest boy [Derek Campbell] dying, that could've been devastating.  The tragedy that my oldest boy [Darren Campbell] who had very intelligent--had every opportunity, was stabbed to death by the state capitol [Arizona State Capitol, Phoenix, Arizona], that could've been, you know, a thing that caused me to dislike society, to blame the world for all of its problems or, you know, those things happen and if--I'm not the only one that they have happened to.  And there--even after I'm dead, that's gonna happen to other people.  It's gonna continue to happen as long as human beings are on this earth and you have to accept that fact and just keep on pushing, keep on trying.
Speaker 1: Keep trying.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Mr. Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell], thank you very much for this interview.  You've been very helpful and very enlightful--very insightful and very enlightening.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Enjoyed it very much, appreciate it.
Story_ID: 532144
Speaker 1: Yeah, his name is Bill Shover.  At one time, he was the president of the Project ChalleNGe [Arizona Project ChalleNGe, Queen Creek, Arizona] governing board, the one where we had the sixteen, eighteen year olds in and we were at a Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] function at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Leave it up there for a moment.
Speaker 1: And the guy way in the back, I don't know who that is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, photo number two.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me with three students in the blue and the former president of South Mountain Community College [Phoenix, Arizona].  Do I have his name on the back?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  John Cordova.
Speaker 1: John Cordova, he was the president of South Mountain Community College, and I was the speaker at one of his graduations.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  For each photograph, try to indicate for us when it was taken.
Speaker 1: Oh, boy, that's gonna be hard.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Or give it your best guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was probably--let's see, this is, what, probably 2000.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is me, my nephew, representative Cloves Campbell, Jr. [sic.], Nancy Jones [Nancy Thomas-Jones] in the middle with Arizona Informant newspaper office, and that was probably 2006.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's me and my two brothers, now deceased.  The one on my left is Dr. Charles Campbell.  He was one of the owners of the Arizona Informant.  The one on my right is Cloves Campbell [Cloves Campbell, Sr.].  He was one of the owners of the newspaper.  And the guy on his right--let me see, is that his son?  Let me take a look at that.  Oh, no, that's Terry Johnson, our cousin who was the mayor over at Oceanside [California].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was probably 2002.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Cloves died in 2004.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Turn it.  Turn it up.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'll let you see it first, then I'll put it back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know who this is.  What year was that, '95 [1995], yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We, we can shoot it like this.
Speaker 2: You won't shoot it up?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, he--it'll, it'll turn around later.  We'll turn it up.
Speaker 2: Oh, it will?  Okay, that's me at the graduation at South Mountain College, 1995, and I was giving my older sister, Carol Hurd [Carol Campbell Hurd], her degree from South Mountain Community College.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How old was she at that time?
Speaker 2: Let's see, she's eighty now.  She must've been about seventy-five then.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Getting her degree.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's her third one.  Uh-oh, that's Don Campbell [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Donald Campbell] and Doris Campbell, and I don't know what year that was.  Maybe it's on the back of there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: Nothing on there?  Okay.  Let's see, how much hair did I have?  That would've probably been in 1985.  And Doris I know 'cause she didn't have any gray hair.
Speaker 1: That was this year at Phoenix College [Phoenix, Arizona] when I was inducted into the--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Try rotating 180 [degrees] so that the edge that would hold is on the bottom and maybe it would help stay together.
Speaker 1: Can you let me see the front page?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In a second, sir.  Let us finish capturing it.  We're kind of in the middle of it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Still got a shadow?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.  See the shadow where your hand is?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you--can you--can--just tilt the stand back.  There you go.  All right, give me a minute, now.
Speaker 1: That was 1954 or '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Or did he want to see the--he wants to see the cover of this.
Speaker 1: Let me see the back part.  That should've been the--Phoenix College Athletic Hall of Fame, May the 3rd, 2007.
Speaker 2: This would've been in 1992, Project ChalleNGe, and I think that was one of our graduation classes there, and I was in charge there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Are you in the photo, sir?
Speaker 2: That's me right there, in the center.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: And that one would've been 19--let's see, that was 1995.  This was--should've been 1993, I think it was, yeah, at the same--I was off to the far right, Project ChalleNGe class two.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, there you are, okay, good.  Thank you.  Next.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was the wedding of Lonnie Jones who is now deceased, and where is--Lonnie Jones isn't even in the picture, is--yes, he is.  He's actually--that was in 19--let's see, we got out of high school [Phoenix Technical High School, Phoenix, Arizona] in--that was probably 1956.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think.
Speaker 1: That one tells itself, huh?  Paradise Valley Community College [Phoenix, Arizona] groundbreaking ceremony, September 18, 1997, building another building over there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're right.  It already is captioned.  Okay, good.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's another Project ChalleNGe class.  That would've been in 1994, I think, and I'm in the center there, too.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: November 7, vote for Don Campbell.  Doesn't say what year, huh?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 1: Would it say it on the inside?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, one second.
Speaker 1: I had so many of those things, I forgot which year they were.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, I'll look for a year.  At this point, you had been a sixty year resident of Arizona at this point.
Speaker 1: Sixty year resident, from 1945 to '95 [1995], would that be it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: It would've been '95 [sic.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay?  Now, this one is Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].  That was Campbell, '58 [1958], named to head community service, where I mentioned.  That was the president of ASU and the vice president of ASU, and which ones were that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think that the newspaper caption there is, is enough for us to build our--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  --own caption.
