Story_ID: 649867
Speaker 1: I'm going to start out--we're going to start out by slating the interview; and I want you to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Dana Canedy, it's C-A-N-E-D-Y, and my first name is Dana, D-A-N-A.
Speaker 1: Okay and I forgot to also say my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Now can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 8th, 1965.
Speaker 1: Which, I wanted to tell to you--I meant, I'm June 10th, 1950--no--I know.  I cou--
Speaker 2: Charles's [Charles M. King] birthday.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  I couldn't believe that.  That was--and then so I didn't know if you were June 12th or June 8th.
Speaker 2: Eight (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't--okay--that's right.
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, wow, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--okay, so the other--I couldn't believe that.  Two Geminis.  So the other th- can we have today's date?
Speaker 2: What is it?  November 12th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: The New York Times newsroom in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a senior editor at The New York Times, responsible for--wait a minute, what am I responsible for (laughter)--responsible for diversity initiatives at The Times, newsroom recruiting and hiring, staff training,  and career development.
Story_ID: 649868
Speaker 1: Five People magaz- magazine-ish questions.  What's your favorite (laughter)--what's your favorite color?  I, what is?
Speaker 2: Purple, which my son [Jordan King] says makes him want to throw up.  He says purple makes him want to throw up.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lobster pizza.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I don't take a lot of vacation.  Cruises, does that count?
Speaker 1: That counts.  Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I love you.
Story_ID: 649869
Speaker 1: So I want to start out and ask you about your father first.  Can you give his name and--
Speaker 2: His name is Thomas James Canedy, Sr. [T.J. Canedy, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Went by T.J., right?
Speaker 2: T.J., right.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have you talk about what you know about his side of the family.
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot actually.  I know that my father grew up--raised by a very, very strong single mother [Everlener Canedy], who herself had to leave school I think around the fifth or sixth grade.  Her parents died, and she became the head of the household.  So she was somewhat illiterate but a very savvy business woman who went on to own a soul food restaurant, and was very entrepreneurial, and raised my father on her own.
Speaker 1: Do you know where, where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  Okay, so that family came from--you don't know where--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --what fur- further than Indianapolis--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --since there ways--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know there were a lot of Mississippi ties; but no, I don't know much at all about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, and even his--s- oh, 'cause he was the only child then.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 649870
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  Can you give her name and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother is Janeth Marie Canedy [Penny Canedy], and she's a firecracker (laughter).  She--I don't actually--she was born in Indianapolis [Indiana] as well.  I don't know much about her because she was--her family--because she was adopted.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see, okay.  And so can you describe your mother besides being a firecracker?  Did she give you any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, she's a survivor.  That's the way I would describe her; had a very, very, very difficult childhood, involving--she was sexually abused quite a bit.  I don't mind sharing that because, as you know from the book, I wrote a bit about that with her permission, because she thought if her story could help anyone then she's, she's happy to tell it; very unstable childhood.  The woman that she thought was her mother died when she was seventeen.  She didn't find out until she was thirty--either thirty or thirty-three that she was adopted.  She, she didn't know, and then she went on a quest to find her biological family.  Like so many families you know, you sort of romanticize what that family's going to be like and it, it wasn't--let's just say a fairytale ending.  But she's a--she's a strong woman, a survivor.
Speaker 1: So she found her family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they in Indianapolis too?
Speaker 2: No, California.  They had been in Indianapolis for a time, but by the time she found them they were in California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: I actually have no idea.  They don't--actually, I don't know anything about their wedding.  I don't know anything about their meeting because they did--they didn't ta- they had a very dysfunctional marriage.  As anyone who's read my book knows--my memoir ['A Journal For Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' HistoryMaker Dana Canedy]--and they didn't talk about it.  And so I would ask questions over the years, and they, they just didn't talk about it at all.
Story_ID: 649871
Speaker 1: So what is your, your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up would be sitting in the front of our house writing, just writing short stories, poems.  I, I, I--it was my form of escape from what was a pretty dysfunctional household.  There was a lot of love there, and my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.], you know, did the best that they could, given where they came from and their own upbringing.  But my way of sort of coping on a day to day basis with what was ever going on in our home was to sit out in the front yard on an old wooden sled and write.
Speaker 1: Now so do you know how old you were when you were sitting out on the--you know?
Speaker 2: Seven, eight maybe.  I started writing and never stopped.
Speaker 1: Do you have any of those poems from when you were that age?  Do you remember or--do you remember subject matter, do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have--I, I do remember subject matter quite well.  It could be about autumn leaves.  I wrote about wanting to grow up to be a strong, independent woman, believe it or not.  Those were some of the earliest poems I wrote I think, and short stories about families--I think sort of romanticizing and, and--you know, a, a, normal, happy family.  I'm not saying our upbring- or my, my brothers and sisters and I, that our upbringing was entirely bad.  It wasn't, but I think I was a pretty precocious child, and I sort of knew that there was a power imbalance in our household, that, that there was volatility, and that I wanted to grow up to be independent, to take care of myself, particularly never to have to depend on a man.  And, and I felt like writing was going to be my way of doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and you use that about yourself.  No writers around, no, you know--
Speaker 2: You know, I have never felt confirmation more about the presence of God in a life than I have through my writing.  Because something told me at an early age and it's been a thread through my life that writing was going to be a path for me for both my own self-soothing as a child and healing, but also to be able to make a living, and, and to, to put the world in context through, through writing.  And it has just been my salvation from, you know, a young age, as a little girl, to dealing with my fiance's [Charles M. King] death and, and the war in Iraq [Iraq War].  The way I cope when things are really going well in my life or when things are not going well is to write or just when I have something to say, you know, whether it's through the newspaper articles that I--that I've written for The Times [The New York Times] and other publications; or the, the things that I've written for my son [Jordan King].
Story_ID: 649872
Speaker 1: So tell me your siblings' names in--'cause you're the oldest, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so can you give your siblings and when they're--
Speaker 2: I don't know if I remember their ages, but let's see--or they want me to know, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or birth order.
Speaker 2: --so I'm the oldest and then my sister Lynnette [Lynnette Canedy] is--
Speaker 1: She's--
Speaker 2: She's maybe forty-five I think.
Speaker 1: She's two--three, three years--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --three, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Younger, and then I have a brother, Thomas [T.J. Canedy, Jr.]; and then I have a sister, Kim [Kimberly Canedy].  I think Thomas is maybe forty-four.  Kim is I think forty-three.  Nikki [Nikki Canedy Kosmoski] is forty; Vanessa [Vanessa Canedy Blythe] is I think thirty-five or so; and then Derrick [James Canedy] is--I think he's maybe thirty-one.
Story_ID: 649873
Speaker 1: And so I want to talk about what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: That's, that's an interesting question.  You know, I'm a journalist, and it's very interesting that I've been interviewed in a lot of different contexts.  And very few questions take me by surprise.  I've, I've never had that one--the sights, smells, and sounds.  Well, believe it or not, the sound of tank fire--tanks firing is, is something that will be with me until the day I die.  I grew up on a [U.S.] military base, Fort Knox, Kentucky, and it was just not uncommon at all to go to sleep hearing tanks firing in the distance because the soldiers were conducting drills.  And I actually, believe it or not, found it quite soothing.  So that's one sound from my childhood.  I think--let's see; (background noise) smells--I can't think of anything--flowers maybe, food in the kitchen--
Speaker 1: What kind of food?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would--I would say soul food, you know, beans, and ham hocks, macaroni and cheese, and greens.  I decided at a young age I was going to be a vegetarian, so I didn't eat a lot of the food that, that was cooked, but, but certainly the vegetables and the, the carbs (laughter) are, are something that I remember.  So I guess that's the smells.  In terms of tastes, same thing, the food.
Story_ID: 649874
Speaker 1: Describe the, the, the block that you grow up on.
Speaker 2: Wow, the thing about growing up on a [U.S.] military base is that the people are from everywhere.  And so when I tell folks I'm from Kentucky [Fort Knox, Kentucky], the first thing they always say is, "Well, you don't have an accent."  It's kind of hard to have an accent when, you know, the person two doors down is from Germany, and, and--you know, someone to your left is a southerner.  And there was such a mix of, of, of folks that it was really wonderful.  In terms of diversity, I think the military got it right or mostly right long before other industries were, were considering the importance of diversity.  And so on our little cul-de-sac, there was--I say this with great pride.  I, I, I can--I can look at the houses nearest--literally white family, black family, black family, black family, white family, white family, and an Asian family.  That's America today, and this was in the early '70s [1970s].  So it was--it was wonderful.  And a lot of those families are still there.
Speaker 1: So, well, you've lived there the whole time though, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what was your pa- your father's position (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He was a drill sergeant for many years.  He was an enlisted soldier, so most of the time that I recall, he was a drill sergeant, you know, the tough guy who trained the soldiers and very much fit that mold.
Speaker 1: Did he--how did he feel about you as, as the--as the oldest daughter?
Speaker 2: Gosh, I, I don't think my father understood me very much at all.  He still doesn't.  I think--I think he respects me a great deal because he thinks I'm a very strong, independent woman.  I would say I was a strong, independent seven year old and ten year old and twelve year old.  You know, the things that my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] told us they wanted us to be, strong, independent, you know, a, a good citizen were things I think that they really believed in.  But, for me anyway, it didn't mean being that way just out in the world.  It meant being that way in the home too.  And so, you know, in a respectful way I always challenged him in particular.  I think part of the reason I became a journalist is a combination of my love of writing, but, but my favorite question is why.  I'm very inquisitive--always have been my entire life, and he--it, it wasn't enough for him to tell me to do something.  I had to understand, well, why is this important or how come, you know, I and my sisters [Lynnette Canedy, Kimberly Canedy, Nikki Canedy Kosmoski and Vanessa Canedy Blythe] have to do this, but my brother doesn't, or explain this in the context of race, or--you know, there were always these questions that he just, (laughter) you know, was surprised that I was asking at a young age.
Story_ID: 649875
Speaker 1: So can you describe times at the family household, thing--memories that come into--to mind about living in the household?
Speaker 2: Well, there was always a friend.  Because my brothers [T.J. Canedy, Jr. and James Canedy] and sisters are my best friends, and so there was always someone to play with, cry with, talk to, laugh with--that's number one.  I love that about our, our house.  We--we're very close to this day.  I think I speak to one of my brothers or sisters and most often more than one literally every day.  We're spread out, but we get together quite a lot.  And we, we just--we enjoy each other.  And what's so fabulous about that is most of us have kids now, and the cousins are equally close.  We laugh; we tease each other; we all have our roles.  And it's amazing to me how the roles haven't changed at all.  I'm the leader.
Speaker 1: As we all guessed.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  My sister, Lynnette [Lynnette Canedy], is the unbelievably romantic sap (laughter).  And then my brother is the sweet, sweet, kind, you know, guy.  Then we have--we have our drama queens.  We have--although they would maybe say that sometimes that's me, depending on what was going on in the household.  But my happiest memories about growing up have to do with my brothers and sisters.  Although, you know, as a--as a child who was very, as I say, inquisitive, and outspoken, and not intimidated by authority the way they were and the way my father [T.J. Canedy, Sr.] and my mother [Penny Canedy] too, actually, set up our household, so that--you know, he was a drill sergeant, and you don't challenge authority on a [U.S.] military base, and certainly not with a drill sergeant, but I did, always, my whole life.  And so I, I, I used to tease quite a lot that I must be adopted. I can't be from this gene pool (laughter).  And we would laugh and then a--oh, gosh, I think in my thirties--I've, I've grown up saying that my whole life, and I used to say, "When I find my birth parents, I'm going to sue them for not placing me better."  And I would say this as a kid, and we would laugh.  I always thought it was funny.  So finally in my thirties, my father told me--he finally ga- got the nerve to tell me that it hurt his feelings when I said this.  And I was like, "Well, why didn't you tell me years, years ago.  I've been saying this for years.  You know, it's just a joke."  So I've, I've, I've--I haven't said it since, but it was an interesting family (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what were holidays like and things like that?
Speaker 2: Wonderful.  I didn't actually realize growing up that we didn't have a lot of money 'cause there was always food on the table and there were always tons and tons of Christmas presents under the, the tree.  I don't know how they pulled that off, 'cause my mother was a homemaker.  My father was an enlisted guy in the military, and you know, they had quite a lot of children.  And there was always wonderful, wonderful Christmas presents under the tree.  My mother, you know, made the traditional holiday meals, and they were--they were great.  You know, we were all--we, we would wake up every year at five [o'clock] in the morning and wake our parents up to go open up our Christmas prayer--presents.  To this day, my parents call us and wake us up at five in the morning as payback (laughter).
Speaker 1: They do?
Speaker 2: Yes, every year (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, they wake all the kids--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and with you in the--as the lead.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You did this to us growing up, and we're doing it back to you now (laughter).
Story_ID: 649876
Speaker 1: So now what, what other--what about school?  When, when, when are you starting school--you're starting school at age five?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So that was in 19-?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I don't even remember.  I was born in--I don't want to say 'cause I--you're going to tell my age anyway, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was born in '65 [1965], so I guess I started school maybe '70 [1970] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, 19--1970.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: God, you're too, too young to be acting like that, okay, but go on.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, it's, it's very interesting going to school on a [U.S.] military base because fathers were always going off to conflict zones or you know, to serve in--back then even, even, you know, what they call hardship tours of duty in Korea, and they'd be gone for a year.  Or, you, you, you know, you'd have this friend that you bothered with throughout the school year and then the family would get re-stationed to, you know, Fort Hood [Texas] or something--some such.  And so I think we were all proud of what our parents were, were doing, in terms of being a part of, you know, the military in this country.  But it was--it was--it's, it's, it's not the easiest thing being, being an Army brat because, you know, I think we were all mindful that, you know, your parents might not--might not always come back from that last assignment.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. So in--do you remember your first day of school?
Speaker 2: No, I have, it's very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now this--so the school was named what?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Mudge Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Mudge.
Speaker 2: M-U-D-G-E Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's still there I believe in Fort Knox, Kentucky.  That's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So but is it on the base or off?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's on the base.
Speaker 1: It's on the base.  Okay, all school was on the base.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, military public schools, yeah.
Speaker 1: So can we talk about the structure of those 'cause I, I never thought--my father [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] was in the [U.S.] Army, but we never--we never traveled with, with him so I--you know, I never went to school on the base.  So, so tell me what a--what, what the schools were like.
Speaker 2: You know, the schools were, were really just like any other public school.  There wasn't much difference, in terms of, you know, the teacher, and the classroom, and the look of the school, and the lunchroom, and the lunchroom ladies, and so forth.  The difference was, you know, a kid could leave in the middle of the school year and often did, you know.  And, and certainly you had no expectation that, that a best friend that you started out with in first grade was going to be there, you know, in high school.  That just didn't happen because, you know, it was all dependent on the--on the soldier's tour of duty.  And interestingly, this really ties to sort of how I grew up determined to be independent.  Because I thought, you know, I don't want to be the whim of some guy's career.  And so, you know, if I started a business or got a great job or, you know, went to college somewhere, I have to just pick up and leave every three or four years because a man has to relocate for his career.  And so I think at a very early age I realized that I didn't want a military life for myself.  Having said that, I'm really respectful of, of military service and appreciate it deeply, because I think it's so--I mean, soldiers are, are unsung--sung heroes, and it's so critical to our way of life here.  And I saw firsthand the sacrifices that these families made week after week and month after month and year after year; and they did so with great pride and really a sense of purpose that I appreciate.
Story_ID: 649877
Speaker 1: So really in many ways growing up in a base is its own community and its own town that has its (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It literally is.  I mean, there are--there are supermarkets and department stores that you cannot get into if you're a civilian.
Speaker 1: It's the BRX--
Speaker 2: You have to have your military--
Speaker 1: --or BX--
Speaker 2: The PX [post exchange]--
Speaker 1: PX.
Speaker 2: --yeah and the commissary, and you have to have a military ID to get into those, same with the hospitals.  Like, this is idea that you had to pay for medicine or for a doctor, I didn't really get that.  I'd--I, I had never experienced that until college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  You know, I just thought medicine was free.  Because if you were a soldier, you went to the--you know, or soldier's child, you went to the--you know, the hospital on the base [Fort Knox, Kentucky], and you got--you stood in line and got your medicine and left.  We never paid for any of that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It's a different way of life.
Speaker 1: No, it's a different way of life completely.  So that's why I'm just trying to understand.  So what are--what are summers like?  Are you going anyplace summers or are you going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, geez, nobody had money for vacations, but it didn't matter.  I mean, I, I write about this in my book ['A Journal For Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' HistoryMaker Dana Canedy].  We had the best times just like, you know, having the, the fire hose on and--or the--you know, or, or, or playing dodge ball and building forts and--you know, it, it literally was, was, was, was a place where you didn't have to worry about a child getting taken off the street or, or, or kids, you know, being bullied or that kind of thing.  You know, the, the, the, the person's parent down the street watched us if I--if my mom wasn't out in the yard.  And we knew all of the, the families, and the kids played together.  Military structure is very much about discipline and order and authority and I got to--I got to say there's, there's real value in that, you know, for children as well.  There were things we just didn't do, you know.  I'm, I'm sure it went on, but there was no drinking or drugs or any of that.  It was sports and, and school and, and you know, Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  It was a very innocent kind of structured upbringing that I think really to this day helps me in so many ways, in terms of work ethic and perseverance and having a sense of purpose.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I thank my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] for giving me that.
Story_ID: 649878
Speaker 1: So what was your--what were your chores in the family in the household?
Speaker 2: So every Saturday we had a chore list.  And what used to drive me crazy is my sister Lynnette [Lynnette Canedy], the little goodie two shoes, would wake up every Saturday and help my mother [Penny Canedy] write the chores for us.  It drove me crazy.  I'm like, are you kidding me?  All I want to do is sleep or play or watch TV or write my poems and--you know, to get her little brownie points, she'd help my mom write the list, but it also meant she picked her chores.  So, you know, cleaning the bathroom, doing the laundry, changing the linens, there'd be any number of, of things, and it would rotate.  And as much as that drove me crazy, oh my gosh, I value it so much.  Because, again, whether it's teaching early lessons about work ethic or how you maintain a household, responsibility to a family, all those things I learned from, from doing those chores.  And it's amazing to me that, you know, obviously I talk a bit about how our family was somewhat dysfunctional, but my parents did a lot right, you know.  I, I credit them both for getting out of the, the, the poor environments that they grew up in where there were very few opportunities.  They found a way to create opportunities for themselves.  And we were probably the best dressed kids in the neighborhood; the most, you know, disciplined kids; we didn't cause any trouble.  We weren't perfect kids, but we were pretty darn good.  And, and they didn't have a lot of--you know, I guess, they didn't really have a lot of role models themselves to, to sort of figure out how you build a family, but they did it.  And I think the [U.S.] military was a big help in, in doing that.  I, I, I--it's amazing to me, given where they came from, that we all turned out as well as we did.  I have a sister who's in a pretty senior level at a company in advertising.  I have a sister who's a banker, who's gone to Russia to do real estate banking, you know.  You know, I have a sister who's just an absolute whiz at marketing and PR [public relations].  We--we've, we've wa- two brothers [T.J. Canedy, Jr. and James Canedy] who, who followed our father [T.J. Canedy, Sr.] and--or in the military, it's--none of us in jail; none of us on drugs.  I'm proud of that.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  So did you--you know, was music a part of your life growing up?  'Cause I didn't--I didn't hear that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not much, not much at all.  I played the flute in school very badly.  You know, we all took music class.  We all had instruments.  My sister played the clarinet.  My brother played the drums.  So, you know, again, my parents--I don't know where that came from, but they were able to instill some musical background in, in our lives.  But no, music wasn't a huge part of us--our life at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, and not even music playing it in the house?
Speaker 2: Not much.  You know, I think--I think my parents spent all their time working.  My mom inside the house making sure that, you know, she stretched the dollar in terms of our meals, and our clothing and really taking care of the household.  She was very involved in our school.  She was the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] president.  And my father, here is a guy who is not (background noise)--
Story_ID: 649879
Speaker 1: --Have any memories up until, I only have a very few up until about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I--you said seven.
Speaker 1: --junior, I mean even later. There were only a few.
Speaker 2: But that was strange to me, most people have memories at three.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But why?
Speaker 1: Not a single one, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, and those memories at seven or so, I only have a few of them.
Speaker 2: I, well that's--
Speaker 1: I don't really have memories until junior high [at Radcliff Elementary School, Radcliff, Kentucky] and high school [North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: That, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I blocked out my childhood.
Speaker 2: See that--I'm telling you, that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't want to get into that too much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was there a lot of argument in the house?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh yes (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Constantly. About--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Well because, so--
Speaker 1: Infidelity, and--
Speaker 2: How--was it one woman? I thought it was one?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was one mainly, one, but--
Speaker 2: Mainly.
Speaker 1: I mean, like I said there's a lot I didn't say in the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy].
Speaker 2: Right. Well you said--
Speaker 1: A whole lot.
Speaker 2: Okay. You said a lot though.  I mean, because he [Canedy's father, T.J. Canedy, Sr.] had--well we--
Speaker 1: I think, it's funny because when people say to me, like, "How come he wasn't angry?"  It's like, 'cause he knows what I didn't put in there.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So did he have a separate family, is that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's why--one thing I was going to say to you when you were asking me about my brothers and sisters I mentioned five of us, but two were from that relationship, and they're not in the book.
Speaker 2: That's what--okay, five plus two were not in the book, okay.  And which two are those?
Speaker 1: The younger two, the youngest.
Speaker 2: The--okay, the yo- okay, I see.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So he--so he was having, he really had a separate family (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  But never left, really, officially.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  So your mother [Penny Canedy] had to, had to really--
Speaker 1: She raised the other two, actually.  Which is something I don't want to talk about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Beca- not because I have a problem with it, I don't at all, but out of respect for my brother and sister--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I think this is--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, I understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I--they, they're not in the book.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, I, I love them very much, and I don't care, I'm an open book, I talk about anything in my life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I want to protect them.
Speaker 2: Okay. I underst- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They don't deserve for me to talk about their lives.
Speaker 2: Okay. I understand. Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But when you listed the five--
Speaker 1: It wasn't the two.
Speaker 2: It wasn't the two, okay. So there's seven (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it's interesting 'cause I can't believe no one's ever picked up on this: they're listed in--they're in the book, they're mentioned in the book, but then if you read the acknowledgements the numbers don't add up (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And nobody's ever picked up on that.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I thank them in the book and I acknowledge them in the--in the acknowledgements, but in the body of the book they're not mentioned.
Speaker 2: Right, that's--okay, okay.
Story_ID: 649880
Speaker 1: So we were asking about music.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I wanted to know where did church play a role in, in--?
Speaker 2: Well before I answer that, let me--let me sort of finish the, the answer about music.  So, as I say, my parents were always working, you know.  And, and my father [T.J. Canedy, Sr.], I mean, he was a guy who was an enlisted milita- black enlisted [U.S.] military man back then trying to provide for his family, and he would work a second job on the weekends.  I can't imagine that.  You know, he'd work in the movie theater on the weekends and bring home these big bales of popcorn for us and stuff.  But there was very little downtime, and so we didn't--you know, did we have time to--excuse me--sit around listening to music or talking about theater or go--no, they were--they were in survival mode and were really trying to focus on the future, you know, providing for us and doing our homework and all of that.  And I think that that was their way of trying to make a life for us that was better than what they had.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and so--
Speaker 2: Church you were asking.
Speaker 1: Church--I was asking of church.
Speaker 2: It didn't exist for us.  My mother [Penny Canedy] grew up Catholic.  My father was very skeptical of religion and didn't believe in it, so we weren't exposed to church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did the faith component come in then?
Speaker 2: Boy, that's a good question.  You know, we had friends who went to church, and from time to time our parents would allow us to go with them, and I--and I always sort of valued that and held onto it.  You know, I don't even--this is unique to our family.  But, like, life gives you your religion.  It really does.  You, you can't be an intelligent, feeling, thoughtful person and not decide at some point that okay, I have to figure out what I--what I make of this universe and how and the order of things, whether, whether you believe in, in, in, in just nature or a spiritual being or God.  I mean, everybody has to decide that for themse- for themselves, whether they were immersed in a--in a church home--in a church life as, as young people or not.  And I think even people who grow up in the church, as adults have to decide is this really what I believe even though it was what my family believed.  And so for me, there was just confirmation time after time after time about the presence and the power of good--of God that was palpable for me.  It didn't matter that I had no formal training in it or, or, or, or--you know, in terms of bible study and, and, and, and what have you.  I knew about the Bible.  I could pick it up on my own and read it.  And, and certainly during trying times, I just felt the presence of God.  There's no other way to explain it.
Speaker 1: But th- it wasn't discussed sort of, unless your mother--did your mother--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --well, there was no discussion with your mother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Story_ID: 649881
Speaker 1: Tell me, were any of--were either of your parents readers?
Speaker 2: My mother [Penny Canedy] loves the newspaper and, and always has, and likes news.  My father [T.J. Canedy, Sr.] is a huge reader of historical books, whether it's about black history or military history.  So yes, they were--they were very, very big readers in our home.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there discussions at all around the dinner table about things that were happening, or would you hear your parents commenting about things happening?  Or was it more--
Speaker 2: We didn't sit down and have a dinner table dinner.  I mean, my father was working.  He was mostly--and if he wasn't working, he was off, you know, doing whatever--who knows?  So he usually wasn't, wasn't home for dinner.  My mother, you know, I think had a lot of nervous energy and was really taking care of the household.  And so she was always fluttering about, you know.  If, if the dinner was on the table, she was starting to do the dishes or getting our clothes ironed for school the next day.  And I say that--I'm, I'm proud of her for that.  I really respect that.  But we didn't sit down as a family and--you know, and, and dine and talk that much.  And also at--when we got older, one of the things I credit my parents for is that we were--they always had us involved with something I think to encourage our minds but to keep us out of trouble.  And sports was a huge thing in our house, or if somebody wanted to be in the band or, you know, the debate team--whatever.  We had to be involved in something.  And so, you know, I'd be coming in late for dinner 'cause I had a track meet.  I was on the track team.  Or someone else--my brother would be coming in late because he was at a wrestling match.  And so--and, and I actually think part of the reason that we did, you know, stay out of trouble and, and, and always had good self-esteem is because we were a part of something.  We were a part of a team outside of the home, and we were a part of this team inside the home that was my brothers [T.J. Canedy, Jr. and James Canedy] and sisters [Lynnette Canedy, Kimberly Canedy, Nikki Canedy Kosmoski and Vanessa Canedy Blythe].  And they always told us that we were each other's best friends and we believed that.
Speaker 1: So you were--so there was tradition around certain things in many ways, but not the--you know, you--
Speaker 2: That's right.  You got to understand I think--to give my parents a bit of--to put them in context a bit, they didn't grow up with tradition.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My mother was adopted, you know, and didn't have a family.  My father's mother [Everlener Canedy] didn't have a family.  There was no music in their homes.  There was no sit down with the family dinner.  There was no--you know, just going to church.  So where were they going to get all of that?  I mean, I'm--look at all that they did do with and for us.  We all went to college.  Are you kidding me?  You know, we all graduated from high school.  Nobody dropped out.  Nobody went to jail.  Nobody was on drugs.  They had very little to work with when they started out.  And the fact that--I mean, the fact that they, they didn't do it all or maybe didn't have the wherewithal to think, well, maybe we should give them a religious background or maybe music needs to be a part of our home.  My gosh, they were like, let's get them involved in sports so that they're not out running the streets; let's make sure homework's done every night.  You know, when they go to sleep at night, they're going to be--their tummies are full, and they're warm and dry and safe.  That was a big deal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that was your mother.
Speaker 2: It was both.
Speaker 1: Both of them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So now you--I want to know are you a, a child living inside your head?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Is--do you have--are you living inside your head?  I mean, are you thinking a lot of these--I thi- are you living inside your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--oh, I've lived inside my head my whole life, but I don't even think I was a child living inside my head when I was a child.  I don't think I've ever been a child.  I think my parents would agree with that.  From a very young age I was conducting myself as though I was a young adult.  I don't think I've ever really been a child.  I've always been a leader in our home.  I've always helped make decisions.  I've al- you know, I worked two jobs in high school [North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky].  I worked--I worked one job in high school.  Tried to work two jobs, but I couldn't do that and play sports and go to school; but I worked two jobs in college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Story_ID: 649882
Speaker 1: What was junior high school?  What was it--Mudge, Mudge was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it was Radcliff Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We moved to a suburb called Radcliff, Kentucky, which was really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--so when did--when did--
Speaker 2: --attached to the [U.S.] military base.
Speaker 1: --when did you move to Radcliff?
Speaker 2: Maybe I was thirteen or so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Twelve.
Speaker 1: --so, Radcliff Elementary is--was junior high?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was sixth to eighth?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then--let's see; so nineteen six- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Radcliff, you must understand it's, it's like--it's literally attached to Fort Knox [Kentucky], so it--I would--I would say at that time and maybe even now, probably 80 percent of the people in that town are military families.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was living off base a little different.  I mean, how large was the town?
Speaker 2: Not much different at all.  I would--I would imagine at the time--I'm guess, but about five thousand people, so it's a small town.
Speaker 1: Small town.
Speaker 2: But literally, it was--it was--it was a suburb that was attached to the military base.  So, you know, you had--you had a lot of young seja- single soldiers or newly married soldiers who didn't have the money to live off the base, and they lived in, in the military housing on the base.  And a lot of times when they got a little something in the bank and saved a bit, they'd buy a house in Radcliff.
Story_ID: 649883
Speaker 1: And then where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: North Hardin High School, which is the, the high school in Radcliff [Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so are there t- classes that you're gravitating to?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Writing--English and writing.  I mean, I'm a math idiot.  Oh, my god (laughter), you know, if there is a dyslexia for, for writing and reading, I have it for math (laughter).  I hate math; I can't do math to this day.  I always say I'm in the word business, not the numbers business (laughter), so I really gravitated -tated toward literature and, and English, and those subjects--the school newspaper, that kind of thing--yearbook.
Speaker 1: So what are you learning about the life outside of, of Radcliff?  Are you learning--I mean, is discussion occurring within?  I--you know, 'cause at that (unclear)--age--
Speaker 2: There was no life outside of Radcliff.  It was Fort Knox [Kentucky]; it was the [U.S.] military base; and it was Radcliff.  That was it.  And actually, I, I think that it was good, believe it or not.  We were very, very shielded from a lot. Radcliff, by the way, is a dry town, or it was until maybe even two years ago.  There was no alcohol there.  You know, like I said, it was--you really have to understand what military life is like.  It's very structured.  It's very disciplined.  I love that.  To this day I love that.  And so there was no--there was no life outside of, of that, that, that military family, community.
Speaker 1: But are you--'cause we're talking at the time that Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is president I think.  All ready at this time, right, he's pres--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I think it was probably Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and--
Speaker 1: No, '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: What--in eighty--you mean in high school?
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, in high school, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, high school.  I was--I was thinking of high school.  Now the, the other thing is you're running track.  What oth- what other things are you involved with in (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked.  I worked at a restaurant.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Well, first I worked at the Ponderosa Steakhouse serving food.  Did you work at Ponderosa?
Speaker 1: No, but I know Ponderosa (laughter).
Speaker 2: So I worked at the Ponderosa Steakhouse serving food; and then I worked at Hardee's, which was a burger joint, at the cash register, and in cleaning up, and serving; and then I worked at the--when I went on to college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], I worked at the, the campus television station [UKTV-TV, Lexington, Kentucky].  So--and I was a babysitter as well in, in junior high school [Radcliff Elementary School, Radcliff, Kentucky] and high school.
Story_ID: 649884
Speaker 1: So what were you thinking when you're thinking about col- well, well one: are any of your teachers--are there teachers that take an interest in you and which (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh, yes.  Mr. Ellis [ph.], my English teacher thought I was gifted and encouraged my writing.  Ms. Underwood [Barbara Underwood], who was the track coach, still in my life today.  Mostly in touch with her on Facebook, but when my book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] came out, the very first stop on the book tour was Radcliff, Kentucky.  The town came out.  It was probably two hundred people.  They hosted a dinner for me in the cafeteria at North Hardin High School [Radcliff, Kentucky].  My teachers were there.  There was a book signing at the local bookstore.   The man who owned the local bookstore, Jerry Brown--it was called The Bookstore--lived across the street from us.  And he knew that I loved to write when I was a young child, so my very first book signing was at The Bookstore (laughter), in Radcliff.  And hundreds of people from the town came out, people that I'd gone to colle- high school with and junior high [Radcliff Elementary School, Radcliff, Kentucky], my teachers.  Jerry hosted it at his bookstore--Mr. Brown.  It was very special.  I, I, I told my publishers that's the first place I want to go.  Also, you know, the book got a lot to do with the [U.S.] military, so it made sense that it would be--the stop would be near the military base [Fort Knox, Kentucky] there, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful--
Speaker 2: It's kind of full circle in terms of my writing.
Story_ID: 649885
Speaker 1: Did you participate in any debate clubs or things like that?  It was just--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now the other thing that I, I have a question about is, what were you--what--you said you were interested--what were you writing?  Was your writing different in--and were you--was there a journalism--you know, was there a paper--newspaper--a school newspaper?
Speaker 2: There was a school newspaper.  I wasn't that involved in that, because I think it was just sort of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --it came and went actually.  It wasn't--it wasn't a very strong newspaper.  But most of my writing during that time happened to be for class--for school--so essays and, you know, book reports, and writing about whatever literature we were studying.  But I had a teacher, Mr. Ellis [ph.], who was so inspirational and so excited about teaching me and about my writing.  And my mom [Penny Canedy] to this day would tell you that he was very hard on me, because he thought that I had the potential to be a writer.  And, and I didn't need to write anything else.  I loved writing for Mr. Ellis and for his class.  And so that's--that was my focus for several years.  And I really realize now, he was molding me; he was incredible.
Speaker 1: And were there any writers that you admired or--you know people in literature--you know, books that you--you know, you liked at that point in time?
Speaker 2: From high school [North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky], I, I--honestly I can't point to one or two 'cause I loved every--I loved--I was reading everything.  I, I literally--I was read--I was reading everything.  I was just sort of a sponge.  A lot of it was based on what was assi- what was being assigned by my teachers.  And Mr. Ellis directed, you know, a lot of that and assigned a lot of it.  But I was reading newspapers; I was reading short stories; I was reading the classics; I was--everything, and I didn't have a favorite.  I just--if I could get my hands on it and read, I'd read it.  I'd read a yearbook, you know.  I didn't care.  I just loved it, always have.
Story_ID: 649886
Speaker 1: So when it comes time to go to college--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what--how is that decision made; and where are you applying, and who's advising you, and?
Speaker 2: My school advisor [at North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky] helped a bit, but I did--I really did, did that myself.  And it was--my calculation was I will go to the best school in the state that we can afford and that will accept my, and that was the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  And it happened to have one of the finest journalism programs in the country and still does, so that was a no brainer for me.  And I really--in my--in my high school memory book it says, "I will be a writer in New York City [New York, New York]."  And in fact--and I am a writer in New York City--a journalist in New York City.  At that time, I thought I would be writing novels in, in New York City, but I think for my freshman year I realized well, nobody just packs their suitcases and heads to New York to be a writer and writing--to, to write novels that--that the way for me to have--to build my career as a writer was to be a newspaper reporter where I could go to work for a newspaper company.  And so that's, that's exactly what I did.
Speaker 1: And this is what I found--I mean it's sort of funny--about your--you know, your story of college, because you were always ahead of the--you know, the curve.  And so how did a young person--I know you said I was an adult as a--you know, a child.  But you get into college, can you--what was--University of Kentucky is how large--it's--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, at that time, I, I, I think I can still quote this: there were twenty-three thousand students, less than five hundred black.  I didn't care.  I was going and, and, I, I loved it.  First of all, I was out of my crazy house, you know.  I, I, I, I left as soon as I possibly could, and I knew--gosh, I'm, I'm serious about this.  I knew when I was twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, all the way up that I was going to be a writer.  And--
Speaker 1: But you're from a small town and you're and--now it's like a huge--I mean, this is a, a very large campus. But--so do you remember--did you ever--who was your roommate and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  So, again, as I say, coming from a [U.S.] military town, we were very guarded--yeah--or--I'm sorry, we were very--you know--
Speaker 1: Cloistered.
Speaker 2: --sort of protected and cloistered--
Speaker 1: It was--right.
Speaker 2: I went and my mom--my, my parents  [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] drove me the first day, dropped me off, I mean there was some pangs of oh, my gosh, this is the next phase of my life, and how do I do this?  But not much.  I was excited.  I went and I explored the campus, and I went to the bookstore and started looking at the books, even the textbooks.  I was excited just to buy my textbooks.  Stop, do you want me to?  So I was excited just to buy my textbooks and look at the books in the--in the bookstore at the campus.  I was like, oh, my god, I'm here.  I remember going to the journalism school just looking at the building.  I was like, my god, I'm in journalism school.  Are you kidding me?  I'm in--I think it was locked, but I just stood there and said, "This is the freaking journalism school; I can't believe it; I'm in journalism school; Oh, my god, oh, my god, oh, my god."  So I was excited.  I didn't have a lot of fear or trepidation or anything.  I was finally where I wanted to be.  I was on the path.  I was literally on the path, and I loved it.
Story_ID: 649887
Speaker 1: So how are you doing all these things like, you know, writing?  You said, that by the time you were a sophomore, you had clips and bylines and took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how is this?  Is just--well, one, you--you're used to working, you know, 'cause you had done that.  So how, how, how do you even know that that's what you should do?  Is it because--
Speaker 2: You know, you just sort of figure stuff out.  So I was the first person in the history of my family on either side of the family to ever go to college.  And my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.], they didn't know what to do, so I knew what to do.  I worked all summer.  I saved my money.  I knew I would need towels, and, you know, a microwave oven, and a TV set, and I went and I bought it.  I packed up the car.  I bought myself a car.  I worked and bought a little car, and we packed up the car and I took myself and there--I was off.  And I also knew when I got to school that okay one step at a time.  You go get your books; you enroll in your classes; and then, you know--thankfully this was a really, really top rate journalism school [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  And so from freshman year, the professors started talking about this thing called internships.  And I just knew that hm, okay, I'm going to need that, and I'm going to need a lot of those 'cause I'm not at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were--this is 1988?
Speaker 2: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 2: Eighty--'84 [1984] actually.  I graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 2: --in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, you graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From high school [North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: --in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I started setting out to do internships.  And I thought, okay, in order for me to get one of those big internships at one of the big name places, I need some stories.  I need to have written--I need some clips, you know.  So I called the local newspaper [Lexington Herald-Leader] and said, "Could I volunteer to be an intern?  You don't have to pay me.  I'll just, you know, come and work for free."  And I actually--now in my role at The New York Times, I tell students this all the time.  Internships are the key, because now I had a resume.  And, and then I had some--I had some stories to show, and my resume didn't say free intern; it said intern.  And so by the time I was a sophomore and a junior, when people were getting their first internships, I had done three, which impressed The Wall Street Journal and therefore I got a paid internship at The Wall Street Journal.  And it went on and on from there; and by the time I graduated from college I had five internships.
Story_ID: 649888
Speaker 1: So when you went to the internship at The Wall Street Journal, is that here in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, it was in the--at the time they had a bureau--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: --in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: They did?
Speaker 2: And I was the only intern the entire summer in the entire company that had a front page story, and I was very proud of that.
Speaker 1: So you--so let me ask you.  When you were at the--what was the paper at the university [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky]--well, no, in conduc- what was the paper that you interned with at--
Speaker 2: The Lexington Herald-Leader.
Speaker 1: The Lexington, okay, okay.  So what were you learning about journalism when you were an intern?
Speaker 2: I'm learning--I'm more--I--you know what?  That one, thank god, it was a volunteer one 'cause I was making all those very, you know, sophomore mistakes--misspelling names and maybe not getting the, the, the, the other side of the story, you know, fully (laughter)--and so, you know, I was cutting my teeth.  I was literally learning how you interview people and how you take the notes.  And you know, I found--one of the hardest things for me ear- early on was that people talked fast like--and I talk fast--getting the quotes down and getting them accurate.  Because I found that I was writing the quotes and then I'd hear something better.  And in my mind I'm thinking: do I keep going on the quote that I'm writing or do I switch to the other one?  And by the time I'm making that calculation in my mind, I, I didn't hear either of them.  So I literally was learning how to interview people, how to ask follow up questions while you're also writing.  And that was just very basic stuff--and we were doing this in class too--and then how to structure a story.  So it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 649889
Speaker 1: And so when you're in the newsroom at the Lexington Herald [Lexington Herald-Leader], who--are there other African Americans in that newsroom?
Speaker 2: Probably a few--
Speaker 1: A few--
Speaker 2: --but I--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know anyone, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, there were very few African Americans in my college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] as well.  And the, the African American students in journalism, we stuck together, and we actually created a minority student newspaper called The Communicator.  And, and I got a lot of experience through that.  In fact, those of us who worked on The Communicator, we're still in touch, and we laugh about the fact that--so one of the editors is now--let's see--oh, gosh.  He's a very senior guy who worked for the Detroit Free Press and is now off on his own working for a company.  And then--and then another man is now in radio, but they were my first editors, but we were students.  And they tease me to this day about the fact that I didn't want to call this professor on a Saturday and ask a follow up question.  I was like, "You can't--but it's her day off; you can't make me call her."  It's hilarious.  I mean, (laughter) considering the things I've asked since then of government officials, and politicians, and grieving parents, or whoever I had to interview for a story.  But I was so concerned about having to call her.  Literally, I was--I was taking baby steps.  I was learning to walk as a journalist.
Story_ID: 649890
Speaker 1: But those things are very important.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, if you--and you know, the thing that I--you know, I found in--you even look- you know, in reading your book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] and was that--the excitement of journalism--I mean, you know, that you were truly--how to tell a story--how to go after a story--
Speaker 2: I still have that.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I still have that excitement.
Speaker 1: It's almost like Don Quixote--
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  I mean, I still cannot believe, I swear.  I, I talk about this all the time to new employees at The New York Times.  I still can't believe they let me come in here and go to work and they actually pay me to do this.  It's incredible.  It's all I ever wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Wow (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and the fact that I, I got to do this--you know, you sort of talked about, like, where does religion come in and how do you--if you don't have a foundation, how do you--how do you, you know, come to understand what you believe about God?  Are you kidding?  I was sitting when I was seven or eight in the front of my house, writing little short stories, thinking I want to be a writer, and I'm a writer.  I've written a book, and I've been a journalist for The New York Times for seventeen years.  I didn't do that because I'm just brilliant.  I did that because, you know, my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] helped me and God held my hand, and from a very young age let me see in no uncertain terms this will be your path in life.  And, I mean, I get emotional thinking about it.  It's incredible.
Speaker 1: You know, it's--'cause some people know.  I mean, it was like your path was laid out.  It's a destiny in lots of ways.
Speaker 2: It's--I mean, it's incredible.
Speaker 1: In lots of ways.
Story_ID: 649891
Speaker 1: So when you--when you went to intern at The Wall Street Journal in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], what--that's, that's your so- your junior year?
Speaker 2: I--yeah, my junior of college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 1: Your junior year of college.  So was everybody else going to, to internships that summer too?
Speaker 2: Those of us who got internships.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of students just didn't get them.
Speaker 1: Didn't get them.  Because they were just starting actually.
Speaker 2: (Cough) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: So--I mean, you're saying that you had already done them, so that allowed you--so when you did that--this is--this is business reporting?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What--how was that experience different than, you know, covering the beat, you know?
Speaker 2: It, it--a story is a story is a story.  It doesn't matter and, frankly, told through the prism of business, many things are, are business stories.  So if you're writing about the economy, if you're writing about education, if you're writing about prisons, you know, the basic report- a story is a story.  A basic story is the same, so I didn't find it that daunting.
Story_ID: 649892
Speaker 1: So your senior year, looking at internships, and you're trying to decide what you're going to do, and you're finishing up your classes.  What, what are you--where are you thinking you want to be or who--are there--are there people interviewing on campus [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] or does it work that way?
Speaker 2: There were people interviewing on campus.  I also was part of a student chapter of the National Association of Black Journalists, and I can't tell you--there's a--there's at least two generations of us who got our first jobs out of college through that organization.  I mean, and they do God's work.  And literally, there's a job fair every year and I went to it, and I took my resume and my clips and interviewed at every booth there was.  Because at that time newspapers were really working to diversify, and so, you know, people were, were offering jobs to kids who looked like me who had experience.  And so I, I took my packet of clips and interviewed with everyone I could.  I didn't really care where I lived.  I wanted my first job.  So I knew--and I didn't care whether it was Wisconsin or Florida or--you know, I wanted to get a job as a writer at a decent newspaper and continue to learn and grow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So you're saying at the annual conference of NABJ could--is it--was it NABJ 'cause they have a big fair--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that people talk about, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you went around and you did interviews--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and everything.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so did your--so that's how your job came?
Speaker 2: That's how I ended up getting a job at the, The Palm Beach Post.  I was completing the internship at The Wall Street Journal, or maybe it was The Plain Dealer newspaper that summer.  I can't remember which came first.  And I was completing an internship, interviewing for jobs.  I had a couple of offers.  I decided to go to The Palm Beach Post because, you know, I figured they were going to hire me as a police beat reporter.  I thought that was the best training and would be really interesting work, and off I went to South Florida to cover crime and drugs, and you know, the poli- everything that's entailed with the police beat--murders--and it was fabulous.  I think every reporter should start on the police beat.
Story_ID: 649893
Speaker 1: Now that's because a lot of things are coming in, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So why did--but can you--can you say why you think it's the best kind of training; and what training you did receive?
Speaker 2: Well, at that point I was expected to be a professional journalist, so it wasn't literal training, but I mean on the job training.  And what I mean by that is if you're a young journalist, and you're trying to get your start in the world, if you can--if you can learn to interview a grieving parent who just--their kid's body was just pulled out of a river, you can interview any politician, any celebrity.  It's the hardest kind of reporting to do.  If you can--if you can make sources from cops, that's the hardest kind of sourcing to do.  You're writing on deadline, but you're also doing enterprise pieces based o- off of the news.  And so it really offers the ability to do everything that you need to do to be a reporter in life.  Interview people under tough circumstances; write on deadline; do follow up stories based on, on trends; make sources of some of the su- toughest sources out there, which were police officers.  And so I had--I was forced to do all of that, and by the way, do it on deadline.
Speaker 1: So how--why, why are police the, the toughest sources?
Speaker 2: They have to be.  I mean, if you're working in an environment where any given day you can lose your life, but also you're having to tell parents that their kids have been killed, or you're having to, you know, take bodies out of a--out of a car wreck, the last thing you want to do is sit around talking about all of this with a reporter.  And so I think--I think police officers quite--and journalists to, to a larger extent--there're certain professions where you sort of have to have a callous on some of those wounds to do what you do--what you--what you have to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what, what story were you pra- I mean, so can you describe an average day.  You know, like, what--when you would get to the off--
Speaker 2: As, as a police reporter?
Speaker 1: As a police reporter.
Speaker 2: Well, you go into the office and you call all the local police departments.  You call the hospitals and, and, you know, just say, "Hey, I'm calling from," at that time The Palm Beach Post, "[HistoryMaker] Dana Canedy, reporter for The Palm Beach Post, checking in today.  You know anything--any news of significance going on?"  And a lot of times the stories would be generated that way.  You go out and you'd, you'd interview folks for the stories.  If there wasn't a breaking news story, then I would read all the local press; I'd watch local television; I'd maybe come up with ideas on, on, on my own of what I thought could make a good story.  And then you'd go out and try to develop enterprise pieces, taking your sources to lunch, or, or, you know, going out and having a drink with them and trying to develop a rapport so that that would lead to other stories later.  It's just--it was just very basic entry level reporting.
Speaker 1: So when you refer to enterprise pieces, what is that referencing?
Speaker 2: So, so an enterprise piece would be a story that's not an obvious breaking news story.  For example, let's say, you know, there's a plane crash.  That's a breaking news story, but if you find out that the last three plane crashes were involving a certain piece of equipment on this kind of a--an airplane, that would be an enterprise piece, something that you developed because you dug deeper, that it ju- the story didn't just fall in your lap because there was breaking news.  And, and I, I loved doing enterprise news, but I actually really liked just the basic day to day police reporting, whether it was going, you know, on, on a--on a drug raid, riding alongside the police officers, or getting a call about some crime that had just occurred, or, you know, a big drug bust.  It--I found it exhilarating and interesting, and even while I was doing those kinds of stories and, and feeling like I was providing some context for the people that lived in South Florida about the crime world there and about the police world, I was also really mindful that I'm still honing my craft, that I was a new reporter, and I'm learning and growing and stretching these new muscles that I'd learned in journalism school [at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] and through these internships.  That were, were going to continue to pay off.  And I don't mean pay off for me in terms of larger paychecks, but in terms of making me a better reporter, you know.  I, I, I did--I knew I didn't know it all and I was still growing as, as a journalist.
Story_ID: 649894
Speaker 1: Were there things that you learned not to do; or I mean, examples that you saw that were bad examples, or?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think that, that, that--you know, it took me a couple of years out of college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] to, to realize, you know, that you can't make the same kinds of junior, entry level mistakes again, that were--even today I make mistakes on my--at my job, but I, I try not to have a pattern of, of the same kinds of things.  I mean, we're human and I thank God I do more right than I do wrong, but we're always growing.  And I think at that point, it was just sort of like making sure that my stories were accurate, that I didn't have corrections.  And when I was a young reporter, I used to find that corrections tended to come in threes--waves of three.  You'd have one and then darn it the next week you'd have another one.  So it was just really the basics of establishing credibility as a journalist, in terms of the information that I gathered but also making sure that it was fair, balan- you know, balanced, accurate, and that there weren't, you know, misspellings, and wrong addresses, the things that are sloppy, and when--and you know, young reporters do that.  But when you have--when you're--when you're sloppy, it undermines everything else you're doing.  So I was just learning to be a quality journalist.
Speaker 1: And you worked there for--let's--so you graduated 1986--eighty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was either '87 [1987] or '88 [1988], I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I have you starting at there--in 1987.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you worked there you say a couple y-
Speaker 2: One year--one--
Speaker 1: One year and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) long, horrible year.
Speaker 1: Wa- well, now why do you--you're--
Speaker 2: Because I loved the work.  I couldn't stand that newspaper [The Palm Beach Post].  They didn't have confidence in me.  They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well now you see now you never sa- okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I was trying to ask.  Now explain that, that dynamic.
Speaker 2: So I was green but smart and good.  I didn't have any mentors there; I didn't have people who were willing to help and develop me; and they just weren't good at it.  And, and I was not yet at the top of my game.  I was one year out of college.  This was my first job.  And so I just really felt like I was on my own and alone and didn't have a lot of support, so I did the best that I could for a year and then I left.  Because I had done an internship at The Plain Dealer newspaper in Cleveland [Ohio] when I was in college, and it couldn't have been more different.  They were so supportive of me and so nurturing that right when I was about to, like, lose my mind at this newspaper where I had very little support--I mean, so much so that I remember being out on a big crime story, and I see one of my colleagues.  And I'm like, "Hey, what are you doing here?"  He said, "Well, our editor sent us 'cause they weren't sure you were going to get the story."  Well, I needed more s- support than that.  If I was going to have confidence in myself, I certainly didn't need to go out on an assignment and have my bosses have so little confidence in me that they thought they had to send somebody else to back me up.  I mean, that's just a recipe for disaster.  It's horrible management.  So I left and went to The Plain Dealer newspaper in the very same role--as a crime reporter.  I ended up staying there for eight and a half years and blossoming.
Speaker 1: I know you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then went from there to The New York Times.
Story_ID: 649895
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the, the experience at the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer].  Where are you living first of all?  And, and what--are you working with the same people that you worked with when you were an intern?  And who are the--and so--if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, so when I--when I moved to Cleveland [Ohio], I, I finally had a little bit of savings in the bank for the first time in my whole life.  And so I was living in a fabulous apartment on Lake Erie overlooking the lake, and I had a convertible sports car.  I was a police and crime reporter working with, yes, many of the same people that I worked with when I was an intern who recruited me.  And I'll tell you.  One of the great things about being there was I worked as an intern, and they believed in me so much that after I graduated [from the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], they hired me back.  So this was based on having known the work that I did as a student, and that was a big confidence boost to me.  They gave me huge opportunities and a lot of support.  And I, I, I did it.  I rose to the occasion.
Speaker 1: You know what I interest- so are you saying that you--did you contact them and say I'm not happy--
Speaker 2: No, they called me out of the blue and said, "Hey, you know, we were interested in hiring you when you graduated, but we had two candidates for the same job.  We have this job opening up.  It's a similar job to what you're doing now.  Would you like to come?"  And I said, "Oh, my god, can I start tomorrow?  Are you kidding me?  I'm so done here.  I'm ready to be out of this place."  And it was the best decision.  It was a turning point for me, 'cause not only did I have a great job, but I had a lot of support.  They believed in me, and that's really all I needed--some time and somebody to believe that I could do this.  At The Palm Beach Post they were telling me that they thought I chose the wrong profession and that I--that I was never going to make it as a journalist, and I, I was starting to believe it.
Speaker 1: I see.  Because of your errors and mistakes--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--even though you said you liked--you know, you liked what you did--
Speaker 2: I loved the work.
Speaker 1: You loved the work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you didn't have--
Speaker 2: But I didn't have support from the--from the company, from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who--
Speaker 2: --the institution.
Speaker 1: --who were the people--who were the names of the people that were supporting you at the Cleveland Plain Dealer?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, Thom Greer [Thomas H. Greer], at the time.  He was I think a managing editor--was the first black managing editor at that newspaper.  I, I can't remember a whole lot of the names, but Maxine Lynch, who was an editor on the--she was an African American.  She was an editor on the city desk I believe at the time.  But all of my bosses they were just--they had a really good internship program, and they were used to developing young talent.  I think the paper's changed a lot in ways that aren't necessarily great because the industry's gone through much, but they were amazing to me.  And I covered--so, in the eight and a half years I was there, I covered the police beat; I covered suburban government; I actually did a series on the Amish, if you can believe that; I became a business and finance reporter; they sent me off to do a fellowship to see if I wanted to be an editor; I was an editor on the city desk.  It was incredible.
Story_ID: 649896
Speaker 1: So how are you--are you becoming part of the Cleveland [Ohio] community as part of this?  And is that sort of a role in--I want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually.  Because as a journalist [for The Plain Dealer], I was mindful that I needed to be an outsider.  There are certain things you can't do as a journalist.  You know, you can't go and campaign for a candidate; you can't make your political views known.  And I take that very seriously, even more so now at the level of The New York Times.  But, you know--no, I--my job was to be--was to be an outsider, an observer, a recorder of news and the history that was being unfolded in that town at the time, and I was happy and proud to do that.  So civic involvement was something that as a journalist I've always shied away from and I think most journalists do.  Ethically, we just--that's not--that's not our, our, our role.  Our role in any community is to document the news and, and, and not to use our--any clout that we have from being a journalist or, or, or any standing that we might have in the community because of our positions to further our, our own personal beliefs or what have you.  That's, that's, that's contradictory to what your role is as a journalist.  So, no, I was not a--I was of the community, but I was not, you know.
Speaker 1: So who was mayor at the time?
Speaker 2: Gosh, Mike White [Michael R. White] I think.
Speaker 1: Mike White was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they had the black mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought, maybe it was Mike White.  And so are you covering--did you--did you cover--
Speaker 2: I didn't cover city hall, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't cover city hall.  You covered--
Speaker 2: Suburban government.
Speaker 1: Subur- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, I started on the police beat, crime--
Speaker 1: But that's in--
Speaker 2: --in the city.
Speaker 1: --that's sort of city government though, the police beat.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But then I covered suburban government.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So I, I was not covering the city.  We had other reporters who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So suburban--
Speaker 2: --were doing that.
Speaker 1: --suburban meaning what--which part of the--
Speaker 2: There was a county called Geauga County [Ohio].  It was very rural, and I loved covering that, 'cause it was like covering a foreign country.  They had a large Amish population.  And so I was covering Amish communities, and, and they had some of the weirdest murder trials out there in that crazy community.  And so I was--I was in court covering these really fascinating cases.  And I'll never forget covering a few very high profile, very sensational murder cases at the--at the time.  And it was--you know, it was school board meetings and really sort of--my job was to be immersed in that community as a reporter, and that's, that's what I did.  And then I became a business reporter covering small business in Cleveland--covering businesses in general, but for a while I had a beat covering small business.  But also while I was a business reporter, I covered companies like American Greetings [American Greetings Corporation, LLC], which is based in Cleveland; and discovered that I really liked financial reporting.
Story_ID: 649897
Speaker 1: Then I decided, you know, maybe I'll try to be an editor for a while and see if I like that.  And so I went and did a fellowship to sort of get some training as an editor; and they gave me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where did you do the fellowship?
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, I knew you were going to ask me that.  It was--I'll have to look that up for you, 'cause I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's--it--I can't remember--it was in--it was in Tucson [Arizona].  I think it might have been the Maynard Institute [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education].
Speaker 2: Oh, the Maynard In--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, it was the Maynard Institute.
Speaker 2: Okay, but they're--
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Dori Maynard.
Speaker 2: Dori Maynard, but that's in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], right?
Speaker 1: Yes, but they had a--they had an editing program that was done I conjunction with the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona] I believe, and I think we're at--in Tucson for eight weeks.  Then I came back and I was a--I was an editor on the night side, so I worked from like--
Speaker 2: So participating in the--in the Maynard Institute allowed you do--to become it.
Speaker 1: So, so in order to get into that program and to go through it, you had to get a guarantee from your newspaper that when you came back you'd be an editor.  And so they [The Plain Dealer] promoted me and made me an editor, and I was now editing reporters covering the same stories I had covered.  And that was--that was a whole new experience for me.
Speaker 2: So what--you're--at this point, you are late twent--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --late twenties.
Speaker 1: Twenties, yeah.
Speaker 2: And you're--so the question--I have a question, though.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And that is, was there ever the, the--and I'm just wondering how news has changed or--you know, people come at news at different points.  But there was never the recommendation that you go back and get your master's just because you were already in the--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in p--
Speaker 1: Those five internships were worth a master's degree.  I was already working and, and, and writing and thinking--I was starting to think then that the next thing I wanted to do was maybe write a book.  And I had some ideas for books, but I was so busy just--I mean, being a news reporter is--it's not a nine to five job.  It just isn't.
Story_ID: 649898
Speaker 1: You know, I was--at that time, I might spend, you know, twelve hours in prison with a murderer to understand why he did what he did--I, in fact, I did do that--why he did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can, can--
Speaker 1: --what he did.  Sure.
Speaker 2: --we--can we talk about that particular case, who the murderer's name was and--
Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, I don't remember his name.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I can find the clip for you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay--
Speaker 1: But anyway, I'll never forget the case.  It was--it was a guy who murdered his girlfriend's husband on the--slaughtered him on the front lawn of the house.  And I, I get--I was thinking--and then when she showed up at the trial with her new boyfriend, and I remember thinking how did this happen?  How did this guy end up doing this?  And it was very clear to me that she had manipulated him into seeing her as a victim and killing her husband for her.  She was from a wealthy family; he wasn't; so she got off scot free.  And, and, and he was going to spend the next twenty, thirty years in prison.  And I wanted to understand, how did you become a murderer, you know, for this woman?  And so I literally spent the day in prison with him, and I had him explain to me everything.  He told me where he put the, the knife in this guy's neck, why he did it, and I just found it fascinating.  I, I guess, you know, part of being a, a journalist is wanting to study human nature of all sorts.  So that was just one example.  I could give you a million examples of where I got to just like study human nature.  I'll never forget being at the cop shop one day.  We had a little office there.  And I get a call from this woman.  This was right when crack cocaine was, was, was, was making the news.  Nobody really knew what it was.  So this woman calls.  It's a slow news day.  She says, "Listen, my son is in a coma--a coma because he smoked crack cocaine, and I don't know if he's going to make it.  I want you to come and, and look at him and te- you know, I want to tell you about him so that this doesn't happen to other young people."  Well, I thought this was a prank call, but I was like, well, let me go see.  I go to the hospital and lo and behold, I walk into this hospital room and there's this young--he's a baby really, sixteen, seventeen year old kid, (unclear) to all these machines and monitors.  And the mother's there and she tells me the story about how she, in her view, lost her baby.  And oh, my god, I wrote that story [for The Plain Dealer], and, and, and I think it was--the mayor talked about it; teachers talked about it.  I remember one time--I mean, just--I love studying and documenting human nature.  I had a day off and I was at the mall.  And I walked past this art gallery, and literally in the window there was a chair and an easel.  And there was a young African American boy painting the most lovely painting.  So I walked in and I asked the store, "What is--what, what is he doing?  Why is he--?" He says "Oh, my gosh, this kid, he's a really gifted painter, you know.  He's, he's, he's been accepted into the Art Insti--the Chicago Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but he doesn't have the money to go.  So I let him sit in the window and paint to earn money, and hopefully he can take some art classes."  I wrote that story and the kid got the money for college.  Oh, what better way to spend your workday?  My gosh, to this day, I've still--it's just to be able to do this with your life is--it's, it's a blessing and it's an honor; it humbles me all the time.  And I'm thankful to God to be able to do this kind of work.  It's really incredible.
Story_ID: 649899
Speaker 1: You know, it's, it's interesting 'cause I don't think I've had many journalists talk about the human side of things, you know, in that way.  And then I've also had some people--the, the human--it's more an academic approach I think.
Speaker 2: I'm not an academic kind of person (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know, but I'm saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that that's where I've heard it discussed in that way.  Just because you do have to keep a distance--
Speaker 2: Distance.
Speaker 1: --from your, your subjects, so (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. I actually don't believe in that.  I don't keep a distance from my subjects--I mean, my sources.  You have to be professionally appropriate.  There's no way to be distant from a mother whose, whose kid is sitting there hooked up to machines because he's in a crack [crack cocaine] induced coma.  Why be distant from that?  I think the closer you are to it, the better your journalism is.  You have to be--you have to have your boundaries--professional boundaries, but I, I never paid a lot of time to--a lot of attention to the whole keep your distance, be objective thing because--and I tell students this all the time; there's no such thing as objectivity.  And I think it's a dangerous thing to teach people to be objective.  What you have to do is be--is realize that you are subjective in what your opinions and your biases are, and what your--what your--what your triggers are.  Because once you're aware of them, then you can filter them out of your reporting.  But to pretend that they don't exist or you don't feel something I think weakens the journalism and not strengthens it--instead of strengthening it.
Speaker 1: Did, did ever--I mean, anything seem so painful, or frighten you, that you were like--you know, there have been all those, those cases where people are like, I couldn't do it anymore.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I can write about--and I know this is fast forwarding, but if I can write about and report about the father [Charles M. King] of my child [Jordan King] being blown up by a bomb in Afghani- I mean in Iraq, then no.  But even before--even before that, I, I feel that this is my calling, going back from those days in Kentucky writing, you know, short stories and poems.  This is what--this my--what, what I was meant to do and supposed to do with my life; and I, I feel as strong about--strongly about that as I do anything.
Story_ID: 649900
Speaker 1: So was, was the Cleveland Plain Dealer [The Plain Dealer]--'cause if I had not known that, I would not have known that the West- the West Palm Beach Post [The Palm Beach Post] was not a positive experience.  I know I read that you said it wasn't--that, "It wasn't good for--fit for me," and you talked about the lizards, you know.  (Laughter) You, you had too many lizards in the bathroom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But at the--at the Cleveland Plain Dealer, were there things that were--that you were frustrated by at--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, not at all.
Speaker 2: I loved that place.
Speaker 1: The whole--the whole experience?
Speaker 2: I'm a really positive person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't have many frustrations in life.  Gen- generally speaking, I'm not saying I don't have problems, I don't have difficult times, but I'm a really optimistic, upbeat person.  I don't spend a lot of time on negativity.  So, no, it was--it was terrific.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Why wouldn't it be?  I had a great apartment; I had friends; I was doing work that I loved.  You know, it was kind of a sweet spot in my life.  So it was good.
Speaker 1: And so when you--so how does the, the situation happen where you have the opportunity to come to The New York Times?  Okay, and before you get there, had this place been your--on your--in your view (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely not.  I never dreamed of coming to The New York Times.  You know what?  My whole goal in life was to go to a newspaper of any size where I could tell good stories and do good work and that at some point I was going to shift and write books on the side.  That was my life plan.  It didn't matter to me whether it was New York [New York] or Cleveland [Ohio]; it really didn't.  I just wanted to be--this is going to sound corny, but, like, I wanted to be a productive citizen telling good stories; that's it.  I never thought--I never dreamed about The New York Times.  I dreamed about being a writer in New York, but I thought I was going to be writing novels, you know, or, or screenplays or something, right?  So, again, through NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I was at a--at a conference.
Speaker 1: So would you go every year to NABJ?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You would?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And usually my paper--
Speaker 1: What pape-?
Speaker 2: --my newspaper would send me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 649901
Speaker 1: So each year I would go to these conventions [of the National Association of Black Journalists].  And this particular year my newspaper sent me to be a part of a project where the idea was that for four days journalists would come from all over the country, and we would actually put out a newspaper--I think we were in I want to say Baltimore [Maryland] maybe--that was supposed to be the model of diversity--the epitome of a diverse newspaper.  And we did that.  Oh, my gosh, it was a lot of hard work.  And there were some folks there participating from The New York Times.  And they liked the way I thought, and they liked the stories that I did and what I had to contribute.  And so somebody said, "You know, you should come to The Times and talk to us."  And I was like, yeah, right, whatever--you know, The New York Times?  Sure.  And I did.  I came for a round of interviews, and I left--this is--you're going to find this hilarious.  I left crying.  I didn't send a thank you note, follow up, anything.  I thought I had--I thought I had bombed.  I thought it was horrible.  I went back to the hotel and cried, and I got on a plane and went back to Cleveland [Ohio] and said, "Well, I guess I'm staying in Cleveland."  And they didn't call me for a year.  Well--
Speaker 2: Oh, they didn't call you for a year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For a year.
Speaker 2: Okay, so talk about the, the interview process here, the--okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, this is--this is actually, it, it sounds (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it's for an apprenticeship program--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll tell you--I'll tell you--which I now run, by the way.  I'll, I'll, I'll--it's actually--it's actually a great story.  So I come here, and the interviews were--in my view, so awful.  I went back to the hotel and cried (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, what were--
Speaker 1: I was like--
Speaker 2: --what were they--so who--
Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But anyhow, I called at that time the business editor at The Plain Dealer, who had been my boss and was a mentor to me, and said, "It's, it's horrible; they're not going to hire me; I just know it; I think I did horrible."  And I came back, and he told me later.  He said I completely changed as a journalist when I came back, that I was so motivated and so committed to being even better that I worked harder.  And he said it was in--it was incredible to see.  I'm still in touch with him to this day.  Anyhow, Tom Coscarelli was his name.  He's a friend now.  Anyhow, I didn't hear from The New York Times for a year, and I thought it was 'cause they hated me.  And a year later I got a call from Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd], who was the depu- he was--at that time, he was probably assistant managing editor.  He said, "Hey, do you want to come to The Times as a--as a reporter?"  I'm like, "What are you talking about?  I've haven't been there in a year."  And he said, "Yes, you know.  You were just finishing your fellowship.  You, you wanted to be an editor.  We wanted to give you a year to see whether you wanted to continue down that path being an editor or whether you'd like to be a reporter.  But if you'd like to be a reporter at The New York Times, we'd love to have you."  I couldn't believe it.  And there was a catch.  It was an apprenticeship program and called the 8i program.  8i is a tax designation, but it's the intermediate reporter program.  I now run that program.  But--and I tell the, the, the young people who are interviewing for it that The New York Times hires people for two reasons--one of two reason: either you're at the top of your game, and we want you here; or we see so much in potential in you that we think you--we can mold you into a New York Times journalist, and we want to get you here.  I was hired for that later reason.  I had gotten as far as I could at The New York Times with the editing I was getting there.
Speaker 2: You mean at the Cleveland--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, at the--at the Cleveland Plain Dealer.  I'd gotten as far as I could there with the editing I was getting, which was good but not great, and, and the guidance I was getting there.  It was time to--it was time to, to push myself, which is something I have always done.  And so here I was.  The first time in my life I had money in the bank; I had security; I was doing a great job; and I was thinking of giving all of that up to come to a place where I had three years to prove that I belong here, or they would--literally I, I would be fired with no job.  That was a big deal for me.  Because stability has always been important to me to be able to take care of myself.  But I did it, and I was promoted out of the program within nine months to a year.
Speaker 2: I see--
Speaker 1: And I now run the program seventeen years later.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I saw that you had--that you were--you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --'cause I looked and I said she didn't have--she--it didn't take her a year.
Speaker 1: Well, because The Wall Street Journal found out I was in this program, and they said, "Are you kidding me? You're a trainee?  Come work for us.  You don't have to train here.  We'll promote you."  And so I thought, well, do I--do I go with The Wall Street Journal where I had a standing job offer for years there or do I stay at The New York Times as a--as a trainee?  And you know, when I told The Times that I had this offer and I didn't know what to do, they said, "Well, we'll take you out of the program.  Does that make it easier?"  And I said, "Yes, I'm staying."
Story_ID: 649902
Speaker 1: So can you talk about the history of the program that you were--you know, that you now run?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about the history and when it got started and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't know what year they started it, but I think we've had this program now for twenty years or so.  And this was a program where you take young reporters--at that time exclusively reporters.  Now we have producers in the program.  We have copy editors in the program.  We have video journalists in the program.  But you take people who weren't quite yet ready to be at The New York Times but had so much potential that we would bring them here and, and, and mold them; give them challenges, but extra training and support; and give them time to really develop. It's, it's sort of an extended probationary period, but it's saying to these folks that, "Listen, we think you're really good.  We think you'll be better if you come here.  We're not quite ready to pull the trigger and give you tenure at The New York Times, but we really think you're going to get there and be a part of the next generation of our newsroom.  And so come here and we'll--you know, we'll help you develop and give you some big opportunities."  It's a fabulous program.  And so, you know, that--I came in through that program, and, and now, you know, I having, having been an intermediate reporter and now running the intermediate reporting program, I'm, I'm really, really--consider it a great point of pride to be in charge of that for The New York Times and to help this next generation of young journalists develop.
Story_ID: 649903
Speaker 1: I'd like to talk about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] and what--you know, who were the people when you got in the organization--you're going and a young journalist?  Who were the people that you're--you know, are like, the people, you know, that you're hearing and you're looking up to?  Who are they?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, there were so many greats.  Greg Moore [Gregory L. Moore], who's a dear friend of mine and former boyfriend--we're really good friends--he was a giant in the industry at the time, and I was like, wow, this guy is sitting on a panel giving advice about how you cover, you know, whatever it was at the time, and I would just soak up every word;  and people like Maxine Lynch, who was a woman reporter and, and later an editor at The Plain Dealer where I worked, and listening to her talk about how she covered her stories; and [HistoryMaker] Acel Moore; and, you know--oh, gosh, people from The Washington Post; from the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]; all these--and, and small pla- places as well, but really out there doing the work while I was still dreaming about being a journalist.  It was unbelievable, and the thing is they were so supportive of us young people.  You know, we would go there and they'd, you know, look at our resumes and rip them--be bleeding red.  But once you fixed it, you had a much better resume, you know.  And these are people who would, you know, not take excuses for, for not, not being excellent and continuing to hone your craft and do well, but they prop you up and give you a pep talk and--you know.  And then years later, I was running some of those programs.  I ran the, the newsroom for a couple of years there.  We--they--the kids put out a convention newsletter--a newspaper--and for a couple of years I was really involved with that.  And so there's this amazing cycle that happens at NABJ, where you start at one end of it, you know, with your little resume and clips from college; and a few years later you're on the other end of that table interviewing the young people and helping them, you know, get their first jobs.  And it's, it's just an amazing thing.
Story_ID: 649904
Speaker 1: So you, you, you have that--you get out of the--you get promoted out of the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the intermediate reporting program.
Speaker 1: --intermediate reporting program.  By this time, you've decided that you don't--The Wash- I mean The Wall Street Journal contacts you, but you decide that you want to stay here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: This is the best news organization in the world; it just is.  And The Wall Street Journal is really fantastic, but I did- didn't want to just be a business journalist.  I mean, at The New York Times I knew I could become a foreign correspondent.  I could write about theater; I could write about business; I could be, you know, a national correspondent.  The sky was the limit, and I was doing good work here.  I was enjoying it, and I, I just saw no reason to leave.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what were you assigned when you first come here after you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I started as a business and finance reporter covering the consumer product group, and I was covering companies like Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], Colgate [Colgate Palmolive Company], and Gillette [The Gillette Company].  I was writing about their management teams, you know, trends of the industry, about their finances.  And then after doing that for about four and a half years, I was asked to join a team to write about race relations in the United States.  And midway through that project ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'], I was asked to be also, in addition to reporting my story, to be a part of the editing team on the other stories.  We won a Pulitzer Prize for that.
Speaker 1: Well, okay, you're going too quickly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I want to--I want to go back with the intermediate program--intermediate--
Speaker 2: Reporting program.
Speaker 1: --reporting program.  And I want to ask about what are you learning when people say they had--you have potential to be a New York Times reporter?  What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--it took me--I was so frustrated in the beginning because they would say that to me.  And I, I thought, well, what does that mean, you know?  And they kept telling me, "You need to write with more authority."  And I--I was like, "I don't know what--I don't know what that means.  I don't know how to do it."  Now I just get it.  Oh, my gosh, I'm a completely different journalist now than I was when I walked in this door.  In fact, I look at the clips I submitted to get hired here.  I can't believe they hired me (laughter).  The depth of reporting, the--you know, the structure of the stories, the, the, the, the, the subject matter that I chose to focus on.  All of that is much more sophisticated now.  It's just better because this place has a way of both demanding the best, but, but also helping to mold you to, to, to produce that, that level of work.  And so I was doing decent work at that point.  I wasn't nearly asking, you know, the more in depth follow up questions that you need to ask to get beyond the surface of a story.  A lot of things that I would attribute in quotation marks in stories before, I now could just say because I was an authority on this subject.  You know, I said it with authority, and I could back it up in my reporting.  I had an editor tell me when I would be working on certain stories as a business and finance reporter, I--let's say I'm doing a story on a--I was doing a story on a public company when the--when the market opens, you--we should see the stock of that company move based on what you wrote, and it would.  The stock market would open, and you'd see the stock move based on this.  And I thought, that's writing with authority.  I couldn't have done that at The Plain Dealer.  I didn't know how to do that.  I knew how to tell a good story, you know.  I'm not saying they didn't do award winning work, because they did.  You know, I wouldn't have gotten to The New York Times without The Plain Dealer, but it's just a different level, just a different level, both in terms of what they expected of me and what I could produce.  I had more experience by this point.  There were more resources here.  You know, if I want to just, just get on a plane and go see, for example, the new kitchen operating sys- system that McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] was rolling out, I could just do it, just tell my boss I'm going to--I'm going to--you know, I'm going to go spend two days in Chicago [Illinois] looking at, you know, the new kitchen operating system at McDonald's.  And I, I would do that; and then, you know, come back and write about that.
Story_ID: 649905
Speaker 1: So is it--so why does The Times differ from other papers, or why is there only one Times?  And I, I ask that because--
Speaker 2: Boy oh boy oh boy.
Speaker 1: --you, you just point to: well, if I wanted to go here I had the resource to do it.  But I'm not--I would say that there are other places where there could be some more resources.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I would say that The Times--that The Times is different for so many reasons.  I could talk about this for an hour.  The number one reason is because this place literally is a public trust.  The Sulzberger family, who owns The New York Times, takes that very seriously.  They consider themselves stewards and caretakers of an American public trust that's a part of American democracy, and we all drink that Kool-Aid and believe that wholeheartedly.  It is an honor and a privilege to be at this place, and our brand and our role in American society and American journalism is at the base of everything we do.  And so I'll--I, I, I tell this story to new employees that sort of gets at your question, which is I remember when I was getting out of college [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], and one of the places I applied for a job was the Miami Herald.  And at that time, they gave a written psychological exam.  And I remember asking them, "What are you looking for?"  And they said, "Insecure overachievers."  Well, I'd maintain that The Times has managed to hire all those people without the exam.  And if you think about it (laughter), if you're insecure, you're constantly on that treadmill trying to do better.  And if you're an overachiever, it's already better than what most people are doing anyway.  We hire really bright, really motivated people who, by the way, for the most part, have--they've already been fabulous somewhere else.  So they're coming here at the top of their game, you know, really understanding that they're becoming a part of not just a news organization, but a public trust.  And then we just have some of the smartest minds and the most motivated people here, and we all have the same goal.  And I, I, I give a speech to new employees where I say, "Really everybody has the same job at The New York Times," which is to preserve and uplift this, this news organization for the next generation of, of readers and, and, and newsroom employees.  It's something we all take very seriously around here.
Speaker 1: And no other news organization has been able to rep- replicate it.  That's what I--
Speaker 2: Well, I--a friend of mine, who also happens to be one of my bosses, my immediate supervisor, she's a dear friend.  Her name is Janet Elder, and she's one of my mentors--says all the time that if The New York Times ceased to exist, it could never be recreated.  Not only do I believe that, but I would go further and say that if The New York Times ceased to exist under the ownership of the Sulzberger family, it could never be recreated.  It's the last one standing.  I mean, the Grahams just sold the, The Washington Post, as you know.  You know, for a long time The Wall Street Journal was, was family held.  This is--this puts and keeps The New York Times in a league of its own.  There is no encroachment here from, from the advertisers.  Do you know--I mean, we, we--the journalism drives everything, and it is very pure here, in that--in that we don't--we don't cut corners; we're not influenced by outside influences; we don't do anything here that dilutes our, our, our brand, and, and, and everything flows from there.  And so that's why it's in a league of its own.
Story_ID: 649906
Speaker 1: Well a lot of that has changed over--especially over the last ten years.  It's--
Speaker 2: Not here.
Speaker 1: No, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm saying a lot of other places--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --it's changed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because they--
Speaker 2: --most other places.
Speaker 1: --they were fighting for their survival.
Speaker 2: Survival.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: And so were we.  Who are--I mean, we weren't fighting for our survival.  We were--we were calibrating for the realities that were happening in the news industry, which is that this is a shrinking industry.  But you know what?  Quality journalism--the need and the demand for quality journalism has not changed, and I don't think it will change.  What's changed is the delivery system, you know, like how people consume their news.  But this is one of those, those industries where there wasn't anything wrong with the product, it's how you monetize it when, when people are reading it and consuming it in, in vastly different ways than ever before.  That's the challenge, but I don't think that's an unhealthy challenge.  In fact, a few years ago, particularly at The Times [The New York Times], we were all concerned with--you know, bloggers were coming out of the woodwork, and there were, you know, all these news organizations starting up online.  Well you know what?  That's actually even healthy for us.  Because it used to be, a few years ago, you know, we were I think driven a little bit too much by getting it first.  Do we have it up on our website first?  How competitive are we?  But it doesn't really matter if the association--the Associated Press or The Washington Post break something two minutes before we do.  Now what people say is, "Well, what is The Times saying?  Does The Times have it up yet?"  And, and whether it's--whether it's a historic moment like Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] being elected or God forbid some tragedy in this country, you know, a massive earthquake or whatever, in times when people need quality news, they come to us.  And I don't say that to be, you know--like, I don't--I don't say that out of any sense of us being arrogant about it.  I'm saying that, that it's because we're a trusted brand.  We know what we're doing.  We invest in quality, and, and we're all driven by that mission of being a part of--being a public trust.
Story_ID: 649907
Speaker 1: Now the question I have is, when do you meet Greg Moore [Gregory L. Moore]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I was nineteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?  I don't--nineteen, you're at the University--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of Kentucky.
Speaker 2: At an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you started doing NABJ in--at University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I know you had said you had an NAB- NABJ chapter there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me how--
Speaker 2: We became friends.  He was a mentor to me.  We were at very different points and places in our lives, both personally and professionally.  And I met him once when I was nineteen.  And I remember looking at him thinking oh, my god, I could fall in love with this man.  I didn't see him again for ten years.
Speaker 1: So you met him again then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ten years later.
Speaker 1: --at twenty-nine, and you are at The New York Times?
Speaker 2: I was at The Plain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were at The Plain--
Speaker 2: Where was I?
Speaker 1: Dealer?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: I know--
Speaker 2: --at the end of my time at The Plain Dealer I believe.
Speaker 1: Plain Dealer, okay, so you--so how do you meet, and then how--'cause you then developed a relationship.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so at that point, he was going through a divorce.
Speaker 1: Now we're at twenty-nine?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I don't even remember what the--I guess I was twenty--he was twenty-nine.  I don't--I don't remember.
Speaker 1: He's older than you, though.
Speaker 2: He's twelve years older--
Speaker 1: So--right.
Speaker 2: --than me, so how old was I?  Nineteen, twenty--yeah, so I was about twenty-nine I guess.  And we met at a journalism event.  He was giving a speech.
Speaker 1: Now talk about his background.
Speaker 2: What do you mean--what--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I mean, (laughter) his professional background.
Speaker 2: No, no, but--
Speaker 1: No, no, no--
Speaker 2: --so he was a--he grew up in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: So he, he grew up in Cle- you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Cleveland--a lot of Cleveland (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --background.
Speaker 2: He grew up, and he was--he's from Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Charles [Charles M. King]--
Speaker 2: Yep, Cleveland had some good guys.  I got to tell you, they grow some good guys there (laughter).  But he grew up in Cleveland and, and you know, went to work for the, The Plain Dealer, rose to be a pretty senior editor there, and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what else to say about him.
Speaker 1: So (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I'm much more comfortable talking about my work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but you are--no--
Speaker 2: --than my life.
Speaker 1: --you bare all in everything--and the older you get, you, to interview you and you're not baring all.  Is that because you're in charge of telling your own story (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, it's because I'm much more comfortable talking about my work than--
Speaker 1: No, but you, you, you talk about yourself in your book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy].
Speaker 2: I don't--yes, I do.  But I--it's not every day somebody asks me to, tell you about your ex-boyfriend, (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  No, well, I'm just saying that you--you've mentioned him in your book--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that you had a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there was a twelve year difference, and it--what his mother said.  You know, she's like--you're not, I--no, you were--you were--'cause she's the one who said--
Speaker 2: Go to--, "He could get hit by a bus.  Go to New York [New York]."
Speaker 1: Go to New York.  So that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But was he at The Boston Globe at this time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: He was at The Boston Globe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the managing editor of The Boston Globe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were dating, and I got this offer from The New York Times.  He wanted me to come to Boston [Massachusetts].  And I thought, but it's The New York Times.  What am I going to do?  And I love his mother.  She is--I describe her in the best sense of the, the term, she's a real dame.   And so I called her up and I said, "What do I do?  You know, I love your son, and I'm afraid if--you know, if I take this job, it's going to be hard on us."  And she says, "Honey, you know, I love him too, and I love you, and you know what?  I'm sorry, but he could get hit by a bus tomorrow.  Girl, you better take that job," and (laughter) off I went to The New York Times.
Story_ID: 649908
Speaker 1: So at this point, Charles [Charles M. King]--so let's talk about Charles coming into your--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to your life, which you talk about in the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy], but you go back to visit for Father's Day, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is what year--this is?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I'd have to look in my book actually.  I'm not--I'm actually not--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I can--
Speaker 2: It's all running together.
Speaker 1: No, I think it's two--no, it is--is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand and one [2001]--no, no, no, wait.
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety--
Speaker 2: I came to The Times [The New York Times] in 1996. So it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-six [1996], so is it 1998?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, okay.  In ninety--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Go on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I, I go home to Kentucky [Radcliff, Kentucky] one year for Father's Day, and I walk into the living room and literally, like, I practically run into this man.  And I, I, thought, whoa! Where did you come from?  He was gorgeous and shy--and I--like now, it just left me kind of, you know, breathless and I feel like a school girl, and that was Charles.
Speaker 1: And so talk about that relationship and you know.
Speaker 2: That was, you know, a time early on when it, it just it took me a while to really realize that this guy loved me completely and, and it was real, you know.  I hadn't seen a lot of healthy, good relationships between men and women, husband and wife, certainly not in my house.  And so I always had my guard up, thinking, you know, yeah, I had boyfriends and I had fun and all that, but, like, I was about my career, that I wasn't going to be like so many military wives who were stuck on whatever new military base their husband was assigned to.  And then when he got orders to go somewhere else, she had to pack up, give up her career, move the kids.  I just did not want that.  I thought, you know what?  That's letting someone else control your life and control your destiny.  I want to be in the driver's seat of my life.  And the way to do that is to have a career and, and have my friends and my community that I choose to build.  And that's what I did.  I mean, I have, have--I've had some fabulous people in my life and some really wonderful boyfriends.  But my priority at that point in my twenties and thirties was my career, and I don't regret that to this day.
Speaker 1: So he comes into your life and you talk about you being so different, in lots--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, you grew--he--you--now he's [U.S.] military--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as they call military--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --through and through, but what--so were, were, were you--you were just out of this relationship, right? With--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, so Greg [Gregory L. Moore] and I had just broken up, and, and I walk into the room, I meet this wonderful man, and the first thing I thought was, darn it!  Why does he have to be a soldier?  I do not want this (laughter), but he was so sweet and so loyal.  And it was--it was--it's one of those things in life that, like, it's not what you can plan for that'll trip you up, that'll get you, it's the stuff you don't see coming.  And this was the most pleasant surprise of my entire life.
Speaker 1: And he was introduced to you by your father.
Speaker 2: By my father, which I always told him was his worse quality, that my parents [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] liked him so much (laughter).  I said that jokingly.  But he was just--you know, Charles was just a simple, humble, smart, kind man. And I--for years I think I subconsciously pushed him away and tested him just to make sure he was really going to stay and that he was really that good.  And lo and behold, he was.  You know, I never--I had a really good relationship with Greg, and Greg loved me dearly, and we're--as I said, really good friends to this day, but I had never had anybody love me like that.  And, and because I'd focused so much on my career, I was sort of out of--out--a fish out of water.  I didn't know what to do with this, this, this man, you know.  I--at that point, I was thinking ahead to my next assignment for The New York Times.  I didn't want to get married.  I didn't want kids.  You know, like I said, I'd had wonderful boyfriends.  I had--have dear friends; was going off on vacation to South Africa; you know, going on these interesting assignments to the Dominican Republic and different places.  I didn't see the need for much else in my life, and then here comes this man who completely loved me and wanted to be with me.  And I thought, can, can this really be real and can I fit this into my life?  And thank God I did, because having him love me and loving him was the--other than giving birth to my son, Jordan [Jordan King], was the best thing that's ever happened to me; and I'm so glad I didn't miss out on that.
Story_ID: 649909
Speaker 1: It happened in such a short time period.
Speaker 2: No, we were together eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I broke up with him a couple of times in frustration over logistics.  'Cause we were living in different places and--you know frustrations that you go through in any long term relationship; and he kept coming back.  And I kept thinking, really?  How can this guy love me so much, you know?  Like, really?  And, and it was real.  And the ultimate confirmation of that was when he got orders to go to the war in Iraq [Iraq War].  Like I said, I never wanted kids.  I used to say, "Well, why do people do that anyway?"  You have to share your money.  You have to--you can't sleep late on a Saturday.  You lose control of, of your schedule.  And so, I never understood why people wanted to have kids.  And I thought, well, why do I need to be somebody's M-R-S?  Mrs.  I can just have a boyfriend and have my fabulous life.  But suddenly, I just blurted out to him, "I think I want to have a baby," and he said, "Absolutely."  I was like, "What do--what do you mean?  Don't you want to think about it?"  He said, "Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], I made this decision a long time ago.  I've just been waiting for you to be ready."  And so it's one thing--first of all, it takes a long time to know someone.  I'm always saying that to young, young women--men I mean.  It takes a long time to know someone, and it takes a long time for men to know women, you know.  But then you, you sort of--in addition to taking the time to get to know people or get to know that special person, you sort of develop a pattern of, of, of, of--like, okay, knowing that they're there for you.  There's this pattern that develops that you're there for him; he's there for you; that you've seen each other not only when you're, like, dressing up to go out on a date, but when you have the flu or God forbid there's a death in the family or something.  And so over the years Charles [Charles M. King] and I, we just kept being there for each other and proving ourselves to each other.  Then the ultimate testament for me of how much he really loved me is when I said, "I'd like to make you the father of my child," and he immediately said, "Yes."  I couldn't believe it.
Story_ID: 649910
Speaker 1: Right, I mean, you tell that in your book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] and it's, it's--well, a lot in the book is very--it's just--it's very--it feels very real in many ways.  The, the indecision, the things about--I mean, you know, you being more literate than he was and how did that fit and--
Speaker 2: Although he was smarter than I was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Am.  He was.  Like I said, I can't do math.  He, he was fabulous.  He's an amazing artist.  I mean, he could design ba- literally battles to send American troops into combat.  I could never do that.  He could operate some of the most sophisticated military machines and equipment and vehicles that there were.  He was a leader of men in war.
Speaker 1: But see, I think it's--
Speaker 2: That's a kind of an intel- that's a kind of intelligence that I don't possess.
Speaker 1: Right.  And I think that's what you do a powerful job doing is in--you know, and I'm sure you've heard this over and over again--giving context to, to military life I mean, you know, in that way, or to soldier--life as a soldier.  'Cause you don't see that really, and people don't talk about it.
Speaker 2: People tend to think of soldiers as guys--mostly guys--who have no other options in life.  And so it's the one job where you can get where all you have to do is go sign up and pass a physical and pass a basic literacy test.  That's, that's just not true.  That's not what it is.  I believed that for many years myself, and it's just not what it is.  You know, there are any number of people who may go into the [U.S.] military for those reasons; they need a job.  But you don't stay and build a career for that reason.  The, the men and women who build careers in the military are leaders, and they are some of the most intelligent, intricate thinkers in this country.  Charles [Charles M. King] could have done any number of things.  He could have been a professional athlete; he could have been an artist.  I mean, with the, the strategic min- mind he had for things like plotting battle, (unclear) battlefields and, and, and strategy in combat, there are so many things he could have done.  This was his calling in the same way that journalism is mine.  And it took me a while to respect it, but I--and it--I learned to respect that while he was alive.  It's not just something I started saying after he died.
Speaker 1: So you--in, in, in the relationship with him, your career at the same time is, is going well here [The New York Times].  There's, there's no stop to your career, but you're trying--was there ever--I mean, this whole thing about marriage, you--the child came.  Marriage wa- has--was always in the discussion.  Marriage was a discussion--marriage was a discussion with the former--I mean, it was a discussion--
Speaker 2: Him.
Speaker 1: --around your--Greg [Gregory L. Moore].  The--marriage was a discussion with his--you know, with--because he had just had a marriage, you know, dissolve.  How--but it seems like in the book and--see there's the book and then there's real life.  In the book, how are you reconciling those two or did you think that given (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean marriage and the child--or marriage and having Jordan [Jordan King] you mean?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, marri- the whole discussion of marriage.  Because Jordan came.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what I'm--what I guess I'm trying to understand with--both of you have very busy careers.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 649911
Speaker 1: How much time are you spending a year together?  Because it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Where were we spending what now?
Speaker 1: During a year, any given time.
Speaker 2: Oh, it depended on the year really.
Speaker 1: Okay, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like, like sometimes we would--we would spend every--you know, every three weekends together.  Sometimes I wouldn't see him--you know, depending on his training or what I was doing with the news--for maybe a month.  But in terms of my views of marriage, they weren't shaped by my relationship with Charles [Charles M. King].  I had my views of marriage long before I met him, which was--it just wasn't something that was important to me.  And by the time I was dating him actually, and when we really decided we were going to settle down, I was ready.  It's just that he got these orders for the war [Iraq War].  We never intended to have our child first, but literally, he was leaving for the war.  And we had decided to get engaged; we were going to get married; and suddenly I just said, "I want to have a baby."  And I said to him, "Do you want to wait until you come back, until we have our wedding?"  And he said, "Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], I may not come back."  That's what drove the decision to have--I was turning forty, and he was going to be gone for a year in the war and may not come home.  And so that's why we decided, "You know what?  We're already--we already see ourselves as a family.  Let's ex- ex- expand our family, have this child, 'cause we may never get another chance."  And, and thank God we made that decision because it's exactly what happened.
Speaker 1: It, it--I mean, it's--it was amazing on so, so many different levels.
Speaker 2: I was turning forty years old.  We--and the thing that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause forty is old for--you know--
Speaker 2: It is.  Well--
Speaker 1: --the discussion and the--
Speaker 2: It's, it's--
Speaker 1: --with the doctor saying--
Speaker 2: Oh--I mean, really.  Like, the very first attempt to got--to get pregnant, I got pregnant--at forty, which is incredible enough to me.  But I knew immediately, and the doctor told me "No, you're not pregnant.  The pregnancy test is negative," and I said, "You're wrong."  I just knew it.  Four days later, sure enough found out I was pregnant.  I mean, Jordan [Jordan King]--we willed this baby into being with God's blessing I believe.  Only God knew at that time that we were going to run out of time and not be able to do all the things that we would have done if Charles were still here to this day.  If he were here this day--to this day, he'd be my husband, you know.  We might have had another child.  I, I, I don't know that for certain, but things would be very different.  But I am so grateful that, oh, I have that boy and that I had Charles.  Any--you know, we've talked a lot today about all the planning I did for my career.  I would give all of that up if I had to make a choice between Jordan and Charles and being a journalist and a writer.  My whole life all I wanted was to be a writer and a journalist and an author.  Thank God that with all that plotting and planning I didn't miss out on the other part which is actually much more important, which is having this beautiful, loving man in my life and having my son.  And thank God that--I still don't quite understand why God chose me to be there at the end of Charles' life.  I feel like part of my role as a person and as a human being was to be there when, when his life was over, to present him with his son, you know, and to be the person that was there when he came home from the war and was having nightmares and flashbacks and you know.  He gave me far more than I ever gave him, but I am glad I was there to be the mother of his child and to, to be a large part of the reason that at the moment he died, as his mom [Gladys King] says, he was so happy and had so much to look forward to, that we were going to be married, and that we have this beautiful son that he'd wanted for years.  He was so proud of that boy.  He only met him once.
Story_ID: 649912
Speaker 1: So can you talk about--can you give Charles' name first?
Speaker 2: His name is--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --was--I still--seven years later.  I got to stop for a second.
Speaker 1: It's okay, it's okay; it's good.
Speaker 2: Ch- give me a minute.  It's Charles Monroe King [Charles M. King].
Speaker 1: Charles Monroe King.
Speaker 2: Yeah, First Sergeant Charles Monroe King.
Speaker 1: First Sergeant Charles Monroe King.
Speaker 2: What do you want to know?
Speaker 1: Can you just say a little bit about his background?
Speaker 2: He grew up in Cleveland [Ohio] and was a very accomplished athlete and artist, who was--got into the Chicago Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  But he just had this love for [U.S.] military service, and he writes about it to our son [Jordan King] quite a bit in the journal left him--then it's also in my book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy]--that, really his calling was to be a soldier, and he was proud to do it.
Speaker 1: Now I wanted to ask about that journal, and I know the journal came because you gave him the journal.  But it's one thing for someone to give someone a journal.  It's another for someone to actually journal. And write.
Speaker 2: So, I'll, I'll--I'm happy to talk about that, but I wanted to answer your question about the religion, if I could?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You were asking me if, if, if you--if I thought that I started talking about God more when I met Charles because of his faith?  My faith was enhanced obviously by being with a man who was very Christian, and he was.  And people have very sort of preconceived notions about religion and faith and you know, have suggested to me, "Well, how can he be such a Christian if he decided to have your child before your marriage and all of that?"  Okay, fair question, but he was.  He was a--he was a--he was a good Christian man.  But my faith was enhanced, believe it not, more so by his death.  And what I mean by that--that might sound like a shocking thing to say.  I always assumed, and I wrote this in my book, that if someone close to me died, certainly in such a tragic way, that I would be angry at God.  Oh, my gosh, the opposite happened.  I mean, I felt enveloped by God's comfort during that time, and I saw--I saw that everything that had happened, in terms of those--going all the way back to, to my early time sitting out in front of the house writing was all leading up to Charles and this book.  Because I remember after we worked on this series here on race relations at The New York Times, that won a Pulitzer Prize ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'], I kept thinking well, is that God's work?  'Cause one of the things I used to do when I was a young journalist when I first started out--I still do this sometimes, but I would run my fingers over the keyboard and pray, and I would say, "God, thank you for this talent; thank you so much for, you know, allowing me to be a journalist, a writer; and please use this talent that you gave me for your good."  And all these years, whether I was writing about a murder trial or, you know, someone dying of crack cocaine, or race relations in the United States that won a Pulitzer Prize--with a team, not, not just by myself--I kept on thinking that doesn't feel it.  You know, why won't God use me?  It was this book. That's it.  So, until I--until I, I had this amazing man in my life and lost him and all that, I kept thinking that, that all of that training and all that focus, you know, related to, to writing had to do with being a good journalist or trying to be a great journalist.  I realize that was all in preparation for writing the story of Charles' legacy and writing to our son a book that's now in seven or eight countries in six or seven languages.  It's not because I'm such a great writer, you know.  God used me to do this.  I don't know why I was chosen, heathen that I am (laughter), but He did.  And I'm really proud of that.
Story_ID: 649913
Speaker 1: So can we talk about the process of--'cause, so first you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The journal you mean or?
Speaker 1: Well, I want--yeah, I do want to talk--can we talk about the journal.  Then I want to talk about the process of the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --writing of the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, but the journ- how did he end up--because the journal is the--also the ce- a central part in the book.  It's allows your--you know, his voice to be heard.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But how is he writing in that journal?
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Because, you know, I hear that he's an artist, you know, I hear he's disciplined; he gets up at five in the morning.  I mean, all these things.  You know, he's very committed to his troops.  Where does the--are you influencing that?
Speaker 2: No, not, not one bit, not at all.  In fact, I expected him to write two or three sentences I swear.  I did not know he was going to fill that journal up with two hundred pages.  So what happened?  You know, he was--he was a--he was military man through and through.  Like you say, he, he would get up in--if he had a--he had a cold or a flu, he thought, well, you put on a sweat suit and you go running and run it out.  And I'm like, are you kidding me?  I mean, I watched this over, over year--I've never met a more disciplined person in my entire life.  It was really kind of not normal how disciplined he was.  He was not a great communicator.  He barely talked.  You know, 'cause he would prefer to express himself through his art.  He was a really quiet guy, which was a real frustration for me because I'm so talkative and you know, animated and all that.  And he was just calm and quiet.  He didn't feel the need to show you that he was the smartest guy in the room if he was.  He could let you think you were the smartest person 'cause it didn't matter.  His, his, his sense of self wasn't based on what other people thought of him; it was his relationship with his God and with--and, and, and, and his relationship with the people that mattered to him.  So when I gave him this journal, I partly thought, you know, what if he dies in this war [Iraq War]?  I would--I would like for our child to at least see his handwriting, at least see the words, I love you, or whatever it is he's going to write.  But I honestly thought it would mostly be blank, and he'd write a couple of passages.  And he became consumed with it, and the reason that he is--now it's not surprising to me.  He was a very spiritual man who had a lot of depth to him and humble guy.  And the most important thing in his life at that time was this child that we had created who was still in my stomach at the time.  I was still pregnant.  And so he had a lot to say to me.  He was also a career military man who'd fought in a lot of different conflicts.  He wasn't some twenty year old soldier who thought, you know, I'm going to go over there and be Rambo and come back and get the tattoo, and--you know, it's, the sports car or whatever.  He was a guy who understood that, that, that, that people died in these conflicts.  He had carried their bodies back before, okay?  So Charles [Charles M. King] was preparing both for life, the life after the [U.S.] military 'cause he was going to retire, and life of this, this baby we were bringing into the world, and the possibility of his death at the same time.  And I think that drove his refle- inner reflection and all the things that were going on that led to him being able to write two hundred pages to our son, most of it from the war.  I interviewed his soldiers after he died, and his battle buddy.  And he said there'd be a light on under his tent at night, and that's when he was writing to Jordan [Jordan King], after spending the day doing god knows what out there, you know, literally in combat and, and leading these very young soldiers into the combat.  That's when he was doing this, which I think is just profound.  You know, that's the guy that I loved.  Who wouldn't love a man of such depth and character?
Story_ID: 649914
Speaker 1: So you--he, he passes away; you're overcome with grief, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's an understatement, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, so--but it's the reason--there are so many things, it was life unfinished.  You know--right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you, you take a year off.  And tell me what the process is, this--
Speaker 2: Of writing the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] you mean?
Speaker 1: Not--wa- wa- was it--I don't think that it was obvious at the beginning that you were going to write the book, but the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I took the year off to write the book.
Speaker 1: To write the book.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you did that at who--that--that's what I'm trying to un- can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like, what happened?
Speaker 1: Right, that right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so we had this new baby.  Charles [Charles M. King] got to come home--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: What did you say?
Speaker 1: Go on, go on, tell the story.
Speaker 2: He got to come home for one month--I'm sorry.  He got to come home for two weeks to meet Jordan [Jordan King] when Jordan was six months old.  And he literally had thirty days left, thirty days.  We were counting them on the calendar until he was going to be done and be back home.  So he was going back literally just to pack up his soldiers and bring them back.  His missions that he was going out on, he didn't have to--he didn't--he, he didn't need to be there because he was the first sergeant, which is the second highest rank you can have as an enlisted soldier in the [U.S.] Army.  And as such, you're leading the troops.  You don't necessarily have to be in the convoy yourself, but he told me he could--he, he, he told me repeatedly, "Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], I can't send them out to do things that I wouldn't do myself."  And so periodically, he would just tap one of the young soldiers and say, "You stay back, you know; go do some paperwork and do whatever, and I'll go today."  He wanted them to see him out there, and he told me this himself.  He told me in writing, but he also told me when he came home to meet Jordan.  He said, you know, "They're young, they're scared, they need to know that I'm out there with them, they need to see me," he said.  So when he came home that two weeks to meet Jordan, I'll never forget it.  He's standing in the living room, and he's holding him and looking at him and just completely in love with this boy.  And he says, "Dana, I'm not going to go out anymore."  And I was like, thank God.  But when he got back, his commander was sort of taunting him about this decision, and he felt bad about it.  And so he said, "Well, I'll go one more time," and that's when he was blown up by a bomb.  So that's why he, he was killed.  He called me here at The New York Times a couple of days I think it was before he died, and he was agitated.  He was calling from Iraq.  And I kept saying, you know, "What's wrong?  Are you okay?"  He wouldn't tell me, and he just said, "Oh, I'm fine, I'm fine; I just wanted to hear your voice; I just wanted to talk."  And I remember I had a meeting that was starting in a few minutes, and I decided to skip the meeting 'cause clearly he needed to talk to me or he wanted to talk to me.  He was asking about Jordan.  And I said, "Are you sure you're okay?"  He says, "No, no, no, I'm fine, I'm fine."  And I remember saying, "I love you," and I don't think he said it back.  I think he just, you know, hung up.  That was the last time I talked to him.  And when he--when he--when he was killed, I had only been back from maternity leave at The Times for two weeks.  The plan was he was coming back; he was retiring; he was going to watch Jordan; take--I told him to take, take some time off.  Raise our son.  You know, I said, "You have nothing to prove about your work ethic.  Stay home.  Be a stay at home dad.  You have nothing to prove," you know.  And how great would it be for a young black boy to have his daddy be his primary caregiver.  Let me go off and work, you know.  And so I fin- I think I finally convinced him to do it, at least for a year.  And that's--and then we ran out of time.
Story_ID: 649915
Speaker 1: So like I, I--it's funny.  As you'll see this pattern in my life, I always come back to writing, right?  So I come back to work after the funeral, and I just couldn't work.  I'm like, "Okay, so you bury him [Charles M. King] and then you just go on like nothing happened?"  So my boss--one of my bosses, Jill Abramson, who's now the executive editor and who's a friend, came by my desk one day and said, "How are you doing?"  And I said, "I'm, I'm not well."  And she said, "Well, leave," and I just left.  And then I said to her--we were coming up on, in this country, of three thousand soldiers dying in the war [Iraq War], and every time there's like, five hundred soldiers, one thousand soldiers.  You hit these sort of artificial markers in, in numb- casualty numbers.  News organizations take that as an opportunity to take stock in where we are in the war.  And so we were preparing this big package about the, the war which I was involved in.  And I remember thinking, I'm the only soldier--the only national journalist in the country who's lost a soldier in this war and had that knock on the door from the [U.S.] military.  I need to write about this.  So Jill said, "Let's do it," and I wrote a first person piece about losing a soldier in war that ran on the front page of The Times [The New York Times].  And I remember at that time, one of the people who was in charge of website said, "We thought the site was going to crash from all the traffic."  And he said--he said to me, "I wondered, what did we do?"  And he said, "And I looked at the paper and I said that's what we did."  And the response was so overwhelming that I realized I wanted to keep writing.  And so--and I wanted people to know more and more about this man than the journal.  And not just about us, but about the sacrifices that military families make every day without anybody knowing about them.  And so I wrote the book, 'A Journal for Jordan' ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] is the title, incorporating pieces of the journal into a memoir of our life together.  And I wrote it primarily for Jordan [Canedy's son, Jordan King], so every chapter of the book starts, "Dear Jordan."  And, and it was really--this is the most amazing thing.  It wa- it's, it's the last project he and I ever did together.  Because he wrote his part, and then I wrote my part; and we put it together.  And so we really have this project that lives on, you know.
Story_ID: 649916
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first laid eyes on the journal?  Is it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, of course.
Speaker 1: And so where were you and--?
Speaker 2: There's a story behind that.  This is--this is--this is a fascinating story actually.  Charles [Charles M. King] called from Iraq one time--another time--when, when he was fairly upset, and he didn't say a lot 'cause--certainly when I was pregnant, he didn't want to say things that were--tell me things that were going on there that he thought would be upsetting.  And then, you know, I had this new baby.  But he called one day and he said, "Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], I'm going to send you the journal.  It's not done, but you'll have it."  And I said, "Well, why are you doing that?  Just bring it home with you when you come."  He said, "No, no, you have to have--you have to have it."  I said okay.  And it turns out that one of his very young soldiers in his twenties, a kid who maybe two year earlier was just in high school, got blown up inside of a tank.  And Charles tells me that he had to go and literally scoop up the, the, the young man's body with a shovel.  That's the condition he was in--in the middle of the night, in the dark.  And I remember asking him before he went to the war [Iraq War], "What is your job there?  What, what exactly do--are you--do you do?  I've never quite understood it."  And he, he said that his job was to do everything from recover his soldiers' mail--I mean, deliver his soldiers' mail to recovering their bodies, everything in between.  He trained them for battle, all of this.  So when he had--when he had to recover this young man's body, it upset him and got him thinking yet again about his own mortality.  So he, he says to me, "I want you to have the journal; it's about 80 percent done, but I, I need to get it in your hands--in essence--because if something happens to me, at least Jordan [Jordan King] will have it; you'll have it."  And then when he came home for that two weeks, he finished it.  When he left to go back, I put away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I--what I want to know, did you read it when he came?
Speaker 2: No, I was--when he--no, I, I--he finished it, and he goes back to the war, and I put it away in a drawer.  I'm trying to think--that's not right.  I'm sorry.  I put it away afterward--I, I'm sorry--I'm, I'm just remembering that wrong.  When he initially sent it back, when it was incomplete, I read it.  And then he finished it when he came home.  But, but when he sent it to me, it came in this--I still have the envelope with all the, the customs markings and the things saying, "Book," you know, from Iraq.  And I opened it up, and I start reading it with Jordan sleeping beside me one evening.  I couldn't put it down.  I could not believe it.  This man who didn't talk a lot was writing about rainbows.  He told Jordan, you know, "Hide money in your shoe when you go on vacation."  He told him how to choose a wife, what to look for in a woman; he told him about the power of prayer; he told him why he loved me; he said--you know, he described all the qualities in a woman that you look for.  And he said, "And if you want to know what I looked for in a woman just look at your mother."  I couldn't believe it.  I could not believe it.  And do you remember what I was saying earlier about how it takes time to know someone?  And I kept saying, "I can't believe this guy loved me that much, loved me that much?"  Here's the proof right there, you know.  And I was--I was just--and it's--and it was unbelievable and I fell in love with him all over again at a deeper level.  I literally fell in love with him again.  And, and as I said, he finished it when he came home.
Story_ID: 649917
Speaker 1: So the process of writing the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy], how was that process?  You're, you're without a--the reason I'm asking is because you're outside of a--you've been working along--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no--
Speaker 1: --you know, your whole--
Speaker 2: --I get this question a lot, and I'm, I'm, I'm used to it, but--oh, gosh.  The process was different at different points of writing it, so for me it was actually cathartic when I was writing it about dating him and all the fun we had and all of that.  And there were parts that were horrible, and I had to walk away from the book.  There was one part where I interviewed the soldiers who were on the convoy when he died.  Interviewed--I became a reporter.  I interviewed the doctor who pronounced him dead at the hospital.  Interviewed his commanders, and I reconstructed the last twenty-four hours of his life, minute by minute, and that's one chapter of the book.  That was horrible.  I had nightmare- horrible nightmares.  When I interviewed his commander, it was a very difficult conversation 'cause I had to sort of confront him about taunting Jor- Charles [Charles M. King] into going on this last mission.  And I remember I did that really late at night, after Jordan [Jordan King] went to sleep.  It was maybe ten o- ten o'clock at night or something--9:30, 10.  After I hung up, I was like, "Now who can I call on the West Coast that can keep me up tonight, 'cause I cannot go to sleep while--." I, I knew I would have nightmares, and I, I put the book away for a time.  And I think for two or three weeks I just--I stopped working on it.  Then I picked it back up again.  I had a mission.  I had to get that done.  I had to get it done for me.  I had to get it done for Jordan.  I had to get it done for Charles.  So, people ask me all the time, was it cathartic writing this book?  No, it wasn't cathartic writing the book.  It's cathartic having written the book and now being able to hold it in my hand and show it--present it to my son.  I mean, God forbid I get blown up by a bomb.  Jordan will have that for the rest of his life.  He has his dad's voice.  He has his mom's voice.
Speaker 1: Which is a really special gift 'cause that doesn't happen.  I--you know, I--but what other research did you do for the book?
Speaker 2: I re- you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this, this--
Speaker 2: --this may sound kind of cold--clinical.  I, I, I approached this like I would as a journalist on any other story.  And what I mean by that is all of that training, all of those internships, all of that experience came to bear.  And I used every ounce of experience and preparation, going all the way back to journalism school [at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky], going all the way back to writing--you know, practicing writing in my front yard at my parents' [Penny Canedy and T.J. Canedy, Sr.] house when I was a child, to do this.  So I did what I do. I, I, I looked at military documents.  I put in documents requests for them in the [U.S.] military.  I interviewed soldiers.  Interviewed someone from the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] about military personnel.  I, I talked to soldiers' wives.  I reread the journal, and then I wrote the book.
Speaker 1: And the writing of the book took how long?
Speaker 2: A year--the writing and editing.
Speaker 1: The writing and editing.  And so had you found a publisher at this time?
Speaker 2: My goodness, once that story hit The New York Times--
Speaker 1: Then everything--okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have to find a publisher.
Speaker 1: You didn't have--okay.
Speaker 2: I had to choose a publisher--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from twelve publishers who were interested in the book.
Speaker 1: So that's a lucky place to be in some respects.
Speaker 2: Blessed.  I don't think luck had--
Speaker 1: Blessed.
Speaker 2: --anything to do with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's true--a blessed, okay; that's a better term.
Speaker 2: But I guess I can't--I, I don't feel like I can (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I mean, you know, they always say that you should write from real experiences, and you laid everything there; that's the thing.
Speaker 2: But I can--I, I, I, I haven't felt like I've been able to accurately or forcefully enough make the point that--do you see how I'm only a vehicle for this.  I mean, we started this conversation by me saying that when I was seven and eight years, I used to sit out in front of my parents' house and practice writing over and over.  And then in high school [North Hardin High School, Radcliff, Kentucky] I was honing writing, and that I did all these internships, and then I, I, I trained myself to be--not trained myself, but I had a lot of training to be a journalist.  And I started at smaller publications, and I practiced my writing, and played with interview techniques, and started learning to write with authority.  Right?  All leading up to this.  That's not me.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's fine.
Speaker 2: I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: That's fine.  I understand.
Speaker 2: Life, calling and destiny.  What do they say?  When opportunity meets preparation.  I couldn't have planned this on my own.  I couldn't have said when I was seven, "Well, let me start practicing writing so that I can go to college.  Now let me get some internships.  Now let me figure out how you interview people, how you look up documents so that when this man I meet dies, I can write a story about him or I can write a book about him."  Didn't happen that way.
Speaker 1: That's right.  But it has a complete nature to it.  I mean, it's almost like it's Jordan's inheritance too.  That's--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: I think that's--
Speaker 2: It's not almost like.  It is Jordan's inheritance.
Speaker 1: Just--(unclear).
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So now, I, I think I want to finish personal and go back to work.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fine by me.  Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, but I haven't finished personal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 649918
Speaker 1: So it's one thing to--you know, you--in, in--obviously, what is with the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] came a great deal of success and accolades with personal and personal trauma--the--you have a son to raise now, so can we talk about that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, we can talk about him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: What do you want to know (laughter)?
Speaker 1: But let's talk about him because, you know, you're a single parent, you, you, you returned to work, so, you, you told me that you were--your book tour took you--I think you said--
Speaker 2: Seven weeks in twelve cities.
Speaker 1: And then there are always ancillary speaking engagements--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and tours when those things happen.  But what is--what I happening in the home front?
Speaker 2: It took me years to be able to say this, that we are so happy.  And it took me years to be able to say that without--even longer to be able to say that without feeling guilty about it.  That's my little buddy.  Jordan [Jordan King] is--everybody thinks their child is like, special, but this kid, he is--I could talk to you for hours about how truly special he is.  He's, he's got an old soul like his dad had.  You remember how I said I don't--I, I never really felt like I was a child?  Jordan's the same way.  He, he is--he is--he's just--he doesn't conduct himself like a child.  He's, he's profound and empathetic and wise.  It's kind of frightening a little bit.  So, so I, I go to great pains to make sure he is a child because he's such a serious kid that--you know, I'll pack up some Saturdays and say, "Hey, I just packed your suitcase; get in the car."  And he'd say, "Where are you going?"  "I'm not telling you.  It's a surprise."  And we'll go to a waterpark or something.  We spend time at the beach.  We go on cruises.  Day to day we talk a lot.  I enjoy him not just because I'm his mother, but I enjoy him as a person.  I just think he is one of the most interesting people I've ever met, and I really--I enjoy him.  There's nobody else I'd rather spend time with.  I actually think it's very healthy for kids, particularly for a boy, to see his mom work and have a mission.  So I tell him all the time that: "Jordan, there's nothing I'd rather do than spend time with you, but even if I could stay home, I wouldn't.  You know, you're the most important thing in my life, but you're not the only thing in my life.  And I enjoy being a journalist, and I enjoy contributing to society."  Where he gets idea--his ideas about work ethic and perseverance and all that stuff, and the same way I got it from watching my father's ethic in the [U.S.] military, he's going to get it from knowing about his father and seeing me when I have a cold or a bit of a fever and I don't feel like going to work, I get up and come anyway, you know.  So he's got a nanny who helps me.  You know, when I travel, she's there.  She's--you know, she's been with him since--Charles [Charles M. King] and I interviewed her together.  She's been with him since he was six months old.  So his nanny, you know, cooks for him and you know, takes care of the house.  And we--I have a housekeeper, and that helps me--that helps me be able to focus when I'm at work and not have to--I think about him when I'm at work all day long, and I--my colleagues will tell you I talk about him, I make them look at pictures of him, but I don't ever have to worry about him.  He--you know, I set my household up in such a way that, you know, on the weekends I'm not doing laundry, I'm not, you know, cooking for the next week.  Because I have such a small amount of time that I want to focus on him.  I don't check my email or talk on the phone.  That's his time.  But, you know, fortunately now I'm in a position to do it.  I pay for that, so I have help--a lot of help in the house to help me handle the logistics of the groceries and the laundry and the this, so that when I'm there I'm present and, and, and it's about him.  And it's not to say I don't take care of my house myself, 'cause I also think it's important for Jordan to see me do things around the home, but I don't want that to be the majority of my time because I want to focus on him.  We read books, we go to the theater in New York [New York].  He's a--he's a New Yorker, which cracks me up.  Coming from a small town in Kentucky [Radcliff, Kentucky], this kid is a New Yorker through and through.  He's got a little New York accent.  He's been hailing cabs literally since he was eighteen months old.  And I'll never beget--forget being out on the street corner, and I'm holding him on my shoulder and--or on my side here, and I'm, I'm hailing a cab.  I look over and Jordan's hand's up.  You know, he'll say, "Mom, I, I think we should have sushi tonight."  You know, or when he's hungry--when I--when I was growing up and would say, "Mom, can you--can you make me a bowl of soup?  Or can you--you know, can I have some of the leftover chicken or whatever?"  Jordan says, "Mom, where are the menus?"  'Cause he wants the delivery people to come deliver his meals.  I mean it's just a different life.  When his cousins come to visit--we live in a high rise on the thirty-seventh floor.  They think we live in a hotel.  "Are we going to Jordan's hotel?"  Conversely, when he goes to their homes, he can't believe they have yards.  He thinks--he--for years he thought that Granddaddy's yard was a park.  So (laughter) he's a New Yorker, and it just cracks me up.
Story_ID: 649919
Speaker 1: So that, you know, and, and his father had said that you would make a wonderful mother.  He did say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, he did.  I hope he would be proud.  There's part of me, though, that thinks like, my kid goes to private school.  He talks about his feelings.  It's like, Charles [Charles M. King] had some sort of street cred, you know, in him and some street smarts.  Jordan [Jordan King] doesn't really have that.  I'm thinking, what would he think if he walked in today?  Would he think, who's this little nerd living on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] talking about sushi, you know?  I mean, part of me really wonders, like, would he think, what have you done here?  Like, yeah, he's got a really good life, and he's this smart kid who--I mean, he's said to me when he was four--Jordan said, you know, "Mom, when I was a baby, Pluto was still a planet."  This is how this kid talks all the time.  You know, he can tell you anything you want to know about Georgia O'Keeffe, and he likes Impressionist artists and dot dot Seurat [Georges Seurat] and he--we went to Jackson Pollock's house 'cause he loves Jackson Pollock.  That's his favorite artist.  He's seven.  You know, I'll, I'll, I'll never forget taking him to visit Charles' parents [Gladys King and Charles King] one time in the--his grandfather, Charles' father, had developed Alzheimer's at that time.  And Jordan hadn't seen him.  Well, first of all, it was a rem- remarkable to me was he didn't know who I was, but he re- he knew who Jordan was, the fa- the--his grandfather.  And I thought Jordan was going to be frightened.  And I remember when I got him alone, I said, "Jordan," we were there for a weekend, "you know, when people get older, they, they may forget things; they may get confused."  And I said, "But your grandfather loves you very much."  And he thought about it for a few minutes then turned, and he looked me in the eye, and he said, "Mom, well, let's just let them take their time," talking about his grandparents.  And the whole weekend he understood that the weekend was not about him.  And he would open doors, and he helped pushed his grandfather's wheelchair.  And we were going back to the airport, and we we're driving.  I said, "Oh, Jordan."  I said, "I'm so proud of you," and I said, "And your daddy would be so happy."  He looks at me; he says, "Mom, dad's already happy; my daddy is happy."  The--that's what I mean about him having a very old soul.  He just does.  So he's fun.  I mean, there, there are ways in which the loss of Charles comes up for him.  I mean, remember for the first few years of this boy's life I was grieving.  And so, you know, he's afraid of fires and bad guys and things like that because his father was, you know, blown up, and, "The bad guys got him," he says.  He goes between being very proud of Charles and being very angry.  "Mom, he shouldn't have been in the [U.S.] Army.  He should have been a writer," he'll say.  "If he was not in the Army, he'd still be here."  And there are times he'll say, "I think I just want to cry for my daddy."  And he'll go to sleep and he'll cry.  And then there are other times he'll say, "Mom, my dad was the strongest guy ever, wasn't he?"  And I'll say, "No.  He was a very strong man, but no, he wasn't the strongest.  He wasn't the fastest.  He wasn't the tallest."  'Cause I don't want him to, you know, have this unrealistic view of who his father was.  He was--you know, he was a human being.  He was--I don't want him to think he can't live up to who his father was.  But we're really good.  We're--and of course, he's practically the mascot of The New York Times when he comes in the newsroom.  He knows whose office has candy, whose office has toys, and, work just stops when Jordan comes in the newsroom.  It's great to see.  I'll never forget, some election Jordan was having a debate about the election with my--one of my bosses.  And I--and, and, and, and he was saying, well, "Why can't reporters give their opinions?  Mom said they can't."  And he says--so, so my boss is trying to figure a way to, to make Jordan understand about objectivity.  And so Jordan says, "Oh, so you mean like, Romney [Mitt Romney] would feel bad if you said you liked Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and Obama would feel bad if you said you like Romney, so you really shouldn't say which one you like."  And he said, "That's it."  I'm so proud of this kid.
Speaker 1: It's a blessing.
Speaker 2: He's--
Speaker 1: It's a blessing.
Speaker 2: --he's amazing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 649920
Speaker 1: It's not that I couldn't see myself falling in love again.  I guess sort of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would be hard.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, I don't want to--I've, I feel like I've honored Charles [Charles M. King].  I don't want to live in the past.  I haven't completely let go of him, but I'm not--it's not that, that I'm, I'm, I'm holding back because of Charles.  I feel like I did what I was supposed to do, which is bring his child into the world, be there for him at the end of his life, love him while he was living, and, and, and help to write his legacy.  So I feel like my work is done, in terms of my relationship with Charles, and my time with him is, is, is over.  It's the first time I've ever been able to say that, and I feel a little guilty saying it.  So it's not that--it's not that I don't think I could be open to something else.  It's just that, if it happened fine.  If it doesn't, I--I've got a really cool life, you know.  I think that, particularly for women and young women, so many women think that your life begins when you have a man or you, you marry a guy.  I just am not that person.  I don't believe that.  I have a great--I mean, I have seen and done and been involved with so many things that if my life, God forbid, ended tomorrow, I could rest in peace, except for the fact that my work isn't done with Jordan [Jordan King].  I've traveled, I've had great--two great loves in my life, you know--three if I count my college boyfriend (laughter).  I've--I, I--I'm a mom to this great kid.  I, I have an incredibly fulfilling career, you know.  I can pay my bills and take care of myself.  I don't need much more.  I'm good.  You know, companionship would be nice I guess.  But I don't really care if I get married or not.  That's not to say--I mean, it's not to say it wouldn't--it's, it's not going to happen.  Who knows?  But I don't spend a lot of time thinking about it.  I just spend time living my life, you know, staying motivated at work, enjoying my kid, having fun with my friends, being silly and crazy sometimes, and you know.
Story_ID: 649921
Speaker 1: But it was almost like he came in like an angel.  I mean, it--you know.
Speaker 2: Charles [Charles M. King] you mean?
Speaker 1: Charles.  It was sort of--I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah.
Speaker 1: --from the outside.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well I don't know.  Because you could never have gotten married and maybe--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --maybe not.  You could've--
Speaker 2: We could have.  You know what?  No, we could have.  If I had gotten over myself much earlier.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I--right.  I'm saying that you could--it could--he could never have come at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There--never mind.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--no, he wasn't like an angel.  He was just a man, and I'm just a girl--just a woman, you know.  Like, I don't want Char- I don't want Jordan [Jordan King] to think, wow, he was like an angel, or him to think, wow, my mom was this great thing.  We're just people.  Like, there are lots of people in the--and particularly in [U.S.] military families, doing just what we do and carrying on, you know, without books and without The New York Times and (unclear) you know.  You just don't hear about them.  You know, I remember on Veterans Day looking at a, a picture, and I've seen this sort of picture a lot where someone at a cemetery, quite often Arlington [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia] but other places, laying on the grave, maybe just sleeping there or visiting with their loved one, literally wanting to feel them by laying there.  And I'm thinking, that person has a story too, you know.  They're probably doing the same things or other things in their lives that, that, that would be a book or a story if they were a writer.  I don't--I don't spend a lot of time thinking of us as extraordinary in any way.  The one thing that I am proud of is that we're a black family.  You know, somebody said to me when I was pitching the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] to some of the publishers I was meeting with.  The publisher says, "Oh, you know, this book could have been written--it's, it's, it's great love story--could have been written, you know, during the Civil--the Civil War."  I was like, "Not about a black family--and a black family where the mother decided to have the baby fir- the woman decided to have the baby first, absolutely not."  It's not a classic tale in any sense of the word, except that it is in that you're talking about, you know, people who love each other very much, and dedication to this country, and mil- military service, and all that.  So in essence, yes, but, but the particulars of the--of the our (gesture) story, if you will, you know, black--a woman who decides that marriage isn't necessarily that important and certainly you don't have to do it in a certain order.  My marriage to him was going to be important to me.  I, I was very much looking forward to being his wife, to my utter surprise 'cause I--like I said, marriage just wasn't something I cared about that much until we decided to get married.  And I, I write in the book that I actually--in some way, maybe this is rationalization.  Maybe it's what I needed to tell myself to get through the groove--the groo- the grief.  I did consider myself his wife, because I'll never--I'll never forget the moment he was leaving to go back to the war [Iraq War], standing literally in what to me is kind of like an archway now in the doorway.  And he turns to me, and he says, "Now, you're going to marry me, right?"  'Cause we had been talking about our wedding plans.  And I said, "Absolutely, nothing will make me prouder than to be your wife," and he kissed me.  And I feel like that was kind of our wedding, you know, our moment.  Because there wasn't--he wasn't going to make it back to the--to the official one, but we were standing there literally before God declaring our love for each other and me saying that I--, "Yes, I'm going to marry you--I do."  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just he had--you know, that you as a benefici- you know, he had done all that?  It was--
Speaker 2: Yeah--yeah, he did that because he was a responsible father, and that's what you do when you--you know.  There's so much said about black men who don't take care of their families and their, their, their children.  Charles did.  He, he started paying child support for Jordan just on his own when I was still pregnant, before he was even born.  And I have--so there were--I still have some of those checks to show Jordan, "Your daddy was taking care of you before you were even born," you know.  He knew I was capable of taking care of Jordan, but he did his part as well, and it was significant, you know.  Not just because of the financial help.  Living in New York City [New York, New York] is expensive, and I've got this boy I have to take care of who, you know--it's not--it's not easy to do it by yourself.  But, but it was more than that.  It's important because he demonstrated that, "I want you; I planned for you; and I'm taking care of you."
Story_ID: 649922
Speaker 1: I want to go to--back to your career.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because when we left, you had--you know, you had finished the program here and then--tell me the--and you had started--so you were--you had started talk about some of your assignments.  Okay, and I want to do this and lead up to the race--you know, the race project ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'], which was a significant project to be assigned with.  But you're here at The Times and what is so--and you know, you talked about even understanding what makes The New York Times--you did a great job talking--you know, what makes The New York Times The New York Times.  What happens with--so how do you start here?  Which was for the first assignment?  Who were you working with?
Speaker 2: I was a business and finance reporter and had an editor, and it was my job to figure out, well if my editor (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were working--who was your editor?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  You mean the name of the person?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: The business editor?
Speaker 1: The business editor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the business editor was--don't--I forget who--
Speaker 1: That's okay; don't worry--
Speaker 2: I was working with the business editor, and I had an assignment editor assigned to me who sort of helped me figure out what was going to be our approach to my coverage, what the priorities would be, which companies I would focus on.  And what I always say to young reporters and it's something that I think I--I've, I've known from early in my career, it's my job to tell my editor how I should be doing my job.  I'm supposed to be the, the, the expert in my--on my beat.  If you have to tell me what I should be covering, something is wrong with that.  So, for example, when I was the bureau chief in Florida for The New York Times, I'm the one living in Florida.  If an editor in New York [New York] had to tell me what I should be covering, there's something wrong with that.  You hire me and you, you trust me because I know what I'm doing, and I should be able, with guidance, to, to direct coverage of my particular beat.
Speaker 1: Well, you, you could do that because you had had a lot of experience--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --coming in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause those programs are not always--I mean, are those programs--how many years do people usually--going to them, or--
Speaker 2: The intermediate program?
Speaker 1: The medi--
Speaker 2: Up to three years.  We can extend it a fourth if we need to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so after that--then you do that for ha- like, for how long?  Is that the fir--
Speaker 2: Nine to ten months I was in the program.
Speaker 1: Until--and then, then what happens after that?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so I just was promoted, but I still had the same--very same job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I continued covering the consumer products beat for three to four years.  And then The Times decided to do a big project on race relations, and they asked me to be involved.
Story_ID: 649923
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that because--is this the time--what is--why does The Times [The New York Times] ask for this to be done--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: --in the first place?
Speaker 2: I'm trying--you know, Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd], who was a mentor of mine and, and friend who I cared about very deeply, he's, he's since passed, just felt for a long time like we should be writing about race relations in America.  And he'd been wanting to do this, trying to find the right moment, thinking about what The Times could bring to this that hadn't been said before.  And so he just put a team together to start brainstorming.  So, I mean, we'd meet in his house and start talking about this, and what could we say, and how did we want to approach it.  And so there were several reporters.  I think there were twelve us--twelve of us assigned to each do a story, and that's how it started.
Speaker 1: And so talk about what were those discussions leading up to that--you know, under his--you know, because things started a certain--what were the, the--'cause a lot of times--I mean, I'm interested in what you chose to--you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your part of it, but I'm interested in understanding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the series ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart']--
Speaker 1: --what the series was going to do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because, you know, we had had the time, and I'm trying to think if this is around the time that Joh- you know, there had been the race commission [One America in the 21st Century: The President's Initiative on Race].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin had been head of that and people--some people were disappointed with what came out of Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] race commission.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so that's why--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm just trying to--
Speaker 2: When was--when was Rodney King?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 1: Rodney King was--oh, it was in the '90s [1990s].  It was in the '90 [1990]-- so you think Rodney King may have been the impetus (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I may--I may be off about this.  I'm trying--I'm really trying to recall it accurately.  But I think that there were certain flashpoints like Rodney King, racial flashpoints in which Gerald thought, boy, white people and black people really see this different--differently, and including in our own newsroom, and I think whether it was Rodney King or something like that, he started thinking at these moments in time that there has to be something we can say about this.  And so we decided to do a series, and when we started having the meetings based on--you know, this concept that we could bring something--that we could--we could do something significant, we started thinking well, what if we explore (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-one [1991] was Rodney King.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what if we explore, and we started thinking okay, workplace, children--you know, just where are areas that we can peel back the curtain and look where race matters.  It matters at work, it matters with your children, it matters in the [U.S.] military, religion, you--in the church, and so we decided to look in all those area.  And the first thing we did was thought oh, before we'd try to report or write anything, race is one of those things that's very hard to talk about in the workplace.  It's hard to get at the truth.  People are, are self-conscious about it, so we had to talk about our own racial baggage and our racial blinders.  And, and we had several pretty difficult meetings where that's all we did.  And then once, once we got past that point, then we said "Okay, now where do we want to look?"  What, what institutions?  What industries?  What, you know, organizations?  And we came up with a series of stories.
Story_ID: 649924
Speaker 1: So what--who was, who was part of the group?  And how, how diverse was the group that was brought together (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it was a very diverse group.  I--as I recall, and I'm sure I'm, I'm, I'm--'cause it's been such a while ago, but we had two Hispanic women; we had--gosh--three or four black reporters; we had--I can't remember everybody, but it was pretty diverse.  And in fact, so was the editing team.  We were all told that we'd have a year to work on this story and only the best stories were going to run, okay.  Now that was a bit of a career risk, because if you're one of the people whose stories didn't run, that's not great for career development.  Midway through the project, I was assigned to write about a newspaper, a newspaper that had won a Pulitzer Prize for a series on race relations.  And this paper, the Akron Beacon Journal in Akron, Ohio, was now having their own racial internal stuff going--problems, and I, I went in to explore that.  Midway through my reporting--not even midway.  A third of the way through, Gerald [Gerald M. Boyd] said, "Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], you know, I'm the only black editor working on this.  You've been an editor before, you, you expressed interest in becoming an editor later in your career here, why don't you be an editor on this project?  I really like what you've said in some of the meetings."  And I said, "Well," and I tell this to a lot of young people about challenging yourself.  Here, he was giving me an out in a way that if this thing was a success, I could be a part of it as an editor, never having put myself out there as a reporter and have my stories be one of the ones that didn't run, right?  But I said, "No, I'll do it.  I'll be a part of the editing team, but I want to write my story as well."  So I helped conceive some of the other stories, I traveled with other reporters, and then I worked on my story.  And we wrote about, you know, two soldiers in the [U.S.] military.  We wrote about two Cuban guys, one with light skin and one with dark skin, and about their, the--their different realities in this country based on skin tone.  It was just--you know, we wrote about a church in Atlanta [Georgia] where ha- let's see--used to be fifty-fifty black and white, and it was about to tip to mostly black, and what that meant for that church.  So, you know, it was just--it was--it was a remarkable body of work, and I'm proud to be--to have been involved.
Speaker 1: So how, how often are those things done around The Times [The New York Times] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Projects like that--
Speaker 1: --projects like that--
Speaker 2: --of that magnitude?
Speaker 1: --of that magnitude?
Speaker 2: Quite often at The Times.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: This is the first time we took on the issue of race in such a big way, but we do big projects here all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: So but I want to--so who--how many people were on the project?
Speaker 2: So twelve reporters I believe--maybe fourteen and about four or five editors.
Speaker 1: And how often were you meeting during that year or--
Speaker 2: Once a week.
Speaker 1: Once a week.
Speaker 2: So we would--they actually scheduled the, the editing meetings around my schedule because I was doing--I was the only one doing both.  So I would--we'd meet on a Monday with the reporter--with the reporters--or with the editors, just amongst ourselves.  And then that evening I'd fly off to Akron and spend the week there reporting on my story.  And then I'd come back, you know, the weekend or that Monday morning for the editing again, and this went on for a year.
Speaker 1: Now was the Akron story--was that a story that you had heard about and you brought to the table, or was that a story you were assigned?  'Cause when I--in the book, I, I thought I understood it that you had known about this--what had happened.
Speaker 2: Well, I was assigned that story specifically because I had worked at The Plain Dealer in Cleveland [Ohio], so I was very familiar with Ohio newspapers and so forth.  But the story itself was assigned to me.  There were others that I came up with, like the drill sergeants at Fort Knox [Kentucky].  That was obviously--that one was my idea.  My father [T.J. Canedy, Sr.] was a drill sergeant at Fort Knox.  And in the context of race, I felt like that was going to be a good story, so I suggested that one.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ha- was there any acrimony in the group or did the group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no.
Speaker 1: No, no, now--
Speaker 2: I mean, there were--look, you can't write--
Speaker 1: But what about different views?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You cannot write about race relations and have everybody agree.  That's just not possible.  You can't even discuss it with--and, and, and not have--I mean, everyone's reality based on race has to do with, with, with, with, with how they were raised, and their experiences in the world, and, and you know, their own racial stuff, so we all had a different racial reality of course.  But that was where the power of having an editing team came into play, 'cause we, we, we, we, we were, were coming--we, we all had the same goals, in terms of what we wanted the stories to show, which was how--and this is why we, we titled it, 'How Race Is Lived in America' ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'] how people live with race on a day to day basis in America, in churches, in schools, in the military, you know.  And, and we picked some of the strongest editors in this place to edit it, on the one hand, just like we would edit any other big project; but on the other hand, we chose a team that was diverse so that we would--we would all be holding this up to the lens and looking at it from different vantage points.
Story_ID: 649925
Speaker 1: So how was that experience for you, you know, in terms of you being, your personal growth or your growth here within the organization [The New York Times]?  I mean, I know you, you went on to win a Pulitzer and that was your first, you know--that was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --first time that you had been on a team that won a Pulitzer, but I'm just trying to talk--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about the, the--
Speaker 2: The growth.
Speaker 1: --professional growth.
Speaker 2: So, okay, in terms of my personal growth, not much.  I think I've al- I've always been pretty racially aware, and I grew up in a very diverse community [in Fort Knox, Kentucky].  So it didn't push any envelopes for me personally or enlighten me in any way that, that I hadn't already been enlightened.  Because I, I, I--you know, I, I learned some things from my colleagues and from the sources I was working with on my particular story [for 'How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'].  Professionally, oh, my gosh, it was a turning point for me.  Because the executive editor, Joe Lelyveld [Joseph Lelyveld], at the time, called me into his office after my piece ran and said he thought my story was the best and was the hardest.  It was the hardest because--it was--I don't know whether it was the best, but it was the hardest because I was writing about another newspaper [Akron Beacon Journal].  I was interviewing reporters, and I was writing about a newspaper that had won a Pulitzer Prize for a series on race relations, and I was writing at a newspaper where the publisher didn't want me there, and the publisher was on the Pulitzer jury selection committee.  It doesn't get any tougher than that (laughter).  So he thought I pulled it off and said, "What do you want to do next?"  I said, "I guess I'll go back to covering consumer products.  I'm happy to do that in the business section."  He said, "No."  So he called in editors from various parts of the newspaper, the education editor, the metro editor, the national editor, the business editor and said, "Find her a great job and let her choose it."  And I was presented with all these options, and I decided to be the bureau chief for Florida 'cause I thought it'd be an interesting place to live and work, and Florida is a great, crazy, new state.  And I was off to Florida, and I started my job in Florida as the bureau chief on the day of the presidential recount in 2000.  Now that sounds really impressive, but the truth is I am not a political reporter.  So yeah, I had the title of bureau chief, but I really didn't take over until bureau chief--until after that story was done.  They flew in, thank god, the entire Washington [D.C.] bureau.  I had a piece of that story, I held my own, I worked harder than I've ever worked in my life for I think like thirty-eight days straight, until that thing was settled by the Sup- the U.S. Supreme Court [Bush v. Gore, 2000].  But I had a lot of, of people, you know, in New York [New York] and, and--who had come in from the Washington bureau really guiding that coverage.
Story_ID: 649926
Speaker 1: So what was the shape of the bureau that you came to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The--when the--
Speaker 1: --that, that bureau at, at--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --'cause--yeah, what was the shape of that bureau?  And let's provide context for--
Speaker 2: Of what a bureau chief is?
Speaker 1: Well, one, what a bureau chief is, and what political time period we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So in terms of what the--a bureau chief is, a bureau is--we have bureaus all over of the country and all over the world at The New York Times.  And I was responsible for all of the news in the State of Florida.  That was my job--breaking news, enterprise news as I've described before, and, and also just features and profiles that give a sense of people and place.  At that time, Florida was, was, you know, still, as it is today, heavily (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 19--this is 2000; I'm sorry.  This is 2003 I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to recall all that was going on 'cause a lot happened.  At that time, Florida was still, as it is today, heavily influenced by--particularly South Florida, which is where I was based--the influx of Cuban Americans into the--into South Florida.  So, you know, the Elian Gonzalez story had happened, other big news, news events.  The governor was Jeb Bush, who was the--George Bush's [President George Walker Bush] brother.  And, and then after, after nine el--after the--after the recount, 9/11 [September 11, 2001]--the presidential recount--9/11 happened, and I thought well, that's not a Florida story, but boy oh boy.  I worked, again, for months on end, because it turned out that the terrorists for 9/11 trained at the flight schools in Florida, so that was a big story.  Then the shuttle [Space Shuttle Columbia] blew up, and so, you know, that was a big story in Florida.  And it was just--then in between that there was--there were lots of interesting murder cases like the case of Lionel Tate that I covered.  He was a young African American kid--I think he was twelve at the time--convicted of murdering a playmate.  He thought--he said--his defense was he was imitating wrestling moves.  The jury didn't know that if they convicted him of first degree murder, that even at twelve years old, the only option was to sentence him to life without parole, which they did; so that was a big story.  There was this--it was--packed full of news my tenure there.  And so I was running from story to story to story, covering the state as best I could.  And I think I did a lot of my best work as the bureau chief in Florida.
Speaker 1: And you were there how long then?
Speaker 2: Two and half years.
Speaker 1: Two and half years.  Is that the typical time?
Speaker 2: No, it's actually longer.  And I got a promotion, so I got--I, I was going to be happy to stay in Florida for another couple of years.  Then my plan was that, you know, I would either go to another national bureau or become a foreign correspondent.  But I got a call from editors in New York [New York] saying, "You know, you did a great job editing on the race project ['How Race Is Lived in America: Pulling Together, Pulling Apart'].  Would you like to come back to New York and be a--an editor?"  And I said, "Sure.  What kind of editor?"  And they wanted me to be assignment editor for national news.  So then I was responsible for assigning, you know, breaking news coverage throughout the country in all of our bureaus; and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The, the assign-
Speaker 2: --I loved that job.
Story_ID: 649927
Speaker 1: The assignment editor has a lot of power, right, 'cause you're making decision about events (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, lot of authority.
Speaker 1: A lot of authority.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You can't have authority over horses (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I (laughter), but--
Speaker 1: Sorry, I forget, you know, journalists are almost like a college president.  You know, over--'cause everybody is their own--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --whatever.
Speaker 2: But yes, there is--there is a lot of authority in that--in that role.  I did--I don't walk around thinking of myself as (gesture) head authority.  I'm not that kind of person, but, but there was a lot of responsibility for sure.  It was fun, though, because, you know, at this point I'd been a reporter at The Times [The New York Times] for many years, and I liked helping to guide and support reporters out there doing the work that I had been doing.  I enjoy it very much.
Speaker 1: And the, the assignment, so who--how many assignment editors are there?
Speaker 2: That was just, just me.
Speaker 1: Just one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the national desk for all of our bureaus throughout the country, that was me.  We have an assignment editor for foreign coverage.  We have an assignment editor for metro coverage in the--you know, in New York [New York].  But--yeah, I was--I was the only assignment editor for national coverage throughout the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is that--you know, what I--I wonder about does there--when people are moving up, and really more administrative--you know, have news but also strongly administrative roles, which were really running the--part of running the newspaper.  Is there--are there people--do you--did you find that you were good at that?  Also, was--did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --challenge another part of your skillset?
Speaker 2: The administrative part?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I, I actually--as assignment editor for national news, it wasn't administrative at all.  Now my job is almost solely administrative.  And lo and behold, I guess you could ask my bosses.  I--they seem to be happy with what I'm doing.  I have probably more responsibility.
Speaker 1: But, but isn't the assignment though--you still are--you're, you're, you're making it--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: I meant--I mean, it's management.
Speaker 2: It's not administrative at all.
Speaker 1: I'm tra--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma- management.  I meant--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so yes.
Speaker 1: What I meant--I mean, you're not on the--you're not in the--you're actually helping run the paper--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --is what I'm trying to say.
Speaker 2: You're helping to shape the report--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --is how we refer to it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I would say I'm helping to shape and run the newsroom now.  At that time, as assignment editor for national news, I was helping shape the report, the national report, what we considered, you know, prioriti- how we prioritized the national news and what we, we presented as our national report.  Yes, I was very, very heavily involved in helping to shape that for sure.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, I'm helping to shape the newsroom.
Story_ID: 649928
Speaker 1: Okay, and so let's talk, but before you did that, you also then became senior editor, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's--I'm a senior editor now.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're a senior--but you have these other responsibilities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm no longer assignment editor.  So when I was assignment editor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but you're also doing the thing with the diversity--
Speaker 2: That's all under this umbrella of senior editor.
Speaker 1: Oh, but this--that was always the case under--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I just got more and more responsibility.  They keep expanding it, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so can we talk about the--okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, what I do now?  Okay, so now my, my job is really to help shape the newsroom.  I am a part of the senior management team.
Speaker 1: So how many are on the senior man- management team?
Speaker 2: I--oh, gosh, I don't--see, it depends on how you define it.  If you consider the foreign--no, well, let's see.  I'd say maybe there are about eight of us or so.  So, so the executive editor, the managing editor--
Speaker 1: Sit up, sit up.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry (laughter).  My--I have the worst posture ever--always have.
Speaker 1: Much better.
Speaker 2: And I'm clumsy (laughter).  The executive editor, the managing editor, assistant managing editors, and then there are few senior editors responsible for, for various things.  So, as senior editor, I'm responsible for hiring and recruiting, diversity initiatives in the newsroom, career development of the staff, along with my boss, Janet Elder, and, and, and I'm in charge of staff training.  I train--I conduct all the management training, and I'm rolling out a program next year to increase our training over all of the newsroom.  So that, that's what I do now.  I spend practically all of my time in those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, we had touched upon this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before I--I should say this.  I'm, I'm--I apologize for cutting you off, but in terms of my--I think the most significant--one of the--one of the two most significant parts of my job--now I'm involved in all kinds of personnel issues from soup to nuts.  But I interview just about every reporter, copy editor, producer, photographer, video journalists before they're hired.  That's, that's a big part of--I spend--I spend probably almost half of my time vetting candidates for newsroom jobs.  And that for me is so fulfilling.  Because I feel like in that sense, I'm helping to shape the next generation of The New York Times.  And it looks a lot different than the generation before.  You know, the, the things that--you know, I--I'm not the only gatekeeper for The New York Times newsroom, but I'm one of them.  And, and you know, I, I think as a--as an African American woman, as a single mom, as somebody who didn't, you know, grow up as a white male from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], as a--as somebody with--from a [U.S.] military background--military family--all of those influ- all of those things influenced my--what I bring to bear as a recruiter for this place.  The number thing, I think, that qualifies me for--to do that is obviously my experience and tenure here, and my training as a journalist, and my experience in the industry overall over so many years.  But this is where diversity really matters.  Because it's not just that I'm, you know, a journalist with a lot of experience, but I'm all those other things I just described.  And, and that in--the totality of that shapes who I am as a recruiter for, for The Times.
Speaker 1: Now with--all of this is happening against the backdrop of tremendous change in the media landscape.  And we had touched upon that a little bit, but this--from the time that you are assignment editor to today, there has been a paramount shift in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  That's right.
Story_ID: 649929
Speaker 1: I really would like to go with your view about what the last ten years have meant; and your view--especially because, you know, you just said you're training the next generation--identifying and training the next generation of journalists--what your view of what is happening.
Speaker 2: In the media?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the--in the newspaper industry specifically?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 2: I actually am really, really optimistic and hopeful about the future of newspapers.  Now--and I mean that quite sincerely.  First of all, if you talk about The New York Times, The New York Times is not going anywhere.  As I said, it's a public trust, and the Sulzberger family is completely committed to this, this institution, this organization.  If it wasn't, believe me someone else would be.  I think we'd be a--become a foundation before we ever went it--went out of business, and that's--we're nowhere near--I mean, that's just not going to happen.  We're I think as healthy as we've ever been.  That's, that's the--that's about The Times.  But the industry overall, yes, we've gone from ha- I mean, listen, we went from a time in this country where we had morning and afternoon newspapers.  That went away.  Then we had two newspaper towns where there was a lot of competition.  That went away.  Are we going to see more and more cities that have no newspapers?  Yes.  But I do think that over all, newspapers will survive.  The paper part might go away and it's just news organizations, which is how sort of we call ourselves these days.  But the trick is how to monetize that with advertising and through other--through videos and through other means when people are consuming the news on smartphones, and tablets, and, and computers as opposed to reading a dead tree version, okay.  I think we and others are doing really well on that and are figuring it out, and we'll only get better.  But I actually think that the contraction that's gone in the industry is healthy.  There was a lot of bloat.  There were--there was I think a lot of news organizations that needed to be smarter, needed to really think in a way they hadn't had to before about their resources, had to decide--make decisions about whether they were going to be national or international or local news organizations.  I also think that it's created for, for young people coming out of journalism school now--lots of opportunities.  There are--there are--there are startups and, and online publications that deliver the news in ways that we couldn't even imagine when I came out of journalism school.  The, the, the job producer--news producer in newspaper did not exist, and there were no video journalists at The New York Times when I came here.  And so there are--in that way--and not, not just The Times but throughout the country in news organizations and throughout the world.  Those are categories of jobs that didn't exist before, that give young people even more options, not less options.  Bottom line is there's always going to be in a--in a democratic society a place and a need for quality news.  Are some of the organiz- news organizations that aren't living up to their mission going to go by the wayside?  Of course, but I think they should.  On the other hand, there are smart young people who are going to be--continue to create things, ways to deliver the news, but quality news gathering and storytelling is not going away.  It's a part of American democracy.  It's not going to cease to exist.
Speaker 1: I hate to play devil's advocate, but is that because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Please do.
Speaker 1: --you're sitting at the top of the mountain, because there--it--I mean, the quality--the--first of all, there's opinion versus news.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And the quality of the news ha- has deteriorated in a lot of places--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: --on air and other places, so I'm asking that--I'm asking this because also the training that you got at the University of Kentucky [Lexington, Kentucky].  Are--journalism schools during this period have gone through a total paramount shift too.  So do you really think what you've--
Speaker 2: I do, absolutely.  I mean, journalism schools now are teaching young people to become producers and multimedia journalists, and to blog and to be video journalists.  They're teaching--they are teaching to the jobs that are now--that are--that now exist in our--in our ri- you know, they're teaching people to create their own news organizations--you know, online publications, for example.  But, I mean, yes, I think that, that the weaker news organizations are going to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How about the ethics of--
Speaker 2: --continue to struggle.
Story_ID: 649930
Speaker 1: What about the ethics of journ- news journalism (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What about it?  What do you mean?
Speaker 1: They're teaching them those tools, but what about the ethics--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, they always taught that.  Those classes still exist.  I mean, it doesn't really matter whether you're, you're going to be a video journalist, you're going to be a producer, you're going to be a traditional, you know, print reporter.  What I say to young people all the time is, before you do any of that, before you make those choices, you have to ba- own the basics of your craft.  You know, all those years I talked about where I was like, mastering the basics, that includes the ethics.  When you ask me about ethics, the reason I say, "What do you mean," is because it's a given that that's a part of that.  If you're not an ethical journalist and if you don't understand the tenets of, of journalism and, and the rules of it, you're not going to last.  Those people implode, and they have no business in our industry.  But, you know, whether you're learning how to write a lead, learning how to write a what we call nut graf, learning how to write on deadline.  You're also in journalism school learning about ethics.  That hasn't changed.  The fundamentals--the basics have not changed.  What has changed is you're now learning things that didn't exist when I was in journalism school [at the University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].  You're learning how to write--you're learning how to blog, you're learning how to, to code, to do--you know, do computer coding for newspapers.  You're learning how to run a video, you know.  I didn't--I still don't know how to do a, a good bit of that stuff.  And so there are--while the industry is contracting, it's growing and it really is, growing in other ways, you know.  Say what you will about The Huffington Post or some of these other news outfits.  They didn't exist before and they're employing people.
Speaker 1: That's right--that's a modern day take--no, it's--you know, and I--you know, I, I do believe that things have settled down some.  But--
Speaker 2: Oh, quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What about--okay, I can't, I won't ask that, but--
Speaker 2: You can ask--ask me anything.
Speaker 1: No--The New York [The New York Times]--never mind.  I'll ask that off, off camera.
Speaker 2: No, ask.
Speaker 1: No, but I want a--
Speaker 2: This is not an off the record discussion at--you know what?  I fee- I feel very strongly as a journalist you should be able to ask me anything.  I, I--I've spent my life asking people questions, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  No, but it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --this is not--I'll ask you--
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 649931
Speaker 1: Where does [HistoryMaker] Dana Canedy go from here?
Speaker 2: Where do I go from here?
Speaker 1: You're still young.
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  Well, first of all, I don't think of myself as all that young anymore.   Where do I go from here?  Goodness gracious, there's still so much I could do at The New York Times, but who knows?  Could I run a news organization that isn't The Times?  Absolutely.  Might I one day just decide I want to write books full time?  Um-hm, yes.  Or when Jordan's [Canedy's son, Jordan King] older, I might decide I want to become a foreign correspondent for The New York Times and going back--go back to being a reporter.  Our execu- former executive editor, Bill Keller, is, has gone back to writing.  He's writing, you know, a column, but he's a writer now.  The one thing that, that, that, that losing Charles [Charles M. King] taught me is, I don't need to worry about planning.  Life is going to fold as it's meant to be.  I love my, my career at The New York Times.  I'm very proud of it, and I'm very proud to be part of this news organization.  Could I ever see leaving?  I don't plan to, but yeah, I, I--you know, for the right opportunity.  On the other hand, I'm so married to this place, if you will, and so loyal to it, and I love it so much that I'd also be happy to continue to be challenged and have new opportunities here and retire here.  Or I might do something completely different.  I honestly, if I was going to do--if I was going to leave to do anything else, I guess my dream would be to just write books full time.  Otherwise, I'm, I'm in my dream job right now, and I'm in the place where I could see myself finishing out my career.
Speaker 1: So, so you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I've got twenty--twenty-five years to go.  I don't know what's going to happen (laughter).
Speaker 1: You have--that's what I'm saying--so you have--you have a lot of books, bo- book projects you feel inside you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 649932
Speaker 1: When you look at where we are as a society--and I'm just going to move into some philosophical questions; then we'll, we'll be done.  If you--when you look at the African American community, what, what hopes and concerns do you see--or do you have?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: So, you know, the concerns I have as I look at the African American community--I don't, by the way--as a journalist, I never say African American community.  There isn't one African American community.  I say African American communities, plural.  We are not monolithic.  You know, but my concerns obviously have to do with the disproportionate number of, you know, black men not getting college educations as opposed to everyone, and certainly as opposed to black women.  I'm concerned about wealth distribution in this country, and where race and gender and ethnicity inter- you know, intersect with that.  But I'm--but I'm mostly hopeful.  Because for, for, for all of the god awful Trayvon Martin cases and things that happen, you also have--every generation gets better.  We--I cannot believe it's been in my lifetime that we couldn't vote.  Are you kidding me?  Like, it's incredible.  You know, my son, Jordan [Jordan King], goes to a private school--a very elite private school in New York [New York].  And on Friday he had a sleepover with one of his classmates, Hispanic young, young man whose father is a train conductor and the mom is a midwife, and they live, you know, in a--in a not fancy part of New York City.  And the very next day, literally a half hour later after this boy had left, comes his next play date, a boy whose father's a hedge fund multimillionaire who lives on, you know, this very exclusive part of Central Park West, overlooking Central Park [New York, New York].  So Jordan's growing up in a world where his friends can be, you know, young Hispanic kids, they can be black, they can be hedge fund--you know, trust fund kid.  And when you--when you talk to these young people and, and, and, and kids older than Jordan about the fact that, you know, there used to be slaves, or, or, or there was a time when blacks couldn't vote, or there was a time when women--whatever.  They, they think you're talking about planet Mars.  And, and so I think--I think that every generation gets better on this stuff, and we have to keep just working at it.  I mean, the fact that I'm sitting here at The New York Times, coming from that little town in Kentucky outside the [U.S.] military base [Fort Knox, Kentucky], and I'm not--you know, I came in here as a trainee, and I've had what, five different jobs here.  And I'm now responsible for hiring reporters for The New York Times in what, a generation or so.  It's incredible.  So I'm more hopeful than I am concerned.
Story_ID: 649933
Speaker 1: So what do you feel--because in many ways, I don't (unclear) commentary, but your story is the quinte- quinte- quintessential American story, sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Essential, yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: But what do you believe--are you X generation--are you of that generation (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I am, gen X.
Speaker 1: Gen X, all right.  Oh, god, I can't believe gen Xs are in the--their forties.  But it (laughter)--'cause we were the baby boomers.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: At the end of the baby boomers.  But what do you feel that your--the legacy of your generation is going to be?
Speaker 2: That is a hard question because I, I, I wouldn't be so presumptuous as to assume that we made the kinds of impact on society and on this--on this country that the previous generations have.  We didn't have a Civil Rights Movement; we didn't have a women's rights movement; we didn't put people on the moon.  We've done a lot of things, but I don't think that chapter has been written yet.  I don't know what our legacy is going to be.  I truly don't.  I think--well, one thing that we can be proud of is we elected the first African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in this country, regardless of what your politics is.  I never thought I'd see that in my lifetime.  I think most people didn't think they'd see that in their lifetime, so if nothing else, that speaks to how far we've come in this country, right?  But I think what our legacy is going to be--I think it will be a lot about racial progress, technological innovation, the, the Internet and, and so forth.  Beyond that I just don't know, and that's, that's one thing I say to my son, Jordan [Jordan King] all the time is, you know, it's, it's great to, to sort of ponder questions like this, but you don't ever have to feel like you have to have all the answers.  You know, you have to keep thinking about it and working on it, but I never want to presume that I have the answers to everything.  I want to read that chapter in history just like everybody else; and I just--I just--I'm not sure what it's going to say.
Story_ID: 649934
Speaker 1: And your legacy?
Speaker 2: That book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy] and my son.  I don't care about my legacy that much.  I care that I left something for posterity for my son, and that I'm doing good work while I'm here.  I don't take myself that seriously.  I take my job that seriously, or I take my job seriously, but I don't take myself that seriously.  I don't spend--it's so funny because on the book tour I did talk a lot about the importance of legacy and people writing and creating their own legacies, right?  But I feel like my life is documented in that book along with Charles' [Charles M. King], and if Jordan [Jordan King] or anybody else--future generations--want to read it and look at it--and I've, I've been interviewed gracefully by you--thank you--and, and so many places that, that if anybody wants to know what my legacy is or, or, or, or define--help, help define it for themselves or whatev- all I have to do is type my name on the Internet.  So I, I--you know, I don't know.  I'm a mom, a journalist, an author, and just a simple girl from Kentucky--that's it, no more no less.
Story_ID: 649935
Speaker 1: And what would you--just one last question.  What--when people describe you, what would they--how would they--how do--what do you think people would say about you?
Speaker 2: I actually think there's a disconnect between how I see myself and how others see me.  I had somebody recently tell me that, of all the interviews they did at The New York Times, they were most intimidated by being interviewed by me.  I'm not a hard, tough, you know, interviewer, but it--but, but I expect people to know their stuff and know about us and, and all that.  I think--I don't know.  If, if, if people were describing me, I think they'd use more serious language than I use.  I'm just simple.  You know, I'm like--it's so funny because I've had people say "Oh, you're so down to earth."  I go, "What do you mean?"  I grew up with--you know, we had food to eat and we had a place to live, but we didn't have anything more than that.  And, and I'm very clumsy and I mean this.  The minute I call myself walking with my nose in the air, I'm going to trip over my feet because I'm incredibly clumsy.  Life is a great equalizer, you know.  You're only as good as the good things you're doing in life: raising your family, contributing to s- society.  Because the minute you think you're better than somebody else, the person you love can get literally blown up by a bomb.  You can find that you have breast cancer.  You might--you know, I might--you might think you're better than me, but you know what?  Tomorrow you might need my bone marrow, you know.  We're all just human beings.  And so I guess if people were describing me, they would say that I'm focused, and driven, funny, I guess.  I don't know.  I don't--I don't actually like to talk about like, adjectives about myself.  It feels a little self-indulgent.  I'd rather just be doing work or spending time with my kid [Jordan King].  I don't--I don't spend a lot of time (gesture) pondering Dana [HistoryMaker Dana Canedy], if you will (laughter).  I don't do that.  There's a better use of time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, and you're a lovely person.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: You are--
Speaker 2: --thank you.
Speaker 1: You are lov- you're a lovely person.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: You know what; you really are.
Speaker 2: Thank you that's truly nice of you.
Speaker 1: You are--no, because--I mean, I think of how introspective the book ['A Journal for Jordan: A Story of Love and Honor,' Dana Canedy], but then you make everything seem so easy; but it really wasn't easy along the way.  But I mean you had gifts.
