Story_ID: 5072
Speaker 1: There are,  five questions I ask of everyone there's, you know, no relevance (chuckling) to them accept that I start at the beginning. One is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: A particular seafood or something like that?  Lobster, okay?
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have one, can't think of one.
Story_ID: 5073
Speaker 1: I guess and your spell it for us. And I want you to just say today's date and your profession.
Speaker 2: Of course, I'm retired now.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Okay. So if I'm retired you don't, don't want--.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, what you were or--.
Speaker 2: What I was, okay, okay. Walter Hill Clark, W-A-L-T-E-R H-I-L-L C-L-A-R-K, was born June five, 1928 and I was a businessman.
Story_ID: 5074
Speaker 1: I want you to tell me, you know, give me the name of  your father and tell me about them and what you know about his family.
Speaker 2: Okay. My father was John Quincy Clark, he was born in Grace, Mississippi. His mother was Selena Glenn and his father was a Clark, can't recall the first name; and he was white. And he never knew his father and he was raised in Grace, Mississippi, Mound Bayou, Mississippi, went to school for a few years in Greenville [Mississippi], as far as he could go. And then they paid for him to go out of state to higher education, so he went to Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio], finished high school there and finished college there. The--my mother [Beulah Hill] was from Athens, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Could I, could we go back to your father for a little bit?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Did he, talk, at all about growing up in Mississippi and what that was like or that, you know, what, did he share anything with you that was (unclear) or do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes. He talked about the hard time that his mother had because he never knew his father. And he never acknowledged that his father was white, until the year before he died and he was seventy-four years old then. So, he saw different things how blacks were treated in the South at that time but he learned how to cope with that, about what to say and not get involved in different things. And it was mostly a very rural, Grace, Mississippi, I don't even know if it is on the map. You know people did for him and his grandfather, who was a slave, learned how to hunt and also learned how to measure for doing different work in a woodshop. A German man taught him how to read and how to count. His grandmother was an Indian and she's the one that sort of help hold the family together because she knew how to raise chickens and different type of animals, plant corn and things like that. So as a youngster, what he had two uncles that had to leave because of different disturbances they had with some of the white people. And so his mother moved to Chicago [Illinois] when he was, probably when he was a sophomore in high school. And she was a domestic all of her life. But she saw that he needed an education so she worked to help put him through school.
Speaker 1: Did he talk at all about what's, you know, any, any spec--oh, you didn't know until? Well when he mention this right before he passed away, was there anything he, talked in terms about or just that, that was or--.
Speaker 2: He really didn't say that much about his father cause he never knew him. We never questioned, my brother and I lived with his mother because we went out, we went to school in Los Angeles [California] for a couple of years. And we thought maybe she had been raped so we never asked her anything but she wasn't. And, I don't know how far Yazoo City [Mississippi] is from Grace, Mississippi but his dad worked on the railroad. And on that side of the family his grandfather, on that side of the family was a doctor in Yazoo City, Mississippi. And my brother and I were never ones to tried and look up the history of family. So we really don't know anything them.
Speaker 1: But you now she wasn't raped, you know that.
Speaker 2: I know that from a cousin, a first cousin of my father's, that she like the man and, but they never lived together to my knowledge and she never mentioned his name, all her life to us.
Story_ID: 5075
Speaker 1: Now, on your mother [Beulah Hill], you talk about your mother.
Speaker 2: Okay. My mother was born in Athens, Georgia and there were about eight kids. Her mother was a Richardson and, there's a Richardson--there's a book called the Athenians for Athens, Georgia. And has the history of a lot of families. There was a Richardson, there was a representative from Georgia in the 1960s, in which was a relative of my grandmother. I don't know that much about it, I just happened to see that in a book. I know he supposedly was poisoned while serving in the House of Representatives; what for I don't know.  So my mother was raised in Athens, Georgia and her two older sisters were living in Wilberforce, Ohio. So she went to Wilberforce because her brother-in-laws were teaching there. And that was where my mother and father met. Mother went to private school in Athens, grade school and it's called the, I can't think of what it's called,  Knoxville Institute, Knox Institute, I guess it was. And she had some aunts that taught there.
Speaker 1: So she was from a large family that, of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the, a prestigious one.
Speaker 2: Her father, which would be, no that's my grandfather, but her grandfather was the product of, a Jewish man that worked in a department store,  in a family own department store in Athens, Georgia. I'm talking about my mother's father's name was Squire Hill. Hill was his mother's name; she was a slave and the name of his father was Michael Max Michaels. There's a department store there in Athens, Georgia that is still operated today. Here again, I've never investigated that part of the family. But, I always wondered who his mother and father was because he was real short, real light, straight hair. And when I, course when I remember him he had gray hair. So I don't know anything about his family. My grandfather took his mother's name. She already had a family when he was born and that's how I got the Hill in the middle of my name and that was my mother's maiden name, Hill. So, once my, mother and father met at Wilberforce [Ohio] they got married and my dad went to Carbondale, Illinois to start teaching in 1926. So my mother was basically a housewife.  She taught music, you know, to private students.
Speaker 1: So when you said you're, father [John Clark]  start teaching in Carbondale, did the family moved to Carbondale?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, okay. And that's where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Athens. But my--they will living in Carbondale at the time but she wanted to go home where her mother was, when I was born. I only had one brother and he was a year and a half older than me.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: John Quincy Clark, Jr. and he was born in Chicago [Illinois] because my dad's mother was living in Chicago, so that was, less miles to travel when he was born. But we really spent our childhood in Carbondale, Illinois.
Story_ID: 5076
Speaker 1: So tell me what are, you know, if you could share with us, some memories or, you know, growing up. You know, what, any memories, you know, it may be with friends or family or, you know, just any of those.
Speaker 2: Well, Carbondale [Illinois] is, at that time, a city of about thirteen thousand people. Biggest thing there was, the university [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and it was small at the time. We all had separate schools and, but in the black schools we had very good teachers, most of them were college graduates, some with Masters degrees. About two thousand blacks in the town and they all lived in one section, and the whites lived in other sections of the town. And at that time we are talking about in the 20s [1920s] and 30s [1930s]. you could not eat in the restaurants, anything like that but that didn't really seem to bother us cause most of us ate at home anyway or we ate at friend's houses. And for, for me, I thought it was a wonderful way to come up. I mean, we had very good teachers.  Our parents and their friends were really into raising kids. People in those days would correct you if you were doing something wrong. And I think if anybody you talked to my age from wherever they came from well that was the thing of the day. So we all received real good education, the teachers were really into teaching and they were well respected. And in those days that was probably as much money as you could make being black, is teaching school. So it was safe, it wasn't any crime to speak of, drugs to speak of. And I really had some real nice times growing up at the school and participating in athletics. So we really had a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Now what athletics did you participate in? What games were these?
Speaker 2: Basketball, football, track, baseball. My dad was science and math teaching, plus he, he was the coach. That's in high school now, I participated all the way up through grade school and high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Carbondale, Illinois].
Story_ID: 5077
Speaker 1: I, can you give me some idea more about even your, your family life what was it like, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, where, your dad [John Clark] say that in a small town [Carbondale, Illinois] like that, if he's the coach or teacher, there's certain things we couldn't do. Couldn't go up and hang around on the street. (chuckle) No smoking, no drinking and you had to set example for, for other kids. But that didn't seem to bother us because we were interested in athletics and things. We weren't interested in those type of things. We always ate together for lunch and for dinner because my dad could walk across the street to school. There was a classmate of my mother's [Beulah Hill] and father's that lived with us, she never got married. And so she came to Carbondale [Illinois] to teach at the same time. So while we were eating even as little kids, she taught English, so if we didn't speak properly, she was correct us at the table. So, and she taught Spanish, so we learned to ask for food in spanish, plus english. So it was very, very nice, growing up there. My dad and mother liked to fish, so each evening in the summertime they'd go fishing. He even go during the noon hours since he was so close to the, to school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], to fish. They had some nice lakes that was close by. And, everybody in the community know, knew one another. So, and the social life for the teachers was to get together with one another. They played cards, have dinner and I remember many times when it was fall we would go with them and they'd played maybe to twelve or one o'clock on the weekends and we would be sleeping at whoever's house we were, you know, so--and then we had a lot of friends that were our age at that time also. So it was a very relax living.
Story_ID: 5078
Speaker 1: You know--(pause) I wanted to ask another question about that--how many blacks? That was the question.
Speaker 2: Around two thousand blacks that lived there.
Speaker 1: Out of thirteen thousand?
Speaker 2: Yeah. They had one dentist that was a friend of ours, one doctor and one, it's a foot doctor. Most of the people worked. They have a station there that when the train stop there, to be serviced, which is pretty good. The train would go from Chicago [Illinois] to New Orleans [Louisiana] and that was one of the big stops of service in trains on the railroad there. And a lot of the blacks that's where they worked. Not too many worked at the school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] at that time. Of course as the University got bigger we had people that worked at the University and it didn't bother us that we had a separate school because we all got a real good education. One unique thing was I, I had finished high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Carbondale, Illinois]  and at that time, my dad [John Clark] was Principal. And, they had a high school for the Southern Illinois University so, for practice teaching. And then they had a white high school, that was the regular high school in, in the city; so you had three high schools there. And, they wanted to combine the black high school with the white high school. But their, their idea of combining the schools was just to take the students and not take the teachers. So my dad resented that and they almost had to get his permission, you know they had to get his okay in order to have a smooth transition. But he had always worked, with the Board of Directors for the school, on the School Board. And the School Board for the Carbondale Community High School was the same board for [Crispus] Attucks High School [Carbondale, Illinois], that was the name of the high school I went to. And, so he said, "Well, it's fine if you want to combine the schools but you got to take the teachers, too."  So it took them six or seven years before they decided to combine the schools and bring in the teachers. Then it was a big thing to-do about who was going to be the principal because my dad had his Master's degree in Education and then well known in the city. He was in the Rotary Club, he's the only black in the Rotary Club. And, and they, when they had the election for the school board, he assisted the ones he wanted to be on the Board to--of course they (unclear) that the citizens voted on, so he had corralled most of the blacks to tell them who he would like to see on the board. So they knew he had some power with the community so he was well known in, the town. So, it was a big to-do about who was going to be the principal of the school. And they didn't decide to have him as the principal even though the principal had come along the same way my dad had. Although he hadn't gotten a Masters in Education, he had been a coach also and then a principal. And so I told him he shouldn't--well what they said they were giving him the job as Assistant to the Principal, not Assistant Principal; it's a lot of difference. And I asked him not to take the job. I was living in Chicago then. But he took it anyway and he worked there for, think for six or seven years and then he retired and went to work for the University.
Speaker 1: What year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: 1960s or around 1965, in that area.
Story_ID: 5079
Speaker 1: Now, describe the young, you know, how you were as a young person were you, you know, quiet or your, I mean, you have a quiet demeanor now. But were you quiet?
Speaker 2: I was quieter then. (laughs) But, I never caused any waves but, I just, I really enjoyed life.
Speaker 1: Did you have, you know, we all when we're young we little things that we want to do or think we want to be, what, what did the young Walter Clark dream of?
Speaker 2: Well, my dad [John Clark], my dad had a lot to do with that.  When he was going to college he worked in the summer times.  He had to help get money for school. So he worked on the railroad as a waiter on the trains. Then he worked in Chicago [Illinois], here at the hotels. And, he was Phi Beta Kappa in college, Chemistry, Math, Physics. And he wanted to be a engineer, he wanted to go into engineering but he knew he couldn't find a job in it so that's when he start teaching. But he used to tell me about his experiences on the, working on the railroad and also working at the hotels, here in Chicago. And he mentioned the fact that I was really interested in Math myself and because he taught it, we'd had different games at home; we would play with Math. And he talked about the accountants that would come there and how they would stay at the hotel for a week, judging about how the hotel was run, what they would do with the food when they take it away and so they were really like consultants to the hotels, the Bismarck Hotel, at the time which is on Randolph [St.], they've changed the name now. And so I got interested in accounting just through his talking about it and what the people did. Because at that time we didn't have TV so and we only had one accounting firm in the city of Carbondale [Illinois]. So I majored in Accounting. My brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] also had a business major, he didn't major in Accounting but he decided to teach school  So, so that was really the influence of what I, told me as to what I thought I wanted to be. I was really liked to coach but my dad didn't make any money, so I said, "I better not go into that.", at that time. And, at that time, of course, you couldn't participate in the pro football or basketball and just to be high school really cause they didn't really have any black college coaches, except at black schools.
Speaker 1: Was there any, ever--(long pause) Was there ever any--so both you and your brother were basically good, good boys in your lives. Did you ever go against your parents in any way?
Speaker 2: My brother did but I didn't. (laughs) And I let him be the spokesperson, you know. But we got a chance to do what we wanted to do and he worked mother [Beulah Hill] against the father, father against the mother, you know, you find out which one you can get along with better. And, so we, we still had a relaxed living growing up.
Story_ID: 5080
Speaker 1: Who are you most like, your mother [Beulah Hill] or your father [John Clark] or a combination of both?
Speaker 2: Probably a combination of both.
Speaker 1: And, and tell me what you have from both.
Speaker 2: Well, my father was a person, who didn't like to brag about what he did.  I know in basketball he would never let the fellows, who ended up playing know how many points they scored. Because he thought a person who was a good defensive player or a person who would pass the ball to the scorer was just as important. So I took that same type of demeanor I guess even in work, until I learned to do a little better. And I learned that you can't rely on people to recognize your abilities by just working. You have to, you know, product yourself and you have to sell yourself, in certain ways. And, but my brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] was a little more high strung than myself and I guess he has that one thing from his from my father. My mother didn't cause any ways except when she got real, real mad, you know. (laughs) And she really ran the house.  My dad would give his check to her, she did all the business for the house, she bought the groceries, paid all the bills, did all the housework, did the cooking, taught music. And so all he did was coach, teach and that was it. She laid out all his clothes for him and so, he had no word.
Speaker 1: He had the good life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, real good life. (Laughing simultaneously)
Speaker 1: We all want a wife like that, no it's true.
Speaker 2: You can't find those today! (Laughs)
Story_ID: 5081
Speaker 1: Okay now you, what about your friends, like, you know, in high school and growing up.  Who, were there people that had influence on you, you know, during that time or, you--?
Speaker 2: Well, they were older people who, you know, there was a fellow who was say ten years older than me, he was--see all the basketball players had come over the house and sit down and eat with us.  My dad [John Clark] would get them to bring the coal in for the stove, you know, and different things like that. And so, you know, growing up we had a basketball goal in the house on the door.  So, (laughs) I don't know how my mother [Beulah Hill] ever, you know, allowed that but we had one on the outside, that's hanging on the outside on the side of the house. So, the fellows who were older than my brother and I catered to us because they wanted to go over and talk to the coach, you know, and they wanted know what my dad was saying about them and things like that. But, most of the kids in the school know, knew one another, we all played together and we all were on the teams together or participating in classes together so we were all very friendly. We had a lot of house parties and things like that.
Story_ID: 5082
Speaker 1: Now when it came time for you to--were you a good student, you would say in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very good grades.
Speaker 1: And when it came time to go to college, what was the discussion?  Was there any discussion of your going to (unclear) schools?
Speaker 2: Yes, my brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] went there his first year, he was two years ahead of me. Then he went into service, in I think it was 1945. And, so he was two years ahead of me, so I went to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] the first year and we decided that we wanted to go out to California to go to school. So when he got discharged from the service we were in the same grade then, so we went out to California. And he had the GI Bill and I didn't so I think it cost $150 a semester, at that time, to go to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]; we wanted to go to UCLA. So, we didn't have the money.  We lived with our grandmother, my father's mother was in Los Angeles. So we went to Compton Junior College which was free and after you're there a year you'd become a citizen so we both got our junior college degree and then we went to UCLA, the next year.
Speaker 1: So that's where you graduated from?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I came back to Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and finished up there.
Speaker 1: So you went--how long did you go to UCLA?
Speaker 2: We just went one year.
Speaker 1: One year, okay.
Speaker 2: But we went two years to college out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Compton Junior College [Compton, California] and then, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear), okay, did he come back with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well that's interesting! You were like twins at this point!
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, we did everything together, you know, our mother [Beulah Hill] did us that way; yeah. Our clothes, we got the same clothes and, so except when he went to college that's the only time we were separated and then in the service.
Speaker 1: So now, what did you major--were you majoring in business or accounting?
Speaker 2: I majored in accounting.
Speaker 1: Accounting, okay. Did you come in majoring in accounting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you like your California experience?
Speaker 2: I did but my brother wasn't making good grades out there, he was partying too much, so we to go back home. (laughs)
Speaker 1: He ruined the party (unclear) people--(laughs)
Speaker 2: Yeah he ruined the  party, right. (laughs)
Speaker 1: He might have had a different story written but you had to come back to the backyard, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Los Angeles is real nice.
Story_ID: 5083
Speaker 1: I might say that,  I went my first year to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], I really didn't want to go.  But the coach at Southern Illinois had begged me,  and my dad for me to come to Southern Illinois University.  And, that was 1946 and all the,  fellows were getting out of the service then.  So I went out for football as a freshman and you practice three or four weeks before school starts.  And there were so many people who,  so many men there that had lettered in football, that I wasn't able to get a uniform. (Laughs)  They didn't have enough uniforms to go around, so it took me a whole month to get a whole uniform. Well, that kind of bothered me,  but I still worked hard because I liked football.  Finally made the team, they had three teams that would travel.  And the first out of town game was down in Cape Girardeau, Missouri and I noticed that my name wasn't on the list.  So I went and asked the coach what was wrong.  He say, "Well Walter" he said, at that time they didn't use black they said, "They will not allow any colored boys to play down in Cape Girardeau.  If the game were here in Carbondale you could play. So that's the reason your name is not on the list."  Well I really felt bad about that cause I'd worked real hard just to make the third team. (Laughs)  So I made up my mind that, when my brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] came back I was going some other place to go to school.  But, and then when we went out to California, I made the team out in Compton Junior College [Compton, California].  And, we were the National Champions for the junior colleges, that would be 1947, 48 [1948]. And it was interesting we, went down to Phoenix, Arizona to a holiday tournament.  There were three blacks on the team.  And we went down in cars and this is in the southern part of California on the way to Phoenix, Arizona.  And, the coach had arranged for the team and the manager and himself to have dinner at a certain location.  I forgot the name of the town. So there was a restaurant on the highway there so we all went there to eat and soon as the three blacks walked in the waitress say, "I'm sorry we can't serve them."  This is in California, so, coach came in and say, "What do you mean you can't serve them?"  She said, "Well we don't serve colored people in this restaurant."  He say, "Well I've made this arrangement for about two months ago, I've got the check all made out, I know what the cost is."  So the lady say, "Well, well let me talk to the manager."  Well the manager came out and says, "No way, you can't eat here."  He say, "I'll tell you what I'll do."  Some of the fellows had already started eating. "I will,  fix a dinner and you, they can eat it outside."  And the coach says, "No way, either you feed everybody or nobody eats." (laughs) So, we didn't eat!  So he went to a grocery store and bought some bread and some lunch meat (laughs) and, that's how the team ate.  We got to Phoenix, Arizona about two o'clock in the morning and we had--we went to a hotel.  First time in my life I've ever stayed at a hotel.  I woke up the next morning the coach said, "How did you sleep last night?" I said, "Fine."  Well, you know, that was the first time I'd ever slept in a hotel and it was a real nice hotel.  So he said, "Well, I didn't sleep well last night.  So,  you know, the people were running up and down the hallway and saw some mice in the room."  So I said, "Well where did you sleep?" (Laughs)  So,  he said, "I just didn't sleep well, I think we are going to find another place."  So he rented a house, what it was they didn't want us to stay in the hotel but he didn't tell us that, at first.  So,  that's the difference in two coaches.  But,  I was really surprised that,  both California, I wasn't I guess that surprise about Phoenix, Arizona. But we had made several trips out to California,  in the 1930s and the 40s [1940s] and we could never stay anywhere in,  at least at the hotels.  So my dad [John Clark] had arranged the different places he'd gone to college with we would stay at their house, different people's house.  And sometimes we get in there real warm weather we would just sleep, you know, outside. So, it's, my dad was very light complexed and at first he would go to a motel and get a room and then they'd see us and say, "You know, we forgot we don't, I thought we had a vacancy but we don't" (Laughs)  So,  but we made it anyway.
Story_ID: 5084
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you go--what year are you when you go back to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: 46 [1946], 47 [1947] I was at the SIU, 47 [1947], 48 [1948] I was at Compton [Community College, Compton, California], 48 [1948], 49 [1949] I was at UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif.], then went back to Southern Illinois University.
Speaker 1: For your last year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did someone count; I know California is usually five years?
Speaker 2: No, four.
Speaker 1: Four, okay.  So your, how did the program differ at SIU that kind, after you had done that, you know, UCLA was there a difference, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing at UCLA in accounting you have a lot of practice sets to do. And the teachers at, UCLA were all in business, they were CPA's [Certified Public Accountants] and they had their own business.  And they were in downtown Los Angeles, which is quite a ways from UCLA campus.  So if you had a problem and you wanted to talk to the teacher you had to make an appointment a couple of weeks in advance.  Well you don't know when you are going to have a problem when do work at night on problems.  And the teacher was doing a new book and we were the persons who were critiquing the book as to misspelled words or errors in them and so forth.  But, it was very nice and I enjoyed Southern Illinois University better because I had a real nice teacher, which was very nice, it was a lady and you could call her at ten o'clock at night and go up to her house and work on a problem. So I really enjoyed it in Southern Illinois a lot better than out to UCLA because of the closeness of the teacher, smallest of the classes.  So,  I had a major in Accounting.  I took every accounting course they had there. And, I really wanted to work for one of the automobile companies and they would come to campus and interview students but I never got an interview.  That was another thing that really hurt.  So, all the people in my class had jobs before they graduated. I even contacted--.  There was one CPA firm in Carbondale. And it was a Mr. Curtis, he was on the school board supposedly a real good friend of my father.  So, my, I was a junior then, I said my junior year, I said,  ask my dad, "Let's go talk to Mr. Curtis, to see if I could work at the firm just to get some practical experience because everybody in my class had a job working in, at a store and,  some business or for an accountant to get some practical experience."  So he said, "Okay we'll go up and talk to him."  And I told my dad before we went, I said, "You know, I'd be willing to work even if he doesn't pay me."  So we talked to him and he said, "Well Mr. Clark" he said,  "I wouldn't mind hiring your son cause I know you and I know your son but I feel that we will lose business, if he were to go into the office to do the work."  And, so I piped up and said, "Well Mr. Curtis", I said, "There's only one CPA firm here and the next closest one is St. Louis, Missouri which is a hundred miles and I don't think you'll lose any customers, if they have to have a Certified Audit by CPA."  You know, but he didn't let me work there.  So what I would do is I would go and get individuals who I knew that had a job, like a mechanic or somebody who had his own business, I would do their income tax returns for them to get some practical experience.
Speaker 1: So now, that's what I'm wondering cause there is this perception about blacks and money, I mean, you know, blacks were never, it's not, accounting has been a very difficult area, even today,  what was it, so my question for you. You're, okay, so you're finishing up, you're graduating with your degree in accounting what are you, what are your desires at that point?
Speaker 2: To be an accountant.
Story_ID: 5085
Speaker 1: So do you,  got, you were employed there [in Carbondale, Illinois after graduation, 1951]?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Not in Carbondale. We graduated on a Saturday and Sunday we were on a train coming to Chicago [Illinois].  My brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] and myself.  So, I spent well, you know, we made money as youngsters, sweeping the hallways in the school, newspapers and I think I had around  three or four thousand dollars in 1951, yeah, that we had saved up. And there was a Mr. Goul (ph.) here in Chicago that was, he's on, he had an office on Forty-seventh Street. And my mother [Beulah Hill] knew a lawyer here that was from Athens, Georgia that was a civil rights lawyer. He had a office on, around Sixty-fifth [St.] and Cottage Grove and he told her, "Send your son up, I'll get him a job." but he didn't have a job. (laughs) So I spent just about all of my three thousand dollars going for interviews. I went to Arthur Andersen, they were at Dearborn [St.] and Washington [St.] at the time.  The receptionist not, anybody in the company, the receptionist say, "We don't have any openings." So they didn't take my name or let me make an application. Mr. Goul sent me to various industrial places.  I'd spent at least two months everyday going taking tests to get a job and I didn't get a job any place in accounting, that's what I was looking for. So I ended up,  finally after not getting a job, I ended up working for a company right here on Michigan [Michigan Ave., Chicago, Illinois] not too far in the 1800 block on Michigan Avenue.  They, made the boxes for radios, record players and things like that, at a dollar a hour.  By the way, I talked to Arthur Wilson, who was the black CPA and Charles Beckett, two black CPA's in the city of Chicago. And Mr. Wilson say, "Well I'd have to pay you a dollar a hour but I'd have to teach you cause you don't know anything." (laughing) So he didn't hire me either. And, so I got this job and it's really right down the street on the other side of the street, on the east side of the street and I guess I worked there a couple of months. And it was on an assembly line where you put different parts to the, to the, radio or the record player and of course, my feet got tired and I was really--so one day the line stopped because they didn't have--I didn't know what it was and I asked the owner, I say, "What's wrong, well, you know, whether, why the line stopped and everybody's just, just standing around?" He said, "Well we ran out of parts." Some type of screw or whatever it was, you know. So I tell him, I say, "Well I tell you what,  I'll set you up an inventory system." He said, "You know how to do that?" I said, "Sure." You know, so. (laughs)  I'd set him up an inventory system so whenever he got down to a certain number of parts that we'd know how he'd, how many days he could work before he needed to get additional parts and he liked that. So I didn't have to work on the line anymore. So,  but I was still making a dollar a hour. Yeah, I used to bring my lunch everyday, I couldn't afford to go to the restaurant. I ate in a restaurant only on Saturdays and Sundays one meal and I was determined not to ask my parents for money. And,  I met a, can't remember the gentleman's name but he worked at Alden, he was head of personnel, it's a mail order house. Alden's,  it was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was sitting next to him and got to, started a conversation and so, he asked me to come over. He said he could get me a job, so I worked there for about three or four months. And then I met, the real-estate broker, Miss Louise Cross, at that time, her name is Lawson now. And she was like the Office Manager at Illinois Federal [Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois], so I went to work for them.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Finally got to do accounting.
Speaker 2: (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now you--.  What is your brother doing at this point, is he here?
Speaker 1: My brother taught school, okay and,  rather than--he came up here for the summer but he taught school down in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, at a black school.  And he taught Business and he was also a coach there.  And they combined the schools there and they fired all the teachers so he then went to Detroit [Michigan] and,  he taught at Ferndale High School, in Detroit.
Story_ID: 5086
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so here you are you, you want to practice, you wanted to be an accountant.  Were you happy with the position at Illinois [Illinois Federal Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois], you know, the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes but it wasn't that much accounting really, and I was a teller, I did the books, I went out on Saturdays and Sundays to make speeches to encourage people to come and start deposits there. It was better than what I was doing.  And then, I worked there, I guess maybe only four or five months and then I got drafted.  So I went into the [United States] Army and I served two years. I spent two years in the service.
Speaker 1: Where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: I went to Fort Riley [Kansas] for basic training, eight weeks, then I passed the test to go to the Adjutant General School, in Fort Benjamin Harrison right outside of Indianapolis, Indiana.  And, there they taught you how to type, shorthand in eight weeks, I did that eight hours a day.  If you didn't pass you'd have to do it at night. (Laughs) It was a good way to teach!  I mean, they were, so I get to do 120 words a minute in shorthand!  And, this is ironic, there were thirty-two of us in the class and when we graduated we got our orders, and they didn't, thirty-one did not have a destination as to where you would go.  They would,  they had maybe five people who could go to Germany, four or five could go to England or France, some could stay here in the states. I, my, mine was, I was the only one that had definite orders as to where you were going and mine said Korea.  I was the only black in the class so...
Speaker 1: So you went off to Korea?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were put, were you, were you with soldiers doing the same role?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and that was, how long were you there for?
Speaker 2: Let's see, fifteen (pause) weeks, I was there about a year and a half to close, I was only two years service, so I was there about a year and a half.
Speaker 1: So what was that experience like for you?  It's your first time abroad really, you, you come from a small town and you lived in Chicago for a short time and you're drafted so, so what was that whole experience like in your whole development?
Speaker 2: Well, number one when you're in the service in those days, you would spend sixteen weeks with the same group and you're trained if you're in the Army, you're trained to, for combat.  So I hadn't had the full sixteen weeks training, I only had eight weeks. And I was not with any unit, so when I got there, you know, they, I told them that I was Adjutant General School and that, my training, what my training had been in and my even my MOS [Military Occupational Specialty].  And he said, "I don't care what your MOS says, (laughing) here's a rifle and you're going,  you're in the Army now!  We don't have any place for, Adjutant General people." (laughing)  So, I was in the Army unit where we were right up next to the thirty-eighth parallel.  So, I wrote a lot of letters to the Senator for Illinois, and told him how much money they spent on me to do a certain job. Took me I guess eight or nine months that I was transferred to a quartermaster headquarters.  I was lucky I didn't get killed.
Story_ID: 5087
Speaker 1: So what things did you learn about yourself or for about life, you know, during that time [in the United States Army during the Korean War]?
Speaker 2: That you had to be a little more forceful and speak up for yourself but have a good plan for what, what it is you want to say.  But it's a humbling feeling to see that you're sitting over there doing guard duty.  The thing that disturbed me about Korea was, you couldn't tell the North Koreans from the South Koreans.  South Koreans did all the work, you know, like around the camp place and I was getting secret information in three or four different envelopes, you know, it had sealed, confidential information.  And the little boy, who was shining shoes, knew what was in that package! (Laughs)  So that's really kind of frightening that, here you're suppose to be getting top secret information and those kids knew, what troops were moving, who was going where and that's kind of scary.  Because you couldn't recognize a North Korean from a South Korean.  But, to say you got a letter from [U.S. President] Dwight Eisenhower saying here you are over here and December and it's cold, you know, you're walking guard duty. (Laughs)  That's, just because you got that one letter.
Speaker 1: So now, you'll, you were happy to come back?
Speaker 2: Oh yes! They wanted me to go to Officer's training school, I did my two years and I left.
Story_ID: 5088
Speaker 1: And you come back to Chicago [Illinois] do you go back to Illinois?
Speaker 2: Well, I stopped in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and made a--I was going with a girl in Minneapolis, wish I'd known Joyce that's where she's from but I didn't know her then.  And I made an application at the Federal Reserve Bank in Minneapolis, it's one of the twelve Reserve banks, in the United States.  And, they didn't tell me if I could work there or not, so I came back to Chicago and went back to Illinois Federal [Savings and Loan]. And after I was here two or three months they sent me a letter and told me if I wanted to work there I could come up.  So I'd come back to Chicago and I decided I wasn't going to go back up there.  However, the Office Manager, it wasn't Louise [Cross], it was Mr. Robert Taylor, he was really the Secretary of the Board and sort of really the head of the Association.  He'd didn't want to hire me back and I told him, "Well he had to because I was drafted and you, you couldn't refuse not to hire me back, give me my job"  So, I know he didn't like that but I decided then I better find another job.  So I was going, I had entered,  DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] night school to get my Masters in Accounting and, I went to the placement center and they told me there was an opening at First Federal [First Federal Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois], and I should try there.  So I went over to First Federal to apply for a job and,  I happened to get one there so, then I left Illinois Federal.
Story_ID: 5089
Speaker 1: Now, I have a question, couple of questions. One, for those people who don't know, Illinois Federal [Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois]  has, a sort of raw history.  What is that, if you, do you know much about it?
Speaker 2: It was one of the first, it was the first Savings and Loan in Illinois.  They were formed in the '30s [1930s], middle '30s [1930s] and, the problem was that it was on Forty-seventh Street and I don't know if you know that area or not.  The (unclear) Complex, and it was an office there, at one of, of the offices there.  So, it did pretty good but it, people really didn't know where it was and it, you need a separate location when you're in a neighborhood like that for people to know where you are and see you.  And, I think it was convenient for Mr. [Robert] Taylor cause he ran the (unclear) least he had a lady that was running it for him.  He had an insurance agency and the savings and loan, so he could run everything there and he lived right around the corner, so it was convenient for him to run all three of those and not have to, to drive or anything like that. But they finally made a decision to move on King Drive and get a separate building,  years later.
Story_ID: 5090
Speaker 1: Now, when you, when you decided to go your, get your Masters [in Accounting from DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], why, what's the thinking behind that?
Speaker 2: Because I needed additional training, in accounting.
Speaker 1: And were you thinking that would position you better to get the accounting job that you were looking for?
Speaker 2: That or if I didn't get, you know--I was going to go into business for myself but I was afraid to do that because I didn't know that many people.  So I was, a little leery about going out on my own. So, uh--(pause)
Speaker 1: Now you were,  taught, I was asking you about getting your Masters and while, why you, why you're getting, you were explaining that?  You thought, you had thought about going out on your own, you know, own your own business, so--.
Speaker 2: I really, wanted to have my CPA [Certified Public Accountant] business but I, think I took the exam before I went to service [United States Army] because I'd never taken it and I didn't pass it.  And I figure that if I would get my Masters, that if I didn't pass the CPA exam I would at least have a Degree in Accounting that would help me advance in my position in any business I would be in.  As a matter of fact, that's where I met [Accountant] Lester McKeever, we were both taking that exam, that's how I met him.  And, so, you know, when you take the exam you really cram for it.  And I was working and you, every night you go and study, you go to the library and, like there's six months of intense studying. Your wife can't talk to you, your kids can't talk (laughs) to you and you don't have any vacation and if you don't pass the exam it's like, you know, a big blow up.  So that's one reason I decided to get a Masters Degree and, I was glad I did that.  But it was interesting when I went over to First Federal, the [DePaul University] placement center recommended that I go there.  And I talked to the lady in personnel.  They didn't have any blacks hired at 1st Federal, at the time, that's the largest, it was the largest then, in the city and maybe the largest in the State of Illinois.  So she said, "Well, I tell you, you have to go and talk to Mr. [Morton] Bodfish." Well he was the Chairman [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago], so that's who interviewed me and,  he wrote the regulations for the savings and loan industry back in the 30s [1930s].  And he's the one that started that, Association.  So after the interview, he asked me all kinds of questions, where I worked, and about my family and all that.  So, he said, "Well, I appreciate your coming in to apply."  I said, "Well I have a job already, so I'd appreciate it I know you have to check references but I appreciate it if you wouldn't say anything to people at Illinois Federal [Savings and Loan, Chicago, Illinois] where I'm working."  He said, "Oh, I wouldn't do that." So,  I went home and the next day I went to work, Mr. [Robert] Taylor met me at the door and I said, "I heard you were down to First Federal, yesterday applying for a job."  And I said, "Who me?" (laughs)  "Yeah, Mr. Bodfish called me and told me that you'd been down and he thought I was a very nice young man and all this, you know."  So,  Mr. Taylor said,  "I think that you'll do well down there." (laughs)  So, I didn't know if I had a job or not but they did hire me.  And, that's one of the advantages of being black, lot of people in the Association, he didn't know, but he knew me. So, but that's, shows you how important it was to hire one employee.
Speaker 1: So you think it the would, do you think it was pressure on him at the time or you think he just--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think there was any pressure. No, the other thing too, the savings and loan industry, lot of the ladies, women were running the associations because this was in the war no men were there. So they had a lot of high positions, at least in the savings and loan industry.
Story_ID: 5091
Speaker 1: Now, so you, so you, you know, you start [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago, Illinois] you said n 1955?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. And that was a good breeding ground for you, in many ways, well I don't quite mean breeding grounds. (Laughing) (Simultaneously laughing) I mean, you've moved up, right?
Speaker 2: Not to start with.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I moved up from the job that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was very naive, I think was making $250 a month at Illinois Federal.  And, why in those days if you were making $10,000 you were really doing real well a year.  The lady, head of personnel, ask me how much did I think I was worth and I thought I was going to really up the figure, you know, I said, "Well I think I'm worth $350." She said, "Fine, you can start at that." (laughs) So, that was a big mistake, you know, cause in those days if you got, every six months if you got a five dollar raise, you' were doing something.  But I worked in the accounting department and I worked for people who just had a high school education, here I, didn't have my Masters then, but I was least half way through. And so, I spent at least six or seven years not moving and I, talked to some friends of mine like Fred Ford.  I don't know if you know Fred Ford or not. He's the Vice Chairman, Draper and Kramer.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: He used to work for Miss Washington when she started a CPA [Certified Public Accountant] firm.  So I was, you know, I talked to different people then that I knew that, trying to figure out if I should stay where I was because I really wasn't moving, working hard.  And it's kind of, hard when you're working for people that come ask you simple questions and you have to answer for them and, that they do not know and they're and you're working under them.  But, the Chairman died and they got in new management, at First Federal, the Chairman had a alcohol problem number one.  And they didn't hire the one, any of the officers there to be the new Chairman or President.  And so when the new person came in all of the officers, the highest-ranking officers didn't want to talk to him.  So the people that I worked for, that time I was probably head of the accounting department, after about six or seven years, they told me not to give him any information.  New Chairman coming in, so I just listened to what they said, you know, I say, "Well this doesn't make since.  Here's a guy that going to head the company, he's going to make decisions as to whose hired, whose fired and who gets a raise!"  I had to say that to myself.  So, I went downstairs and his name was E. Stanley Enlund, he'd come from the Sears Bank [and Trust Company].  And nobody would go and talk to him so I went in and introduced myself to him and told him who I was, what I did and where I was, what floor I was and if he ever wanted any information on accounting just give me a call.  He then hired a President from outside the,  [Savings and Loan] Association and they were real good friends, they knew one another.  And this is when I started getting some promotions.  Not because of my conversation, because they were looking for people who had education and by that time I had my Masters Degree [Accounting, DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois].  And so they were looking for people who could provide the knowledge and supervision to have the Association moved ahead.  So I didn't leave.  I began to, realize that if I can--.  Also at that time I was doing books for people, you know, accounting, at night.  So I, I told my wife [Juanita E. Dillard] I--(pause)  and about that time we had two kids [Hilton and Jaunine] and, I told her I was just going to work the one job.  And, but I would work longer at the one job to try to find out new things that maybe would help me with for promotions.  And, I decided to set up a treasury department at the Association. None of the S&L's [Savings and Loans] in the country had what they call a treasury division and I asked the chairman if they would give me a couple of years to set this department up. I wanted to get back to being over the accounting department because I realized that the more people you supervise the more chance you have at getting an increase in salary.  And I didn't want to get off in some specialty where there is just myself and maybe a couple of people.  So he said, "Okay."  And this is when I learned how to trade bonds, bid on bonds, U.S. Treasury Bonds, Agency Bonds and I did a lot of it just through reading and talking to different investment houses.  And I basically dealt with all the major investment banking companies.  And I wrote up this whole operation, made a presentation at our National Meeting of the Savings and Loan Associations and, the board, members of the board were really enthused about this and it made money.  Used to be when we had a certain amount of securities for liquidity in the institution and they would just call up, Salomon Brothers or First Boston or someone like that and they would say well, they'll tell you what bonds to buy and then two years of, or three years later when they maturity they would call you again.  Well, rather than doing that, what I did is I set up a trading unit so I could trade the securities and I got to be known throughout the country as if you wanted to do some business in the bond business they could call First Federal and talk to me. So that really kind of spearheaded my movement up in the company.
Speaker 1: Do you, I have some more questions.  Do you think that--what year was this first? What--
Speaker 2: 1968, 69 [1969], 1970 in that period.
Speaker 1: Do you think that, it had a lot to do with, I mean, was that uncommon, a lot of places if you go in and say, "I have this idea." They would say, "No, no that's a great idea but no we are not going to do it that way."
Speaker 2: But if it makes money they'll listen, okay, so it was a money incentive for them a profit incentive and, in that, you know, I had a lot of economics courses so in those times you had a lot of problems with rates. The rates with Savings and Loans were low and you had creeping inflation.  And so whenever people, anybody in the Association had a question about rates, they would come and ask me what I thought because I was in touch with the marketplace where you discussed things like that.  So here again, this provided me with some notoriety in the Association and with the Board of Directors and the other officers.  So, this is, in a way, selling yourself but it's a way because you're coming up with new ideas and new things that make money and that's our purpose in the Savings and Loan is to, to make a profit.
Story_ID: 5092
Speaker 1: And then, you, you were at First Federal [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago, Illinois], until when?
Speaker 2: Well really 19--we were acquired by CitiBank out of New York in 1984 and so, we ceased to  be First Federal, then we became CitiCorp.  And I officially left in 1988, even though from '86 [1986] to '88 [1988] I did not work there.  That's another story. (Laughs)
Speaker 1: But from 19-- you say '86 [1986] to '88 [1988] you didn't work there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But from that time, so how did you role, because you're saying it was 1968  you know, when, who, how did your, how did things change, that's what, you know, from like 1968, to,  you know, 1986, I mean what--?
Speaker 2: Well there's a lot of things that, happened and--in the 70s [1970s] you start having increases in rates and in the savings and loan industry the basic money that we received or in savings accounts and those rates were regulated.  And, the mortgage rates that we were making were getting higher but the savings rates were still the same, so we were doing pretty good as long as that happened.  But when the savings rates started increasing because the banks were complaining about not being able to pay more for their money.  That's when we start having a lot of problems, which was fairly around the mid 70s [1970s] and the early 80s [1980s].  So that's the reason savings and loans industry as a whole start having problems because the cost of money was greater than what the mortgage were yielding and that was the spread we use to make money.  So that's the time run and you had a lot of problems.  And, a lot of associations got acquired during that period of time. Illinois was a non-branch state at that time and then they were allowed to get branches so we--the banks still couldn't do it, I don't think at that time.
Story_ID: 5093
Speaker 1: Now what can you, can you talk about what, I mean, starting this position [Chief Financial Officer, First Federal Savings of Chicago, Illinois] was a very important part of your, you know, career (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were there other things that you think contributed to your success?
Speaker 2: Well, the one thing I had, I was able to come up different ideas, and in being working with the people investment banking industry, I learned a lot.  And nobody else there was in touch with that industry.  So, in 1977 we did what we call a mortgage back pass-through, and it always bothered me that we would make loans and they would just sit there, we couldn't do anything with them.  You make a 4 percent loan and you have it for thirty years, at that time, it was maybe, maybe only one you could make.  Later they started having fifteen-year mortgages but that was later on. So you'd have, mortgage that you earn 4 percent on and you're paying 7, 8, 9 percent for your money.  And it was no, nobody was selling those mortgages, nobody thought about doing that.  So, it always bothered me that we would have to hold that mortgage and not, only thing we could get out of it is 4 percent.  So, I approached one of the investment banking companies, Salomon Brothers about selling them our loans but I'd have to take a loss on it and I didn't want to do that.  And so in '77 [1977] they came up with the idea--.  I think I talked to them in the early 70's [1970's] but they came up with the idea of having a mortgage back pass-through.  And what that would do is, we would put up, a group of loans together and have them securitized and we could sell them and then we would service the loans, so they, the person who had the loan would not know that it had been sold cause we would still service it and they'd send out the payments to us.  And we would sell the loans and then we would, they sell those to insurance companies and other corporations.  We would use the proceeds to make new loans and I was the first savings and loan in the country to do it.  And, Salomon Brothers didn't have all the things set when it came to us to do a transaction so we spent at least, four or five months working out the bug.  And the Bank of America actually did the first transaction because Salomon [Brothers] had promised them to do it and we did the second one. But we were the first savings and loans to do it. So we did a transaction for seventy-five million dollars, but we got in fresh new money to make new loans at current rates and we didn't have to own those four and five percent mortgage loan.  So out of that another investment banking firm came in and they wanted to do an issue for the City of Chicago where you just do it for low and moderate income individuals and the first home buyers.  That, at that time the rates were still high for mortgages. So--
Speaker 1: And what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1978.  I'm talking with the next year, 1978.  And so, they're approached the law firm Sidley and Austin about this transaction for Chicago.  So the people at Sidley and Austin said, "Well go across the street to First Federal [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago] and talk to Walter Clark.  He's the one that's done the only mortgage back pass-through, for the savings and loan industry."  And of course they wanted to contact the savings and loan industry because we did most of the mortgages in the country.  So this transaction, they didn't know how to do it, so I taught them what we had done on the, mortgage back pass through in 1977, which would help them with the transaction that they wanted to do in 1978.  Mayor [Michael] Bilandic was the [Chicago] Mayor at that time.  So we did the transaction for a hundred million dollars and that was the first time this had ever been done by a bank or savings and loan.  And basically what it did was we would make the mortgages, the city could, because it's a municipality, could borrow money at a lesser rate, then municipalities can always borrow money at a lesser rate than other institutions can.  So we would make the mortgages for the city and we would service them and we would handle the transaction.  We would use their funds to buy the mortgages from us, the city's funds to borrow, that they borrowed, they would use that to pay us the mortgages and then we would actually do the actual work in doing the mortgages and we would handle all the payments in the service for the mortgages.  First transaction was done we did by ourselves and then all the transactions after then they would let various institutions participate in them.  And it did start doing them all over the country.  So, out of that, and the mortgage bankers met and they meet annually that's all over the country, they invited me down to Atlanta [Georgia] to the meeting to explain the transaction to them.  What's the first black mayor in Atlanta?
Speaker 1: You're talking about, wait a minute, (unclear) was Maynard Jackson?
Speaker 2: Maynard Jackson.
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: So, at the meeting there was a fellow there from this, the Mayor's office.  So after I make my speech he asked me to come over and talk to the Mayor about the transaction and explain to them.  And so, that again, my [First Federal Savings and Loan] Association got a lot of notoriety out of this.  We had to go around the country and sell the issue to various investors so, our Association was, publicized this information in various journals and so forth.
Story_ID: 5094
Speaker 1: Now at this time were you active in the community as much, for you were more involved in, this, in the banking community and came into your (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, we were, our chairman made sure we were involved in various organizations.  I mean, I was on the Travelers Aid Society, I was Chairman of the Board for that four years.  Economic Club of Chicago, YMCA [Young Mens Christian Association].  I was head of the investment company for the investment division for the Union League club, also for the YMCA.  So every Officer [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago, Illinois] had to participate in two or three different organizations.  The Chairman was very insistent that everybody get involved in the community.
Speaker 1: What year, what year did you become an Officer?
Speaker 2: Really I became an Officer in 1968 became a member of the Board in 1973, Board of Directors in '73 [1973], and was a Board member up until we were purchased by CitiBank [1982].
Story_ID: 5095
Speaker 1: So you were--how many people like you were in the company, African Americans, at the time?
Speaker 2: Very few at that time for a large associations like that.  We [First Federal Savings and Loan Association of Chicago, Illinois] were a 4 billion dollar association at the time which was about the ninth or tenth of the country.
Speaker 1: So when did you, when you became an officer how did you feel, I mean, you know, remember you just starting talking just a short time ago--.
Speaker 2: I felt better about staying. (Laughs)
Speaker 1: You even talked about how you first got started when you work for like $350 a week, well $250 or $350 a month, I mean.
Speaker 2: Then this way you get bonuses and things like that so work's a lot more enjoyable when you're making more money.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a sense of yourself in the role you're playing, you know as a black person, was that ever, you know, a factor or--?
Speaker 2: I knew that at the time, but, you know, I worked day and night in order to come up with all these things.  I tried to get people in, more blacks into the business, even came up with a policy,  you know, we had to have goals and objectives for all the officers in the association.  And I was always on the chairman about getting more blacks into the company, so he said, "Well, they don't seem to find any."  So I said, "I tell you what we're going to do, in order for you to get a bonus we'll make this one of the objectives, to increase your minorities in the company."  I mean you have it if you asked them to do a certain bottom line profit wel'l ask them to,  each time we review for bonuses if they haven't hired any,  they won't get a full bonus.  And he bought it and we did it. (Laughing)  So, this is in, 1975 or somewhere along in there.
Story_ID: 5096
Speaker 1: Did,  who were your peers at the times that you were respected or influence you or, you know, you had dealings with, you know, out, maybe outside the bank or inside, but who else, you know, were you sort of floating around with?  You, mention that, you know, you went to,  you were taking an exam with [accountant] Lester McKeever--.
Speaker 2: Well we became friends and still are friends from that. [Vice President, Draper and Kramer] Fred Ford is the guy I mentioned to you--
Speaker 1: I think I know his, daughter, I think I know, does he have a son and daughter--?
Speaker 2: He has a son and daughter, his daughter though, I think is in--
Speaker 1: Rebecca Ford.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a lawyer.
Speaker 1: She's a lawyer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I met her, okay. His son was running a company or something out in the suburbs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lafayette is his name.
Speaker 1: I do, I do.  they're younger than I am but, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  then I was in the Royal Coterie of Snakes, I met a lot of people in them, black men's club, I don't know if you know them or not? I was in the Boule [black men's social club], and through church, you know, I went to the Park Manor Congregational Church so a lot of the people that I'd became friends with were church members.
Speaker 1: I don't want to get--I want to derogate a little bit but I'll come back to your financial (unclear) but I do want to ask about--let's talk about the [Royal Coterie of] Snakes and the Boule because a lot of people are very sort of interested in these organizations and what role they play and I like you to sort of--
Speaker 2: Snakes is primarily social, primarily.  And I think the Boule is a big secret for years. I knew everybody in the Boule here in Chicago [Illinois] and didn't know they had a Boule, I wasn't aware of it.
Speaker 1: Well, can you give me the origins of the Snakes, how they began.  They're not secret societies are they?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're just social clubs and--
Speaker 1: How did that name come about?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously, chuckling)
Speaker 1: Who gave them the name, I mean, even that, that's worst than, I mean, Boule, I don't know where did they get, but why (laughing) give me some snakes, I mean, people call themselves--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I shouldn't say it's call the Royal Coterie of Snakes, okay? (laughing)  If that makes any difference.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) (unclear)
Speaker 2: I think it was formed in 1922, somewhere along in there.  We've separate, it's been over seventy-five years. They had an organization called The Frogs, okay.  Supposedly you had to be light complexed to be in The Frogs, years ago.  So they say snakes eat frogs, now that's as simple as it is! (Laughing)
Speaker 1: And, okay, so, how many members did they have? Aren't there, isn't it, a limit on--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a limit or at least, least in our club it is.  You can only have thirty-four members.  There's a limit on it.
Speaker 1: And what, what was--
Speaker 2: They did, they did the cotillion for young girls coming out every year. They're the first one's that started that and then they have,  basically have, a dinner dance in May but the cotillion was the one that started the dinner dance for the young girls who were coming out into society.
Speaker 1: You know, I find it surprising that a men's group would start the cotillion but I know that because this year I did, we did,  video on the [black women's club] Link [sic, The Links] Chicago chapter and they said that they got the idea, you know, they took over these cotillion.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Very strict, I mean,  you had to give your list of who you are going to invite and they at the door and you had to check-in at the door and you had to have proper dress, you had to have a black, you know, formal, ladies had to have long formal dresses, otherwise she couldn't come.
Speaker 1: And, the, the purpose of this organization was, you said it was more social--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they say that they work, together and, you know, we'll going to help each other or are we going to just socialize?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, you know, they, it was, they discussed business, we have speakers.  But you take in those days, men would exchange ideas, you know, [businessman] Johnny Johnson,  [founder of Johnson Products] George Johnson.  You know, anybody who was anyone was in the Royal Coterie of Snakes. So they talked about different things that were happening in the different areas, if you were a doctor or if you were a lawyer or businessman, they didn't have too many businessmen in the group but this way they found out about different things that were going on in the city [Chicago].  And Ted Jones, I don't know, he's a CPA [Certified Public Accountant], I don't know if you know him or not.  He learned about, something through Johnny Johnson and something was for sale,  a radio station was for sale and he didn't know about it and he was able to go buy it because of that.  So it's an exchange of information and we have, I think we meet about eight months, then we have, summertime we don't meet but we have dinner and just sit and talk and we have speakers to come in and that's about it.
Story_ID: 5097
Speaker 1: Do you feel that, that the membership in that organization [Royal Coterie of Snakes, black men's social club] helped you as well?
Speaker 2: It did but I did know most of the people before I got in but it was very helpful.  You learn lot of history about Chicago [Illinois], what went on.  When I joined I was the youngest one there. (Laughs)  Now I am about the oldest. (Laughs)  But, you know, a lot of famous people have been in their organization.
Speaker 1: Give some examples to me.
Speaker 2: Well, both of the Johnsons [George and John] I mentioned.  The chemist, who, went to DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] and lived out in Oak Park [Illinois], I can't think of his name right now.  His wife was well known also. You ought to know him.
Speaker 1: Ooh-wee! She was a Link [The Links, black women's social club], she was a Chicago Link,  I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she died maybe about three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know who you're talking about, okay.
Speaker 2: You see I'm little, I have a little lost of memory myself now.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, do you, I would just like to see a (unclear) whether is the [Royal Coterie of] Snakes or Boules, do you think, what value do you think organizations like that are on the back (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well they're doing more things now.  A lot of times now, they will give scholarships to students.  I think it's nice when you can sit down and talk about things that are going on in and around in the city [Chicago].  You know, you can be a doctor working all day with patients and things, there's a lot of things you don't know that are going on that are happening in the city that you may want to get involved with.  Help some businesses, you know, communicating with one another is one of the things that we used not to do and we need to do more of it.  When Harold [Washington] was running for Mayor [Chicago], you know, I was the,  treasurer for the organization in 1983, when he first ran and I could tell all the guys what's going on and get them to give money.  And let them spread the word to all their friends and things so--I think it's valuable for communication and we can't do too much of that and that's what I try to promote in the Boule because here you have a nationwide organization, you have over five thousand and some members and the advantage of being in it is, say if you're a lawyer and have a case,  in some other city, you go there and don't know anybody, you can contact somebody in the Boule that's a lawyer and give them, get, let them give you some background about the city, or something like that or you may need some other help.
Story_ID: 5098
Speaker 1: Now the Boules [Sigma Pi Phi fraternity], just a little history about them, when did they get, do you much about their history?
Speaker 2: Started in 1904, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], black students, they were medical students I think. They didn't have anybody to associate with so they started a little club and it grew and grew, grew mostly on the East Coast for a long time.
Speaker 1: And what, is there any--?
Speaker 2: It was just social to begin with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, or have somebody to talk to.
Speaker 1: To talk, come together with.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Discuss their problems, successes or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there much difference between, one is local [Royal Coterie of Snakes] and one is more national [Boule].
Speaker 2: Well the Boule, you had to be a college graduate and other requirements done something important, now, whatever that is they didn't define it. (Laughs)  And they made a few exceptions for people who've been very successful, you know, like [owner of Johnson Products] George Johnson and maybe [businessman] Johnny [Johnson], you know, but,  basically you have to be a college graduate.
Story_ID: 5099
Speaker 1: Now I wanted to go back also and ask about your family cause when did you get married, in the process?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you meet your wife [Juanita E. Dillard], was it, it was here, right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a friend, girlfriend of hers that, had gone to college with her, was going with a friend of mine and I asked her if she knew any single girls and she says, "Yeah, I have one you can meet." (Laughs)  And that's how I met Juanita.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was love at first sight, sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for my part! (Laughs)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously laughing) You had to do some convincing with her.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously laughter) Yeah, yeah, well I knew what I wanted so, when I saw it, I knew what to go right ahead, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, your children were born before that and you have--?
Speaker 2: Hilton was born August 8, 1958.  My daughter Jaunine. Did you know her?
Speaker 1: I knew Janine, I just met her through (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay, she was born August 9, '59, 1959, so they're one year and one day apart.
Speaker 1: So now, you were you spending a lot of time away from the family or would you consider yourself you know--?
Speaker 2: No, I just, I worked long hours, six [A.M.] to six [P.M.]  But I didn't, I mean, later when we were doing issues, you know, we were selling, various securities, you know, I wouldn't be gone that long, you may be gone a whole week or ten days, go to different cities, making presentations.  But it paid off for me and that's the reason I spent the extra time. Now I did miss the kids when they were little like six o'clock in the morning they weren't up and at six o'clock at night, they were asleep, so--.
Speaker 1: They were asleep at six o'clock [P.M.]!
Speaker 2: Yeah! (laughs)
Speaker 1: Now, they don't put kids to sleep, that's amazing!  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: So I had to talk to my wife to see her, what was going on, while I wasn't there, you know.
Story_ID: 5100
Speaker 1: So now, okay, I'll go back to, so, you were saying through '86 [1986] to '88 [1988] that was a different story. I'm going to go back, you know, to your (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well in 1984 when we [First Federal Savings of Chicago, Illinois] were acquired by CitiBank, I was the highest-ranking officer there because the president--the home loan bank had asked the chairman to resign and then, they asked the president to resign.  So we had been busy seeking suitors, you know, we talked to different banks and, CitiBank wanted to get a foothold here in Chicago [Illinois] because they had a office for their bank but it's only one location and they didn't have customers or they just did commercial banking and we had at that time sixty branches in the State of Illinois.  And so they acquired us, in day one, the new chairman came from St. Louis, Missouri from the offices of CitiBank to Chicago on a Saturday, to meet with me, they took away half of what I was doing. (Laughs)  And, so I knew right away that I'd better start looking for another job, however during the time they were trying to acquire us and learn about us they were going to keep everybody.  But what they did is they got rid of the top officials and kept the lower people, employees.  So, you know, I worked a year and at that time, see I was, well, we had to resign from being on the board cause CitiBank had their own board for this one location.  And, I guess all of the departments were reporting to me except for Savings and Marketing.  So everything Legal, Accounting, Loan departments, all of them and, so, I still was the Chief Financial Officer for a while.  And then, I think it was probably the next year, they, in '85 [1985], they told me that he wanted me to be replaced.  He wanted to bring his own treasury.  So, I asked him why, I mean, was it something that I had done wrong or something like that and he said, "No, I just want a CitiBanker to be a Treasurer."  I said, "Well what is a CitiBanker?"  He said, "Well somebody who knows our system, you know, we deal all over the world."  But our situation's here you're going to deal all over the world I knew that. I said, "Well is it written down?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Well I can read."  I said,  "See, you just got here." I say, "Let me write down some of things that I had done."  And, you know, when you've worked a long time and haven't been looking for a job you have to take some time to prepare that and I did. I prepared just about ten pages of all the things that I had done.  Not only for myself but also for the industry, so, I saw that it didn't make any difference that he still wanted to get rid of me.  So I asked him, I said, "So--" I said, "So what do you want me to do?" He said, "Well you can do anything you want to do."  I said, "Well what I'm doing now is what I like to do; that's what I'm proficient at."  He said,  "Well you can't do that."  I say, "Well give me some idea."  So, you know, by the way, I had gotten him into the Union League Club, ahead of time, the Economic Club, ahead of time,  because I was in all those organizations and they have a waiting list. Introduced him to all the major investment bankers around town.  So I said, "Well give me some inkling." I said, " I don't know of anything else here that I want to do."  So he said, " Well, you know, I worked with the Boy Scouts, you can go to those meetings when I can't go, you can work with the, Olympics is coming up, you can work with the Olympic committee, I'm on that committee you can keep me informed."  I said, "Well I won't be doing anything."  He said, "Well we're not going to change your title and we're not going to change your salary, you'll still make the same amount of money."  So, I decided to sue them because I didn't think that they had a legal right to do it.  And, after talking to some more people, friends of mine they said, "All you are going to do is waste money, they're going to keep delaying, delaying because they have a legal department to do nothing but delay these types of claims."  So, I decided to not sue even though I had hired a lawyer and I went back to negotiate getting out of it.  Because I didn't want to--.  Let me see in 19, I was probably about 57 years old and I still wanted to work but I didn't want to sit around going to meetings that didn't mean anything to bring information back to him. And, I say, "Well my mind is pretty good now and I don't want,  do that."  So, I got a job working for Bear, Stearns Investment Banking Company.  Harold [Washington, Chicago Mayor]  wanted me to be the Chairman for CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], so I worked there at the same time so I--they paid me for two years and I quit. That's what '86 [1986] to '88 [1988] was.  So officially I wasn't finished with the company until 1988.
Speaker 1: Well so at, but at the same time, you worked for Bear, Stearns?
Speaker 2: Yes, in '86 [1986]
Speaker 1: Wow!
Speaker 2: And Chairman of the CTA in 1986.
Story_ID: 5101
Speaker 1: So let's talk about that period, what did you, did you like that experience [Chairman of the Board, Chicago Transit Authority]?
Speaker 2: I'd never worked for a public institution before and, I'd never worked in a campaign before but I met a lot of people that became good friends, learned a lot and [Mayor] Harold [Washington] was just beautiful.  And I got over to the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] and it was horrible.  I mean, I had never worked for a public organization before so--I mean it was easy for me to find out things to do.  So number one, the people in personnel had never had any courses in personnel, they didn't have any way to tell a new worker what his salary would be and what his grade would be, what the grade averages are for salaries, no critiquing of your work, you know, where you, the boss would give you some idea of what type of work you've done during the year and you can make your comments.  They didn't have any type of system like that.  So if the lady, who was head of personnel and I told her, I said, "Look."  I said, "We need to be able to tell workers information whenever we interviewed them and hired them and the people who are already working here should know something about the retirement system, the different jobs that are available, what the ranges of salaries are for the jobs, what the qualifications are" and said, "we don't have any of that."  I said, "I'm going to give you a year and we will pay for you to go to school" cause she hadn't had any schooling in, in personnel or human resources and,, "give you a chance to learn some of these and come back and let's see how it works."  And I guess she figured that I was new person on the block and she had her political contacts, that I couldn't do anything.  So one year passed and she hadn't done anything, so I hired a new Human Resource person. I did the same thing in Auditing.  The person in Auditing had never had a course in Accounting or Auditing so I replaced him.  So I went through the organization replacing people to get some people in that had some knowledge about the different aspects of our business.  Because I was really supposed to be part time, you know, as the Chairman, but I was working full time, really, because all these things were lacking.  We didn't have a Marketing person, really, that knew anything about marketing and they had thirteen thousand employees, probably a over a billion dollars in terms of dollars spent on the CTA.  So, there was a lot of things that I enjoying doing there, but when Harold died [1987], we got a new Mayor in and he got mad because a lot of the people that relatives and people that he had put in to the CTA got sifted around but he never talked to me; talking about Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer.  And, but what he, what he would do is tell other people and then they would--or even newspapers say, "Mr. Clark is thinking about moving". (laughs)  And this is a political system and I would be meeting with him frequently because I, you had to stay in touch with the Mayor because you have funding that comes from the government for all your capital improvements and you get money from the State for improvements for buses, railroads, tracks, rail cars and all these kind of things.  So I was over there all the time and he never said a word to me.  And so a lawyer friend of mine said, "Walter why won't you go talk to the Mayor, he's, he wants to get rid of you."  I said, "For what?"  "I don't know, why don't you go and talked to him."  So I did.  I said, "I'm over here every two weeks."  Then I said, "Do you have a problem with me?"  He said, "Well you, fired a lot of people that I had put over to the CTA."  I said, "Well who are they?"  You know, he may, he mentioned the lady that was head of personnel.  I said, "I didn't fire her!  What I did was take the job away from her.  We didn't fire her, she can get a job, she got another job someplace but I gave her a whole year to bone up on being a Human Resource, Human Resource person and she did nothing"  So, that's what he was angry about.  So, I told him, "Well I'll tell you what I worked all my life and I, I have a good record.  I'm not going to rehire them."  I said, "Because that would be more work for me and it would be bad for the, the organization, for the Authority.  So, if you want to get another Chairman, you can have the job."  So, I quit. So that was, 1988.
Story_ID: 5102
Speaker 1: Then were you still continue to work for Bear Stearns [investment banking firm]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you like that? Or was it--?
Speaker 2: I liked investment banking because I worked with them and--but that wasn't a real real good experience but I liked doing that.  I was on the, 1980, I was on the School Finance Authority, the first time they set that up.  That was, to help the [Chicago, Illinois] school system get in balance and, I think there were five or six of us, I've forgotten exactly, but Jay Pritzker was on, he was one of the members of that.  And I had a heart attack in 19--1980 and I had to quit that job, even though I was still working with the First Federal [Savings of Chicago].  And Jay Pritzker said, "You know, I enjoyed meeting you, enjoyed the meetings we've had, let's stay in touch."  So when I had problems with CitiBank, I went to talk to him cause I knew he had dealt with some investment banking firms and so, he's the one, who suggested that I go and talk to Bear Stearns.  So I flew out to New York [New York] to talk to Bear Stearns and told me to talk to the chairman.  So, chairman was working, he had his sleeves all rolled up.  He had this little computer there, he was working and he said, "Well, Mr. Clark where do you want to work?"  And I said, "I prefer Chicago since my family is there."  He said, "What do you want to do?"  And I said, "I'd like to work in public finance because I know a lot of the institutions in Chicago that do public finance."  He said, "Well okay." He said, "If Mr. Pritzker want you,  told you to come out to see me, you can work any place that you want to." (Laughs)  So that settled that!  But, I had a rough time with the Chicago office in getting paid so--
Speaker 1: Why they didn't want you there?
Speaker 2: Well it's not that. It's just that the guy I worked for didn't want to give me credit for the business that I brought in.  Yeah, so, and it's basically on commission.  You get a salary but basically commission. So I had to sue them to get my money, so that ended that. So I only worked there for about four years.
Speaker 1: Then after that?
Speaker 2: I started doing some work on my own, not a lot. I do investments for various people, four or five different people, to, setup portfolios for.
Story_ID: 5103
Speaker 1: So at this point in your life, what are your thoughts about things because you first said, "I'm retired."  You know, you are--
Speaker 2: I basically am retired. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Are you enjoying retirement?  What are your thoughts about, you know, the future for yourself?  Are there things you will like to still do--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That you haven't done?
Speaker 2: Play golf. (Laughs)  I like securities so I don't mind, that's not work to me to follow the market.  I enjoy doing that.  You know I got all my retirement fund in there and my wife was always interested in real estate.  We had purchased some buildings and she ran those.  And she was really into real estate and we sold them all and she didn't--she wanted to buy some more real estate and then I introduced her to securities and now she is into it more than I am so,  she enjoys it also.  So, but, I'm still active with my church and the Boule [men's social club], The Royal Coterie of Snakes [men's social club] and that's about as busy as I want to be.
Story_ID: 5104
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about, the, I mean, you were definitely, you were definitely a trail blazer and I'm wondering if you have any thoughts about blacks in business or blacks in accounting or--because the accounting industry really when you look at it. Look at Arthur Andersen or whatever now, Arthur Andersen is called, do they have a black partner? Do they have many?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have some, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it's never been, I mean, those big eight accounting firms--
Speaker 2: It would been hard to come by, yeah. Odell Hicks, do you know Odell?  He was a partner there. The problem with those firms and law firms are, it's difficult for blacks to bring in a lot of business for those type of companies.  And, when you get to be in your 50s, you're not, they'll say, "Well you're not bringing in business."  They get rid of you.  And that's a difficult time to go and seek another job, middle 50s.  And most of it's done on a basis of friendship, like at First Federal [Savings of Chicago, Illinois] the Chairman decided who the outside counsel would be, what firm.  And their auditors, even though the auditors worked for me,  they made those decisions.  And so those are friendships that they have either through college or socially and that's how these-- most of the firms are competent but that's how the business is done.  And, we don't have people, normally we don't have people in those positions.  We don't have companies that we can bring in to give the type of, fees that, the company requires you to bring in.  But they know that when they hire them, they understand the economics of this.
Story_ID: 5105
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for young people coming along with that [lack of African American's in upper management]?
Speaker 2: Is, you know, you have to get together.  For example, when I went to the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, yeah, CTA, you look over all the law firms and you go to the [Chicago] Park District, compare the same firms through the same business for the city.  And, you know, this is probably a warped idea that I had, that I didn't want to be involved in public institutions.  I wanted to be in private business.  And, but the major firms court all the public institutions because that pays for all their overhead.  And they never, they never lose a job as long as that mayor, or whoever is in, still the mayor.  And so it pays for all the office space, rent and everything so any private business they get is gravy.  And, we didn't change everything but I changed the lawyers that we had.  The Park District did the same thing.  We didn't completely just go all black.  But, none of the blacks had any of those cases, so some black lawyers started getting some business, least from the institutions while I was there.  [Chicago] Housing Authority the same thing and--but referral of businesses is going to take a little while for us to have type of business that you can support of the firms.
Speaker 1: So you're hopeful for the African American community--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you just have to make, you have to work at making partnerships, contacts.  We have some organizations that help out,  the one that Warren Bacon was head of, Chicago United.  Where they have black or white business people, Chairmen of those companies get together and they try to, give business to black firms.  I did it with CTA, it was kind of easy to do, I mean, you still have to bid on the business on certain contracts but, it takes that type of contacts to get things started and continued.  Now you have to be able to produce, you know, nobody's asking to just get work and not be competent at it.  But, and it takes people in those kind of positions. Now, when I was, I was able to select the different investment banking companies I deal with and I was able to give business to some minorities.  But you got to be in that position to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: So what,  what advice do you to have for, you know, young blacks coming behind you? Do you have any advice?
Speaker 2: Well, education is number one and not just, you know,  just,  a certain field, you had to be well-rounded, you know, I think in order to be successful.  And work hard.  Most people will listen to you if you can help them do what they want to do.  It wasn't that the new Chairman [E. Stanley Enlund, First Federal Savings of Chicago] liked me that much but I made him look good!  I made the company look good and they respond to that. You may not get everything you want out of it but,  at least get some satisfaction.
Story_ID: 5106
Speaker 1: And I know that your, parents had a great deal of influence on you. I'm wondering who else did you respect or admire in your life?
Speaker 2: Well coming along we had a lot of parents.  All the teachers at the school, I mean, if I was going with some girl that they didn't think was right for me they'd tell me, you know, now you don't get that today.  It was just a different, completely different atmosphere.  Today you have a lot of one-parent families and it hurts, it takes years to, turn that around.
Speaker 1: Do you, your parents, how, are they, they're not still alive are they?
Speaker 2: No they both passed.
Speaker 1: When did they pass?
Speaker 2: My mother passed in '62 [1962], she was only 55 [years old], my dad was 75 [years old] when he passed.  He passed in 1977.
Speaker 1: So he saw some of your success then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how did he feel?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was real proud.  It is was too bad, my mother, she saw some of it but not enough of it.  And, the same thing with my wife's [Juanita E. Dillard] parents, they died in the 70s [1970s]. So it was a lot of things that we've done since then, that I'm sure they would've enjoyed knowing about.
Story_ID: 5107
Speaker 1: Your family's very, has been very important to you, hasn't it?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it such an importance?
Speaker 2: You can't live by yourself, even if you get married, just the two of you, you need a family!  That's what I keep, keep telling [son] Hilton. (Laughs)  You know, because you--it's difficult for a couple, even if they like each other and get along, to live just by themselves.  And sometimes you need somebody, mother or father or stepmother or father or cousin or somebody.  And years ago those family units were there together. You didn't have to worry about a nursing home, they didn't have a nursing home.  I don't think we are going to get back to that but you need people or friends to help you live. That's what's nice about the church, you can depend upon most of the time, you can depend upon the people at your church. Some friends are your friends, as long as you are at the top and then you slide down a little bit, they're not as friendly, but that's life.
Story_ID: 5108
Speaker 1: I have two questions.  What, career wise, do you think--or,  what does--have you had disappointments in your life and if they are what? And what did you learn from them?
Speaker 2: Well, I've had disappointments.  (Pause)  Of course the greatest disappointment was my daughter [Juanine Clark]  passed [1988].  And, I guess you look back, to, see if there is anything that you could have done differently.  But, whenever I ran into disappointments I worked harder.  You know, it's something that I didn't think of or didn't do, I tried just to rectify it.
Speaker 1: They say it's hard to lose a daugh--you know, your child.
Speaker 2: Devastating.  It was twelve years ago and I, think about it all the time.
Story_ID: 5109
Speaker 1: Mr. Clark, do you ever think about where you started from in Carbondale [Illinois].  Which wasn't meager.  It was just small town--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Small town yeah.  And the fact that you came to Chicago [Illinois] and really, (stressed) really made a name for yourself.  Do you--what do you account for your success?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing, I'm proud of it.  But growing up in a town like that, and in those days no TV.  I wasn't really poor.  I mean my dad [John Clark] probably made $125 a month.  But we had plenty of food.  We had clothes, a place to stay.  And without TV, you know, you don't know what's going on in the other part of the world except through the newspapers.  So, actually we never considered ourselves poor.  Because we got all of the normal things you get in life.  We got to travel in the summer time.  No plane but just driving.  But,  I contribute success to number one, being prepared educationally, making friends, not giving up when things don't go your way or you're not getting any promotions.  And being nice to people.  I don't hate people.  Even the people who do me wrong, you know.  I may get mad for a little while.  I don't shut any doors.  And I try to help people.  I mean I helped a lot of people get jobs, just recommendations.  And I enjoy seeing people advance.
Story_ID: 5110
Speaker 1: And my last question is what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughs)  Well you know one thing, I have never worried about what people thought about me.  I get self-satisfaction so I really didn't--you know, everybody enjoys praise.  You know, the newspaper articles or something like that.  But within me, when I know I've done a good job I don't have to have someone to come compliment me because I know when I've done a good job. So I'm not always out looking for that.  You know, this is kind of isolated--it would be nice--one reason I like what we're doing here is maybe that will inspire somebody to work a little harder in an area that's hard to get ahead in.  And, it makes you feel good when you get compliments.  I have a little note from Virgil Martin who was chairman of [retailer] Carson Pirie Scott and basically he said that--and it was just scribbled on a little piece of paper. And that in working with me--and he was on the board, he didn't work with me everyday.  It really enlightened him to see how competent a minority could be and he was so proud that I was working for that company that whatever business he was connected with he was going to make sure that if there were any minorities in that group that could move up, he would see that they moved up.  And at that time he had been the chairman--when our chairman died he had been the interim chairman.  He was real close to [Chicago, Illinois] Mayor Daley. He was a powerhouse in the city of Chicago with a lot of different companies even though he was also Chairman of Caron Pirie Scott.  So I felt good about that.  I also felt good about--just to give you some things that could make you feel good.  We were selling an issue in Atlanta, Georgia and it was at a club somewhat similar to what the Union League Club would be.  No blacks were members, no blacks had been there and there I was at the podium making a presentation to the insurance guys, to the bankers about buying the issue that we were proposing.  All black waiters and they were sharp.  I mean they had the little towels on.  And you know what, they were so proud to see me there (laughs) and I could tell it.  And they would tell me that.  But the head of the Securities office for Salomon Brothers in Atlanta wrote a letter to his boss in New York [New York] to say because of my presentation he had been able to sell a million more securities than he has placed to sell.  So it's things like that that really make you feel good.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, that, I was, one that opened up the path for others in the, business world.
Story_ID: 5111
Speaker 1: This is the Board of Directors of First Federal Savings [Chicago, Illinois]. And I would think that would probably be around 1975. After each board meeting we would have lunch up in the board room. And the two ladies--the only two ladies on the board. [news anchor] Lee Phillip who was a TV person.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)
Speaker 1: She's in the red.
Speaker 2: Lee Philip is in the red?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know if you've--
Speaker 2: I've heard the name.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who's in the purple?
Speaker 1: She was--I can't think of her name right now--but she was head of personnel at Marshall Field's and Company [retailer]. And in the center there, the gentleman with the glasses, that's E. Stanley Enlund, he was the chairman.
Speaker 2: Inland is spelled I-N-L-A-N-D?
Speaker 1: E-N-L-U-N-D
Speaker 2: And you're in the second row?
Speaker 1: Right. Start of the second row.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (second row, third from right) and the Board of Directors of the First Federal Savings Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 1975. Included are news anchor Lee Philip and First Federal's Chairman, E. Stanley Enlund.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5112
Speaker 1: I'm shaking hands with Mr. [Walter] Wriston, who was the Chairman of the Board of Citibank out of New York [New York]. This was 1984. At the time that we [First Federal Savings of Chicago, Illinois] were merged into Citibank.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark shaking hands with Citibank Chairman Walter Wriston, 1984.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5113
Speaker 1: This is probably around 1969. And, I'm at my desk when I was head of Accounting at First Federal Savings of Chicago. I was working. (Chuckles.)
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark at work at First Federal Savings of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1969.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5114
Speaker 1: This is a picture with myself, chairman [First Federal Savings of Chicago, Illinois] Stan [E. Stanley] Enlund, [Chicago] Mayor [Jane] Byrne, and the [First Federal Savings of Chicago] President, Grover Hansen. We had just passed footings, that is total assets, around three billion dollars. This had to be around 1979. 1978. And she came over to celebrate our--that milestone for the association.
Speaker 2: She had just become Mayor.
Speaker 1: Yes. Right.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (left), First Federal Savings Bank of Chicago's Chairman, E. Stanley Enlund (second from left), and First Federal's President, Grover Hansen (right) celebrating the bank's success with Chicago Mayor Jane Byrne, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1978-1979.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5115
Speaker 1: This was at the Northwestern [Memorial] University Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. And this was a dedication of the lab for my daughter [Juanine Clark]. So, this was probably 1989. When we set up the cancer lab.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark speaking at Northwestern Memorial Hospital's dedication of a cancer lab in memory of his daughter, Juanine Clark, Chicago, Illinois, 1989.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5116
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my daughter [Juanine Clark] that we had hanging at the [cancer] lab [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] that was dedicated in her name. That's the president of the Northwestern [Memorial] Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. I can't think of his name right now. Then myself, and then my wife, Juanita....
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: This was probably in 1989, yes. The same occasion [dedication of cancer lab at Northwestern Memorial Hospital].
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (second from left) and wife, Juanita Clark with the President of Northwestern Memorial Hospital next to a portrait of their late daughter, Juanine Clark, Chicago, Illinois, 1989.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5117
Speaker 1: This is in 1945. The basketball team at the all-black high school, Crispus Attucks High School [Carbondale, Illinois]. We had just won the tournament for the black schools at that time. I'm on the front row, third from the left. My dad [John Q. Clark] is at the back row at the far right. And, he was principal at that time. And the coach was on the far left.
Speaker 2: So, how was it having your father? Was that--?
Speaker 1: So, this is your dad there on the left?
Speaker 2: No, my dad's on the other side.
Speaker 1: This is you right here in the center?
Speaker 2: Next to the center.  Just to the left of center. Third from the center, I guess it is.  See where the trophy is? I'm the next person to the left of that.  And my dad is to the back on the far right. That was 1945.
Speaker 1: What had you won?
Speaker 2: State [basketball] championship. For blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh.
Speaker 2: That's another story I didn't tell you about. (chuckles)
Speaker 1: [Walter Clark (front row, third from left), his father, John Q. Clark (back row, far right) and the basketball team at Crispus Attucks High School, Carbondale, Illinois, 1945.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5118
Speaker 1: It was the homecoming game. There's one on the left and one on the right, too.
Speaker 2: That's true. (Laughs)
Speaker 1: That is a good question.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (third from left) and the homecoming court at Crispus Attucks High School, Carbondale, Illinois, ca. 1944-1945.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5119
Speaker 1: This was in California when we were going to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  So let's see now, it's '48, '49, 1948, 1949. And these were some friends of ours. We were over there for a party.
Speaker 2: Is your brother [John Quincy Clark, Jr.] in this picture as well as you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Ok. You're on the far end?
Speaker 1: Yes. I'm sure he's on this picture. Let's see. Oh, he's sitting down front with the dark suit on. That's my brother. With his legs crossed and hands crossed. That's John Clark Jr.
Speaker 2: And then, you're in the back.
Speaker 1: I'm in the back on the far right.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (far right), his brother, John Quincy Clark, Jr. (front row, right) and friends, Los Angeles, California, 1948-1949.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5120
Speaker 1: Yeah this is the board of trustees for the Congregational Church of Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois]. Pastor's in the center there. Reverend Gray. Used to be president of Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama]. And--I'm trying to see where I am. I think I'm on the left side in the back row. The third from the left.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (back row, third from left) with the board of trustees for the Congregational Church of Park Manor, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5121
Speaker 1: My brother was stationed in Japan at the time. His name was John Quincy Clark Junior.
Speaker 2: Do you know approximately how old he was at this point?
Speaker 1: That was 19-- that was 1946. And he was twenty years old.
Speaker 2: He ended up settling here in Chicago [Illinois], too, right?
Speaker 1: No. Really, Detroit. Ferndale, Michigan.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark's brother, John Quincy Clark, Jr., in his Army uniform, 1946.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5122
Speaker 1: This is 1951. And my brother [John Quincy Clark Jr.] and I were graduating from college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]. My brother is on the left of the picture. That's my dad [John Quincy Clark, Sr.] in the center. And I'm on the right. In the background is the [Crispus] Attucks High School [Carbondale, Illinois], where he was principal.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (right) with his brother, John Quincy Clark, Jr., and father, John Quincy Clark, Sr., at their graduation from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois 1951.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5123
Speaker 1: That's in 1954. And it was in Seoul, Korea. Well, it wasn't really Seoul, it was Yong Dung Po. In the northern part of Korea where I was in service. U.S. Army.
Speaker 2: Were you saying you were right along the parallel when you were stationed--
Speaker 1: Yes, 38th parallel we were stationed.
Speaker 2: Did they station a lot of minorities there?
Speaker 1: It wasn't just minorities, it was just U.S. soldiers.
Speaker 2: Right, but I just know that in terms of--historically--there were quite a few, but they weren't all minorities. See they had like a united force there--a United Nations force there. People from Colombia, Australia, France, Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: [Walter Clark in his Army uniform, Yong Dung Po, South Korea, 1954.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5124
Speaker 1: This was with the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] and Mayor [Harold] Washington is at the podium. And it was a celebration of forty years in business. And he was making a talk to the CTA employees and their wives.  And so he's at the podium and I'm to the right there, sitting down.
Speaker 2: (Inaudible)
Speaker 1: Yes, I was the chairman of the board of the CTA at that time.
Speaker 2: Who's the gentleman on your left, right?
Speaker 1: That was one of the officers-- with the glasses on? I can't recall his name, but he was one of the senior officers in the Chicago Transit Authority.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (second from right) and others watch Chicago Mayor Harold Washington speak at a Chicago Transit Authority function, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1986-1987.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5125
Speaker 1: This is June 18th, 1988. And this is Jaunine Clark, my daughter, getting her Master's degree from Northwestern's [University, Evanston, Illinois] business school.  And I think that's Dean--I can't think of his--.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark's daughter, Jaunine Clark, receives her master's degree from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, June 18, 1988.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5126
Speaker 1: This is the reception after our wedding, July 13, 1957. And it was held in my mother and father-in-law's house at 4900 South Ellis [Avenue]. Starting from the left, you have my wife's sister, whose name is Isabelle--Elizabeth Ramelle (ph.) Dillard, my wife Juanita Dillard Clark, then myself Walter Clark, then my mother Beulah Clark.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Beulah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Next is my dad John Clark and then Moses Dillard my wife's father, and Resi (ph.) Dillard my wife's mother. It was July 13, 1957.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark and his new bride, Juanita Dillard Clark at their wedding reception, Chicago, Illinois, July 13, 1957; (L. to R.): Sister-in-law, Elizabeth Dillard, Juanita Dillard Clark, Walter Clark, mother, Beulah Clark, father John Quincy Clark, Sr., father-in-law, Moses Dillard, and mother-in-law, Mercy Dillard.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5127
Speaker 1: This was in 1954, it's in Yan Dang Po, Korea, and that's the tent where we [United States Army troops] lived. I'm just outside the tent. That was our home.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark standing outside of his Army tent, Yong Dung Po, South Korea, 1954.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5128
Speaker 1: This is at the Royal Coterie of Snakes and we were given awards to--persons who were retiring from their jobs. And on the left is Clark Burrus. He was retiring from the City [of Chicago] at that time. So he later went to work at the First National Bank of Chicago. I was retiring from Citibank. I was in the center. And the person to my left, and to my right in looking at it, is Ted Jones, who was a CPA [certified public accountant] who was retired.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (center) with Clark Burrus (left) and Ted Jones holding awards presented to them by the Royal Coterie of Snakes fraternity, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990-2000.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5129
Speaker 1: This was 1999. And we were celebrating [son] Hilton's [Clark] birthday, so it was August 8th, 1999. And it was at the hotel down on Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]-- Four Seasons Hotel restaurant.
Speaker 2: (Off-camera voice) (Unclear) son on the left?
Speaker 1: Yes. Hilton is on the left, my wife, Juanita [Clark], is in the center, and I'm on the right.
Speaker 2: How old was he at this time?
Speaker 1: Forty-one, last year [1999].
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (right) and wife, Juanita Clark celebrating their son, Hilton Clark's birthday, Chicago, Illinois, August 8, 1999.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5130
Speaker 1: This was at a new garage in Chicago [Illinois].  I would say the year was probably 1987.  And I don't know the gentleman that's on the left, but he was a CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] employee; I don't recall his name. The second gentleman on the left's name is Danny Lawson. This was his new garage. He's the first black person I know that sold buses around the country. And he put up a facility to repair buses. And we were celebrating the opening of his facility. So his name is Danny Lawson, he's from Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: Who is the gentleman on your--on the other side of you?
Speaker 1: He's also a CTA employee and I don't know what his name is.
Speaker 2: (inaudible)
Speaker 1: 1987.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (second from right) and others celebrating the opening of a bus facility for the Chicago Transit Authority, Chicago, Illinois, 1987.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5131
Speaker 1: This is the Royal Coterie of Snakes, it's a social club.  And this was our May dinner dance and it was held at the Union League Club of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: What year? I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think what year this would be.  I would guess it's around 1984.
Speaker 2: (Off-camera voice)- And where are you in here? There you are.
Speaker 1: I don't see me yet.  Yeah I see me now.  Right here.  I forgot.
Speaker 2: You're right behind--is that Fred--?
Speaker 1: Fred Rice.  And to my left next to me is John Rogers senior. John Junior's father.
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark (second row, third from left) with members of the Royal Coterie of Snakes fraternity, Chicago, Illinois, May, 1984.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
Story_ID: 5132
Speaker 1: Ok, this is at the reception. July 13, 1957 at my wife's [Juanita Clark's] parents' home, 4900 South Ellis [Ave., Chicago, Illinois]. And we're cutting the cake.
Speaker 2: And now where was your ceremony at? Where did you get married?
Speaker 1: We got married at the church--let's see--fifty hundred between Ellis [Avenue] and Drexel [Avenue] on the south side of the street.  My wife went to that church; there was a Japanese minister.  And even though we were both members of [Congregational Church of] Park Manor, she wanted to go down the center aisle, so--this church had a center aisle.  (Laughs)
Speaker 2: [Walter Clark and Juanita Dillard Clark cutting their wedding cake, Chicago, Illinois, July 13, 1957.  From the collection of Walter Clark.]
