Story_ID: 220744
Speaker 1: [My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.]  Observing is Renee Pruitt.  Sir, could you please give us your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Donald, D-O-N-A-L-D, Coleman.  Or Alvin, the middle name, A-L-V-I-N, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 11, 1952, Toledo, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Advertising.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you are the president--
Speaker 2: Chairman and chief executive officer of GlobalHue Advertising [Don Coleman and Associates].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 6, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the GlobalHue offices, in my office [in Southfield, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 220745
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type warm up questions that I'm always asked to ask people.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, probably red beans and rice, and collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple, black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Saint Martin in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do: a competitor who has arranged it so he or she can win or lose with equal pride has set the table for their last supper.
Story_ID: 220746
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history now.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Augustus Coleman] side and we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us first your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Dorothy, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Omega, O-M-E-G-A, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Now, is Omega her maiden name?
Speaker 2: That's her middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Bowers, B-O-W-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 22--excuse me, December 30, 1922.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Oakland, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, Oakland, Tennessee.  Now where is Oakland in relationship to--
Speaker 2: It's about thirty miles outside, thirty miles east of Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Excuse me, west of Memphis, thirty miles west of Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's almost in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Let me get that right.  Now, east, west--it's towards Nashville [Tennessee], so it's got to be east, thirty miles east of Memphis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, that's what I was thinking.
Story_ID: 220747
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on your mother's [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] side?  How far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: We've traced them back to probably my great-great-grandfather, whose name was Mack Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who was a major landowner and farmer and entrepreneur, if you will, in the Oakland, Tennessee area during Reconstruction times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories about how he acquired land?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, back in those days, some years after the Civil War, black people were able to get major parcels of land.  And him being an entrepreneur, he bought other parcels from other black people and he amassed quite a, about five hundred acres of land.  And he raised cattle, and he farmed and raised, you know, other farm animals and the like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had a cotton--raised cotton.  And so, he was quite an entrepreneur in the agricultural arena back in those days.
Speaker 1: I was wondering if there was a story, because during those days, as you might know, we were initially given some land by the Freedmen's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands], but then some of it was snatched back.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And people ended up without anything.  So, I wonder how he was able to hang on to it.
Speaker 2: He hung on to his, but his son lost most of the land during the [Great] Depression times.  He actually mortgaged four hundred acres of land for four mules and two wagons.  And he couldn't, the crops didn't come in sufficiently enough, or he was told they weren't sufficient enough to pay back the debt.  So, he lost much of that land.  And to this day, the white family who got the land still owns it, it's still in their family.  Because we still have about seventy acres that adjoin that land.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was your great--
Speaker 2: Great-great... my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, your great-grandfather lost it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what else do you know about your ancestors on that side--your grandfather, or--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's mother, my grandmother, her side of the family were educators.  They were all teachers, and they were very big on education for many, many decades.  I think my mother was the first one not to pursue education.
Speaker 1: Now, were they associated with a particular school, you know, in that area?
Speaker 2: Well, down there it's a county called Fayette County [Tennessee].  And they were associated with the whole Fayette County black school system, because you know of course, it was segregated for most of those years.  And there were a number of schoolhouses that they were instrumental in building, and of course, educating in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said your mother didn't pursue--
Speaker 2: Teaching.
Speaker 1: --education, teaching?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  She actually didn't go to college.  After her high school diploma, her degree, she got married, I mean she married my father [Augustus Coleman].
Story_ID: 220748
Speaker 1: My father is from the same area.  He's from just down the road, in an area called Somerville, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You may as well give me his full name and spell it.
Speaker 1: His name is Augustus, or was Augustus, he's deceased now.  Augustus, A-U-G-U-S-T-U-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Coleman.
Speaker 2: All right.  And he was, what is his date of birth?
Speaker 1: He was born on March 18, 1920.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And he was born in Somerville?
Speaker 1: Yes, S-O-M-M-E-R-V-I-L-L-E [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 1: Not a whole lot.  His father was an entrepreneur also.  He owned a racetrack in rural Tennessee back in his era.  He also owned a cotton gin, which was one of the first owned by black people during that time.
Speaker 2: That's quite--a racetrack.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a racetrack.
Speaker 2: Was it patronized by black and white?
Speaker 1: Yeah, black, primarily black.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he, for whatever reason, you know, he liked horses, and he carved out, you know, a racetrack on his land.  And it became I guess quite an event.  People would come every week and bring their horses and make bets, and those types of things.
Speaker 2: Okay, that sounds like--
Speaker 1: And I wouldn't doubt he'd sell moonshine, and the whole nine yards.  But that's an entrepreneur for you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like a creative way to--
Speaker 1: Make some extra bucks, right.  Rather than grow some tomatoes, you know, you put a racetrack out.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  This is the first time I've heard of somebody, you know, creating a racetrack, their own racetrack.  You know, you hear about the Negro Leagues and how people, even in the rural South would create Little League baseball leagues to make money.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But a racetrack, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, talking about baseball, during that same era I got some uncles who were renowned as, you know, major league talent ballplayers.  It wasn't the Negro League, but it was the black leagues in those regional areas.  Harry [Coleman] and Egbert Coleman were a pitcher/catcher combination that people still about, old people still talk about today in that region.
Speaker 2: Egbert is E-G-B-E-R-T?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 220749
Speaker 1: Anything else about your ancestors on your father's [Augustus Coleman] side?  Are there any good stories that they tell or hand down?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, a lot of stories.  I mean, you know, my father was, I guess he was a ten, twelve pound baby when he was born.  He was always a big guy, a big strong guy.  And he would, he would wrestle men, you know, twice his age when he was twelve or thirteen years old, and beat them.  He had enormous hands.  He wasn't, you know, he exposed to athletics, because there just weren't any... he had to work, so he didn't play a lot of...  But he was the guy who could tame horses, you know, brand cattle.  And he worked in the--he left home at fourteen or fifteen, and went into Memphis [Tennessee], and lied on his application and worked in the Firestone Tire [& Rubber Company] factory [Memphis, Tennessee] doing, you know, very hard labor at fifteen years old.  So, he was always noted as a guy who was physically strong.  I mean, when he was alive--actually I've got pretty big hands--but his hands would dwarf mine.  And you know, he was very strong.  So, there are a lot of stories about his prowess, you know, in terms of his strength and ability in that regard.
Speaker 1: How tall was he?
Speaker 2: He was 6'2".  You know, he wasn't a big, heavy guy.  I mean, at his peak, he weighed 220 pounds.  But he weighed around usually, as I recall, around 210, something like that.
Story_ID: 220750
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] and father [Augustus Coleman] met?
Speaker 2: Well, they met at a dance, I believe, in rural Tennessee.  He was a couple of years older than she.  And so they dated, you know, how you dated back in those days, on horseback. (Laughter) So, he lived, you know, down the road a way, so now it would be the equivalent of a ten-minute drive.  But back in those days it was quite a little horse ride.  And every now and then a buggy on special types of occasions, because they didn't really have a car in those early days back then.  And my father decided to leave Tennessee when he was nineteen, and he hopped a railcar with two other buddies out of their area.  The trains, they knew the trains were coming by, and they hopped them.  I guess you called them hobos.  (Laughter) They hopped a train, and three of them were headed for Chicago [Illinois], because they knew the train went to Chicago.  The first stop was a little town in Ohio called Sandusky, Ohio.  And the two other guys said, "You know, this is far enough.  I'm sick of riding this train," and they hopped off in Sandusky.  And that's where they made their lives and raised their families.  And my father said, "No, I'm going on to Chicago."  But, you know, after traveling by himself for a couple more hours, they stopped in Toledo [Ohio].  So he says, "I'm going to get off here."  So, he got off in Toledo.  And he worked a lot of different jobs, I mean a number of different jobs.  But after he got there and got a job and got a room, he sent for my mother, and they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he didn't, he didn't know anybody in Toledo?  He just stopped off because he got tired of--?
Speaker 2: Well, he got tired.  He said he didn't feel like there was any opportunity for him in the South.  And you know, he wanted to go north, where obviously everyone was trying to get to.  They thought it was better opportunity in the North.  And this was in the, this was in the late '30s [1930s], I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if he was born in 1920, it would be 1939 I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about '38 [1938], '39 [1939], something like that.
Speaker 1: So he's nineteen years old in Toledo?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Where did he work when he got to Toledo?
Speaker 2: Well, he had a lot of jobs.  He was, he and my mother worked as, like domestics in a house.  He was a delivery man, he was a janitor.  He worked a lot of different jobs like that until he finally settled in, and he was a skycap for United Airlines, and he worked there for thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother got into real estate.  You know, as she got older, she settled into real estate.  Now mind you, this was years later.  There were a lot of different jobs.  But when I was born--see, my father retired in 1980 after thirty years.  So, he started in 1950 at United Airlines.  And my mother probably started--I was born in '52 [1952], so she probably started in like '55 [1955] in real estate.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were in, we were in Toledo, Ohio.  And subsequently after he left and settled in, all but--he's from a family of nine.  So four of his, three of his brothers and sisters followed him north, to Toledo.  So he helped them get situated, and that's where their families, that's where they lived and where their families were raised.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was always kind of the trailblazer in the family, you know, more of the leader.  Even though he wasn't the oldest, he was always considered to be the leader of the family.
Story_ID: 220751
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I remember, you know, growing up in Toledo [Ohio], on the east side of Toledo, Ohio.  I can remember as far back as probably three years old.  When I was, what I vividly remember is there was a playground in the neighborhood, which you don't really see much anymore, you know, complete with the baseball diamond, the volleyball, the arts and crafts, the games, you know, the jungle gyms, and the swings.  You know, that was kind of the meeting place in the neighborhood for all the kids.  And I vividly remember playing with other little kids my age, and trying to make these things called--have you ever seen these little vinyl strings?  They call them boondoggles.  People would make necklaces out of them, and they would hang their keychain on them.
Speaker 1: Oh, they'd make the square, kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they'd kind of twine them.  And, you know, learning how to do that kind of stuff.  And I remember that, because you know, you don't see that anymore in the neighborhoods.  I think that's what's missing.  You know, kids don't, they don't--parks and recreation organizations--you know, cities don't have those budgets like they used to.  But those were, I think, very instrumental in keeping kids out of trouble.  I know we were always sent there because we would stay out of trouble that way.  The kids who weren't up there usually were, quote unquote, "getting in trouble."  (Laughter)
Story_ID: 220752
Speaker 1: --Obviously I remember dinner table-type discussions when I'm the littlest one.  I was an only child.  But I had, as I said, my father's [Augustus Coleman] brother lived just right down the street [in Toledo, Ohio], and he had five kids.  So I interacted with my cousins a lot, and I was the youngest one.  And I recall our household was run differently than their household, which I found interesting.  You know, in my house, obviously the patriarch, my father, was the leader.  But my mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] really called the shots (laughter) as far as I was concerned.  My father only came in from a disciplinary perspective, you know, if I was really out of hand or something, or he had to scold me.  I can't ever remember him spanking me; my mother did all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: She was there most of the time, so she was able to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, she was there most of the time.  And, but, you know, if you wanted--we weren't rich by any means and certainly didn't have a lot of money, but there was always plenty of food and whatever we wanted.  And if I had my friends come over, I could offer them something without, you know, even second-guessing it, you know.  My uncle's household was a little different.  I mean he was like the king, and nobody--everybody would sit at the dinner table.  I'd go down there to eat sometimes, and everybody would sit at the dinner table and just sit there and wait for him to get there.  And you're talking about favorite memories--nobody could serve themselves until he served himself first.  That's just the way he ran his house.  So I questioned him, you know, being a kid four years old maybe.  You know, "Why do we have to wait for you?"  (Laughter)  And he said, "Because that's just the way it is here, you know.  If you're going to be here, then that's what you have to do, along with my kids."  So I remember telling my father that, going home.  I said, "I don't know if I want to go down there and eat anymore, because this is what goes on."  So I remember my father walking down the street with me.  And this was his older brother, but again, my father was always the strong, tough one.  Even though his older brother was bigger than him, he never wanted to tangle.  And so, you know how brothers do.  He got in his face and said, "Hey, first of all, when my son comes to see you, you treat him just the way he's treated at my house, just like I treat your kids in my house.  And secondly, you're..."  I'm not going to use the expletive deleted, but I used a few.  I said, "You should not try to treat your kids that way either.  And if I hear of it again, I'm going to come down here and knock you on your ass," which, you know, he was known for doing.  And that stopped his brother from conducting himself like the bad king (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting phenomenon.  I mean, you know, I remember people in the neighborhood that had a similar set-up.  Do you have any idea of where that comes from?
Speaker 1: It's got to be some type of old, southern tradition I guess, practiced in some households where, you know, the father was the worker.  And he worked hard, usually in the fields or whatever in some manually-oriented, labor job.  And so when he came, it was said that he was supposed to get the best of what was offered because obviously he needed the strength to go back out and work the next day.  So, the best piece of meat, the best piece of chicken, the best vegetables, whatever, he would have his pick of before everyone else.  I think that's where I heard that kind of nonsense started.  But it carried over maybe a little too far (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 220753
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, you know, I was--it was a neighborhood.  I vividly remember a neighborhood, I mean truly the village raising the child--you know, the old adage that if you got in trouble--if you did something down on the corner, by the time you got home, your mother knew about it.  And you might have gotten spanked on the way, (laughter) because someone else in the middle knew about it.  I mean everyone disciplined the kids and tried to keep them out of trouble.
Speaker 1: Did you live on, what side of Toledo [Ohio]--how is Toledo laid out?  I mean was there a black side of town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there was--I lived on the west side, which was primarily a black side of town.  I remember after we moved from the east side--I was born on the east side and stayed there until I was about four, and we moved to the west side.  We moved into some apartments on West Woodruff Avenue called the Elms Apartments.  They're no longer there, because the freeway came through in later years and they were torn down.  But in the Elms Apartments, we lived there.  My father [Augustus Coleman] sent for, or didn't send for, but allowed his niece to come live with us.  She'd just graduated from Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee], she and her husband down in the South.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lane is near Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: A C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] school.
Speaker 2: And they were teachers.  And so they got jobs in Toledo, but he helped them transition into--you know, they stayed with us for a number of months until they found their own place to stay and got settled in their jobs, and so forth and so on.  And he became a principal in the Toledo school system, and she was a senior educator over the years.  And now their son is an assistant superintendent in the Toledo school system.  So I remember young, black doctors coming to live in that apartment building, who are still very prominent in Toledo today.  As a matter of fact, Dr. John Coleman, no relation to us, he moved his family in.  And now his daughter is a prominent physician in Indianapolis [Indiana], and his son, [HistoryMaker] Michael [B.] Coleman, is the mayor of Columbus, Ohio.  So, I remember seeing, you know--
Speaker 1: Is that the John Coleman that's in Chicago [Illinois]?  He's an English teacher.
Speaker 2: No, he's in Toledo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You're talking about--
Speaker 1: There's one in Chicago, John Coleman, too.
Speaker 2: Really?  A physician?
Speaker 1: An anesthesiologist, right.
Speaker 2: No, this gentleman was a general practitioner.  And there was another gentleman named Dr. Armstrong [ph.] who came through.  And my father, they always used him as counsel, you know, to help them kind of get an understanding of the black community in Toledo, and where we're not to go, and where to buy things and so and so.  He was a conduit.  Both my parents were kind of conduits for a lot of people coming through in that next generation who had gone to college and who were just branching out into different occupational fields.  And he helped a lot of them kind of get themselves together and get on their way.  So, I remember those kinds of situations.  Certainly sports--you know, I was brought up, very fortunate to be brought up on a block where the older kids were into sports, and not into stealing cars or whatever.  So, we played with the seasons.  I mean, you know, we dropped the basketball and picked up the baseball glove.  And when we dropped the baseball glove, we'd pick up the football.  I mean, it was seasonal.  We just played sports year-round.  And for me it was fortunate, because I would play as a young kid with older kids, you know, much older than me, and obviously much more developed and bigger than me.  But it allowed me to get banged around.  But then as I got a little more prowess and I developed a little more, I found that I could compete with older kids.  And then as I got older, I could, I found that I could dominate against older kids.  And that's what gave me, I think that was the baseline for my athletic endeavors as I got, as I grew and got older.  But I do remember, you know, there was--we didn't get involved in any mischief.  I mean, obviously certain mischievous things, but nothing ever major.  It was all centered around school, sports, family, and friends.  You know, no locks on the doors, you know, kids in and out of each other's parents' homes.  You know parents raising everyone's kids, making sure everyone was in line--
Story_ID: 220754
Speaker 1: I remember there was a factory on the corner called Doehler-Jarvis [Division Plant, Toledo, Ohio], it was a major automotive parts manufacturer.  And many parents, obviously, had worked shiftwork.  So I remember that procession of parents going to work in the morning and walking down the street.  And then in the afternoon after school we saw those parents coming home, and then the second shift, you know, going, with the uniforms on.  And some had on hardhats, some had, many of them had lunch pails.  So, we saw that work ethic, you know, everybody kind of worked.  There were fathers in most all of the households.  I can't even think of a household now that didn't have the continuous family unit in place.  You know, there was no, there were very few female heads of household back then.  So, I think obviously that continuous family made it more conducive for a lot more discipline, and family values, and family orientation.  That's why the kids kind of grew up--that's definitely why the kids grew up with those types of values.  And we didn't get in trouble. We had to focus on moving ahead in our lives, moving forward.  You know, goal-setting and striving for the next levels was very important.  So, that's kind of what I remember.
Story_ID: 220755
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was church a big deal?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I shouldn't leave out church, obviously.  I was raised a Methodist.
Speaker 1: What kind of Methodist was it?
Speaker 2: I was raised initially in Phillips Temple AME Church [sic. Phillips Temple CME Church, Toledo, Ohio], where we went to.  And then that pastor passed away.  And my mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman], again, who was, she was the matriarch--I would say she was the one who made sure I went to church.  My father [Augustus Coleman] went sometimes, he wasn't a regular churchgoer.  But he passed, and my mother didn't like the new minister.  So we moved over to Braden United Methodist Church [Toledo, Ohio], which still is in existence today.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Braden?
Speaker 2: B-R-A-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's on West Woodruff Avenue [sic. Dorr Street].  So, yeah, Braden United Methodist.  And I remember being involved in Sunday school.  You know, I had to go to Sunday school every Sunday, and of course church afterwards.  And not always liking, as a kid, being there for so long, because I wanted to go play.
Story_ID: 220756
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you about the church being, you know, an influence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was very active in the church, you know.  But you know, obviously young, and I wanted to go out and play ball.  (Laughter)  But I do remember Reverend Nelson [ph.] was my pastor, and then Reverend Reed [ph.].  And, you know, we weren't, I don't think you would call us overly religious, you know, but we were a very spiritual family, though.  We were grounded a lot in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] was a music fan, and still is to this day.  She used to love jazz, particularly artists like Jimmy Smith, Jack McDuff, and Charles Earland, who played the organ.  She loved the Ramsey Lewis Trio, The 3 Sounds, you know, she was really into jazz music.  I remember particularly on Saturdays we had, you know, there was a record player, and we stacked the albums, you know.  And I remember, you know, all jazz.  And then on Sunday she'd play some gospel music.  But her thing was jazz music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, I remember going with her to a couple of concerts at the art museum [Toledo Museum of Art, Toledo, Ohio], jazz concerts, that she would have me attend to broaden my horizons beyond sports.
Story_ID: 220757
Speaker 1: --Now in terms of sports, I mean growing up in Ohio in those days, I mean the Cleveland Browns must have been a big deal.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: With Jim Brown being--
Speaker 2: Jim Brown was my favorite ballplayer.  In fact I wore 32, his number, when I played high school football.  So, he was very much an influence.  So were the Indians, you know, the Cleveland Indians, you know, were a big influence.  A guy named Vic Power [Victor Pellot] who played first base was a very, very artistic first baseman.  He always did a lot of trick catches with his glove.  And the guy, Rocky Colavito.  And so I went to, my father [Augustus Coleman] would take me to some of the Indians games.  And we'd also go to some of the Detroit Tiger[s] games, because actually Detroit [Michigan] was closer than Cleveland [Ohio] to Toledo [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right, actually.  Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, you know, sports was just big back in those days for young kids.  I mean we all loved to play them, but we also had leagues.  I mean, there were more baseball leagues and football leagues for younger kids.  And we were active in the Y in the winter, at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and the Boys Club[s of America; Boys & Girls Clubs of America], you know, playing basketball.  So, I think there was just more outlets and more facilities for us growing up, more than there are now for the kids growing up today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I don't think there were any, there were only a few what you would call obese kids in the neighborhood.  Nobody was like a fat kid, because everybody was active.  You know, you didn't sit around, you know, downloading music or playing video games or anything like that, you know.  I can't recall watching a lot of TV.  You know, I'd watch a little morning TV before school.  But man, after school, it was, you know, you're out playing, you're doing your homework, and you're going to bed.  You know, maybe you'd see a half hour of a TV show during the week.  So, I just think we learned a lot of values in terms of being able to compete.  Again, goal-setting, being active, you know, loving to be active, never even considering being couch potatoes.  I think it was a good, it was a good time for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it worked out.
Story_ID: 220758
Speaker 1: What else were you interested in?  Now, you're in advertising now.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were you interested in art at all when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: You know what?  My father [Augustus Coleman] was, he was really a unique guy.  He, I had never seen him do anything related to carpentry or plumbing or electrical, or anything like that.  And we bought this home, I remember we moved to a street called Waite Avenue [Toledo, Ohio].  And it was actually right next door to the junior high school, Robinson Junior High [School, Toledo, Ohio].  And it was a two-flat that had been converted from a one-family to a two-flat.  And my father, well, actually my mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] who was in real estate found the deal.  It was a very good deal on this place.  But they wanted to turn it back into a one-family.  And so my father said, "Well, I want to do it."   I said, you know, I remember saying, "Well, how are you going to do it?  I've never seen you drive a nail."  "Oh, no, I can do this."  And this is some pretty extensive renovation.  I mean, very extensive, particularly the plans that he had.  And I remember him--you know, again, my father had a tenth grade education.  So he wasn't formally educated, but he would always take a tablet--back in those days we called them tablets.  Today, they're legal pads.  And he would always sketch out his ideas in terms of what he wanted to do on this tablet.  He would sketch out dimensions, and figure out dimensions, and so forth and so on.  And I recall him demolishing stuff.  I remember we tore off the front porch.  You know, we had one of those front porches that extended from the whole front of the house.  I remember it was fun to me, because I got a chance to, you know, wield a sledgehammer.  And we were ripping up the front porch, and there was--to get to the upper level in this two-flat, there were some steps that were built upside the house, and then a doorway there.  And I remember him, you know, ripping those steps down, and a lot of extensive renovation.  And I remember him remodeling our basement, putting major Thermopane--major floor-to-ceiling Thermopane windows in our dining room that led off to the backyard, which he built a patio.  Just, he re-did the kitchen.  And I'd never seen him do anything like this before, and he did it; he just did it.  He didn't read a book, or anything.  And it was, it was top quality work.  I saw him almost cut his finger off with a saw, cutting some two by fours of plywood.  You know, but me, man, I couldn't then, and to this day probably can't, you know, saw down a straight line.  (Laughter). I used to go shop class, man, and these kids would make these great napkin holders, you know.  We'd have to cut them on the jigsaw and sand them.  And mine would always look lopsided.  I remember bringing it home, and my mother said, "Oh, that's very nice."  My father said, "Oh, man, this is horrible.  Let me show you how to make one of those."  He took me downstairs and made one perfect, you know.  But I never had that kind of prowess.  In fact, one of my tricks was--he always tried to make me--when he was doing his remodeling, he'd try to make me learn how to do some carpentry work and things like that, and be a helper.  He'd always say, "Never stand around with your hands in your pockets.  If you're going to be a helper, you know, keep your hands free, because I might need something at any time, and you need to give it to me.  You need to anticipate what I might need."  I would purposely put my hands in my pockets.  And not anticipate and tick him off.  So, he would get frustrated and kick me out, so I could go play ball.  (Laughter)  I vividly remember that.  He'd kick me out, quite vociferously he'd kicked me out, but--
Story_ID: 220759
Speaker 1: So, what were you like when you were a kid growing up?  What were you interested in primarily, and what was your personality like?
Speaker 2: Well, my interests were, you know, outside of athletics, I liked schoolwork.  I mean I liked certain subjects.  I liked school.  School was not something that I didn't like.  You know, I enjoyed most of my classes in school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school, grade school?
Speaker 2: I went to two elementary schools.  One was Monroe Elementary [Monroe Street School, Toledo, Ohio].
Speaker 1: M-O-N-R-O-E?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, which has subsequently been torn down, it's not there anymore.  Then I went to Lincoln Elementary [School, Toledo, Ohio] which is still there.  And I went to Robinson Junior High [School, Toledo, Ohio] for middle school.  And then I went to St. John's Jesuit High School [St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was always into sports and cars.  Cars was also, always a big love of mine.  I could from a very early age, tell you the make and model of any car that went down the street.  In fact, my cousins used to marvel at the fact that I could do that.  And still today, my daughter [Kelli Coleman], my wife [Jo Moore Coleman] and daughter--you know, when I say, "Well, that's a '52 [1952] Chevy [Chevrolet], or that's a '56 [1956] Ford," you know, they always say, "How do you know?  You don't really know.  You're just making that up because we don't know."  But I know, because back in those days there weren't a whole lot of model variations.  You know, if it was a Chevy it was a [Chevrolet] Biscayne, a [Chevrolet] Bel Air or an [Chevrolet] Impala.  You know, if it was a Ford, it was a [Ford] Fairlane, or a [Ford] Galaxie, or a [Ford] Galaxie 500.  You know, so you knew them.
Speaker 1: Now in those days, you know, most of the guys in the neighborhood would know all the cars.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're right.  I mean today I don't think it's the same way.
Speaker 2: It's not the same way.  I mean today it's, most of the kids know the expensive or the exotic.  You know, they know the Bentleys, or the Ferraris, or the Lamborghinis.  I mean that's what they really want to know.  But if you talk about--and I mean there's so much proliferation in the models now.  I mean, there are so many variations.  It's, you know, I'm in the business and it's hard for me to keep up with it all.  So--
Speaker 1: Do you still try to keep up with all the makes and models?
Speaker 2: I do, I do, I try to.  I'm not as good as I used to be, but I know many of them, particularly those that compete with my clients' models.  You know, I know those pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 220760
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was more of a history, social studies, science, back in elementary school.  And I was a good student.  I made, you know, I was an A student.  A B was something that I was disappointed with.  And a C was like disaster, as far as I was concerned.  Because you know, I was very competitive in school as well.  I wanted to make the honor roll.  I used to get those little ribbons for making the honor roll and all those things.  So, I was a very good student in elementary and junior high [Robinson Junior High School, Toledo, Ohio], because I went to public school.  Then when I went to high school, my mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] and father [Augustus Coleman] said, "You know, I don't think--."  Some of my teachers and counselors said that, you know, my ability was, you know, I had good academic ability.  So, they said, "I don't think you should go to the neighborhood or the public high school.  You know, you might have a little bit more ability, and you may not be being challenged enough.  So, you should go to this new high school that's just being built called St. John's Jesuit [High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio]."  And of course that was the last thing on my mind, because I had grown up all my friends and buddies and had intended on going to [Jesup Wakeman] Scott High School [Toledo, Ohio], which was a public school.  And so, obviously, I didn't win that one.
Story_ID: 220761
Speaker 1: So, at this time are you like a fairly well-known athlete at this point at all?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was fairly, I was well-known in my neighborhood, you know, in your little local area.  Because I'd played baseball and, you know, football and basketball.  And we used to play a lot of sandlot football, you know.  If there's a little patch of grass somewhere, guys would be playing a game of football.  And it was a pretty big thing, because it was kind of like a, it was kind of like your initiation into this next level of maturity.  Because when you played tackle football with no pads and the like, on grass that, you know, could easily extend to the concrete, that was your test of manhood.  Because the older kids were trying to show the young kids who was boss.  That was more of how it was done then versus fisticuffs.  So, it got pretty rough.  So obviously when I was younger, the older kids would lay into us.  But then as I got older, you know, I started laying it to the kids who were three, four, five, six years older than me, and maybe even older.  So I kind of got a reputation in that regard around the area.  But it was nothing like today, where, you know, schools know kids and try to recruit kids when they're--you know, when they're in grade school, they try to recruit them for high school.  It was nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Right, they sure do now.  I just wondered, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because the Catholic schools, the Catholic schools really go out and try to pick them, too.
Speaker 2: Sure they do.
Speaker 1: Especially a good student athlete--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --would really be, you know, a prize, you know.
Speaker 2: Because they're not, they're not encumbered by boundaries like public schools.  You know, you can't do that in public schools, you know, at least you couldn't.  I don't know about now, but certainly Catholic schools would do it.  When I went there [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio], my parents [Dorothy Bowers Coleman and Augustus Coleman] sent me there for the academics.  As a matter of fact as I got bigger, like seventh and eighth grade [at Robinson Junior High School, Toledo, Ohio], when we played in the football leagues, the Kiwanis leagues, if you were a running back, you couldn't weigh more than 110 pounds or 120 pounds or something like that.  There was a limit to how big you could be as a running back.  So, the big guys like me, I'm weighing 160 pounds, 150 or 160 pounds--
Speaker 1: In what grade?
Speaker 2: This was seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: You were weighing that much then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Man, I shot up.  I was six feet tall, almost 6'1" in the seventh grade.  And I wore the same size shoe I wear today, a 13.  (Laughter)  So, I kind of shot up quick.  And so, I was a lineman.  And I remember I played center on offense, and tackle on defense.  Because, you know, big guys had to do that.  When I went to high school, you know, I remember the coaches saying, "Okay, what position do you guys want to play?"  You know, the running backs are over here, the linemen are over here, and so forth and so on.  So, naturally I was a lineman.  I said, "Maybe I'll run over here with the offensive linemen."  But then I say "No."  I thought of Jim Brown, he was a big running back.  Remember Jim Brown was 230 pounds.  I said, "I'm going to go over here to the running back side."  So that's where I went, and I became a running back in high school.
Story_ID: 220762
Speaker 1: But that whole high school experience [at St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio]--that transition from middle school--or from grade school, middle school to high school--I think was one of the more poignant points in my life, one of the turning points in my life.  Because I went from an A student--and when I went to high school I saw a curriculum that the other kids had seen in middle school that I'd never seen before, never heard of, particularly in science and math.  So, subsequently I didn't make the honor roll at St. John's until I was a junior, the second semester of my junior year.  It was a struggle for me, who had been used to getting A's and maybe a couple of Bs, to be looking at some Bs and a number of Cs my freshman year, because I just wasn't prepared.  So, emotionally it was a problem, because my ego was capped.  You know, I was feeling like a cocky, confident kid.  You know, I was a good student, a good athlete, you know.  I had some ladies, I was fairly confident.  (Laughter) So, getting into that kind of situation where, you know, I'm no longer one of the top students--and indeed one of the bottom students--was a big ego blow.  So, I spent many nights very upset, because I couldn't get it right away.  You know, usually things come just like that.  But when you start looking at geometry as a freshman, and algebra 1 as a freshman, you know, we just didn't, we weren't exposed to it.  You know, and biology, I mean in-depth biology, we weren't exposed to it in the public school.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But then, you know, after a couple of years, I mean every semester it got better, until my junior year and I made the honor roll.  And then I--senior year, I was top fifteen in the class.
Story_ID: 220763
Speaker 1: Now, what was the mix in the school [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio]?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Predominantly white.  In my freshman--this school, St. John's, was a school that had been around for decades, from the turn of the century to the '30s [1930s], to [Great] Depression time.  It closed during the Depression years, and it re-opened in 1965, a new school was built.  So, we actually started out in '65 [1965] with a freshmen class only.  And then I came in in '66 [1966], and so we had a freshmen and sophomore class until we got a full complement of four-year students.  So, we also competed in athletics in the [Toledo] City League with only juniors and sophomores.  So, we took quite a beating, you know, from some very good schools in the Toledo City League.  Because we were, I mean, we were younger.  We weren't as--we were a new school, there was no tradition, no program established.  So, we were kind of starting the foundation and the tradition of that program with, you know, juniors and sophomores playing a varsity schedule.  So, that was interesting, too.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers or administrators along the way in school, I guess, or at any of the rec [recreation] centers that you would consider like a mentor, or someone who took a particular interest in your development?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  I had a lot of teachers coming through elementary and middle school.  I can remember Mrs. Mellencamp [ph.], Mrs. Hahn [ph.], Mrs. Brown [ph.], Mr. Lewis [ph.], Mr. Ashley [ph.].  They all, you know, were mentors, and kept me focused when I wanted to act up.  You know, they always kept me focused on the studies.  When I got to high school, you know, it was my first exposure to catechism.  You know, I'm a Methodist; I knew nothing about the Catholic religion.  So I was dealing with Fathers and Brothers, which was an interesting experience, because I'd never really had that experience before.  I had to deal with Mass, we had to go to Mass every day.  And you know, it was hard for me on Sunday to go to my church versus Mass every day.  I never took communion as a Catholic, you know, in the Catholic church.  I took communion in my own church, but I went to Mass every day.  So, it was really an environmental change, it was a lifestyle exposure difference, and I became more exposed.  And Father LeKemp was a mentor to me there, who became president of U of D [University of Detroit] Jesuit High School [University of Detroit Jesuit High School and Academy] in Detroit [Michigan] here in later years; and Father [Bob] McAuley and Brother [John] Sebian.  And so I had a number of--Father Lodesee, who were kind of mentors at St. John's.
Speaker 1: So was the experience, you know, positive for the most part?
Speaker 2: It was positive, because you know what?  For a number of reasons.  Again, first of all, the academic side was very positive in that I was able to get exposed and catch up, in that regard.  Athletically, it allowed me to establish myself as one of the top athletes in northeastern Ohio, playing football and basketball.  I ran track, you know, and I developed there.  But then the interaction with other students--you know, when you grow up in largely segregated neighborhoods--I mean, you know, there were maybe--there was only one or two older white couples in my neighborhood, who everybody in the neighborhood kind of looked out for, because they were elderly people.  But there were no kids.  So coming to a place like, you know, St. John's, I was exposed to white kids, and got a chance to understand, you know, their values and how they were raised compared to me, and how to interact.  You know, it prepared you for the world, because once you leave the neighborhood you have to go out in the world, and the world is not all black, obviously.  So that was a good, strong exposure and preparation in that regard, at St. John's.  It also--now that you look back on it many years later, we established a tradition there.  On the athletic side, St. John's has won the [Toledo City League] All Sports Trophy.  They have this All Sports Trophy that kind of ranks teams from all different sports, you know, from tennis, golf, cross country, track, hockey--everything, in terms of how they stand and compete versus other teams in the city.  And St. John's has been like the All Sports leader for twenty-five years, you know.  And you know, I was recognized as their first All-City player, their first All-State player, and kind of bringing prominence to the program, which has kind of grown since then.
Story_ID: 220764
Speaker 1: So, you played running back during all that time [at St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Running back during those days, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wearing the number 32?
Speaker 2: The number 32.  And a big running back; for then, I was 6'2", 205 [pounds].  You know, but there were linemen--
Speaker 1: For high school, that's pretty good.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, a lineman is smaller than me, you know.  But I was also fast, because, you know, I ran track and the like.  So, I was kind of one of those--I patterned myself after Jim Brown.  I mean that was the style of runner that I wanted to be, until another number 32 came on the scene, who was O.J. Simpson, you know.  And he had a little different style of running than Jim Brown.  You know, Jim was fast, but he would run you over, whereas O.J. was fast and big, but he was more elusive as well.  So I kind of incorporated a little of that into my game, too.  But, that was all good.  But I think just the exposure--
Story_ID: 220765
Speaker 1: --I remember like we used to have to have--work in outreach programs.  So I worked at the Sunshine [Children's] Home [Sunshine, Maumee, Ohio], I'll never forget that, for the retarded kids--mentally challenged kids.  And I remember, you know, working with them on a weekly basis.  We had to work a couple weekends, I should say a month.  And it was so, it was such a gratifying experience.  Because these kids obviously were very challenged, but they tried, you know, so hard to do things that we take for granted, you know.  So, that was kind of an enlightening thing that said, "You know what?  There are many blessings that have been bestowed on you, and it didn't have to be this way, you know."  So, that kind of humbles you a bit when you work with the kids.  And also, as part of that out-reach program, we would go speak to--particularly me, as an African American student athlete--would go speak to kids in--white kids in rural areas, farm areas, who never had any exposure to black kids.  And I got to hear from them, you know, their perspective.  And it was kind of weird because it's almost like today, to a degree.  But it was only on a more base level.  You know, "Is it true that black people have tails?"  I'll never forget that.
Speaker 2: Really, somebody actually asked you that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a kid asked me that, a little elementary school kid or whatever.  I said, "No, that's not true.  Do you see a tail on me?"  I mean but they were raised to believe certain things, you know.  And there were no black kids around, so they had nothing to compare it to.  So, you know, I guess for me there was some enlightenment for them, you know, being around me.  So, those were exposure things as a kid, you know, that St. John's [Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio] gave me that I might not have gotten if I had gone to the public school.
Story_ID: 220766
Speaker 1: By the time you're a senior [at St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio], you got like, your academic thing is back up to honor roll status?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You're an All-City athlete?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, All-State.
Speaker 1: All-State athlete?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Now, are recruiters coming after you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, recruiters are coming like crazy from--I think 112, you know, 102 or 112 colleges that wrote me letters.
Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents [Dorothy Bowers Coleman and Augustus Coleman] react to all this attention?  How did that affect the family?  I know that can really, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, it was very restricted.  I mean first of all, my father--in those days they'd send you letters first.  And then you would have to send back something that says you were interested in having a recruiter come to your home.  So we narrowed it, we narrowed it down very quickly in terms of where those potential schools would be.  My father's interest was, first interest, was in Ivy League.  He--Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] was very, very, interested in me, and he wanted me to go to Dartmouth.  He said, "Look, hey, football is great.  You know, you'll be a superstar in the Ivy League.  But you'll make all these connections that will help you later in life."  Well, I wasn't thinking about connections.  (Laughter)  I'm thinking--I went for a visit there.  I'm thinking Hanover, New Hampshire in November was like freezing, you know.  And St. John's was an all-male high school, and Dartmouth being an all-male college, there was no way.  And so, Dartmouth got ruled out.  [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], obviously, was after me.  Same reason.  No way, I'm not going there.
Speaker 1: It's an all-male school.
Speaker 2: I'm not going to Notre Dame.  There was a lot of pressure for [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  A lot of people wanted me to go there in the city.  I went to visit Ohio State, and liked it.  They had a winning program, football program there.  But back then all the athletes lived in one dorm, the same dorm.  It was like 'Animal House,' man.  It was like mad in there.  So, you know, I didn't particularly like that.  So, it narrowed down to Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Back then a lot of the Midwestern schools--[University of] Nebraska [-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], [University of] Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma], [University of] Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], Kansas State [University, Manhattan, Kansas]--I went out and visited Nebraska because there was a guy from Toledo [Ohio] who went to Nebraska named Bill Thunder Thornton, who played some pro [professional] ball at one time.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, kind of as a courtesy--he was recruiting me hard, and I went.  But there was no way, because that was out in the middle of nowhere as far as I was concerned (laughter).
Story_ID: 220767
Speaker 1: All these--so it boiled down to two schools, Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Two schools, Stanford and Michigan.  My father [Augustus Coleman] had moved to San Francisco [California].  He transferred with United Airlines to San Francisco during my senior year [at St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School & Academy, Toledo, Ohio], which was in 1969; he left in '69 [1969].  My mother [Dorothy Bowers Coleman] stayed back with me until I would go to college.  So my father liked Stanford, because, since he'd been exposed to the West Coast, he had researched it, and you know, it was an excellent academic institution.  He felt it was like the Ivy League of the West.  And--
Speaker 1: Your father is really keeping up with academics, then?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was, very much so.  Since he wasn't exposed or allowed to really, you know, pursue his-- he had to work, you know.  He dropped out after the tenth grade and had to work, because his father had died, and his mother [Fannie Coleman] had passed, too.  And he had to raise, kind of raise money for the family.
Speaker 1: But still it's unusual that a man, you know, a working man keeps up with academics like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, working at the airport, he ran into a lot of different people.  And he was always, he always asked questions, you know, and he would get in conversations with people.  And so, he learned a lot just through practical, you know, experiences.  It wasn't as though he kind of researched it through books as much as interaction with people.  That's where he learned a lot about a lot of different things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went and visited Michigan.  Michigan, you know, good academics.  Bo Schembechler had just gotten there, and I was actually in his first recruited class.  He inherited some players, and they'd just beaten [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] in that major game in 1969.  They were underdogs, and they beat Ohio State.  And I was at that game, and it was such electricity in the Michigan Stadium [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: That's the one where it snowed, I think, right?
Speaker 2: Um, the '69 [1969] game?  No, it did not snow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just like, you know, Ohio State was considered the best team ever in college football.  That's when they had all the complemental players, and Michigan beat them, 24-12.  You know, and I kind of liked that.  Just, the whole Michigan environment was--in my mind I liked the campus and the program just better than Ohio State.  And me being a Midwest boy, I really didn't want to go to Stanford, you know, because I didn't really know, you know, a lot about Stanford.  With hindsight being 20-20, it wouldn't have been a bad choice.  But Michigan was where I decided to go.  And so when I drove off to Michigan, a moving truck was at my house that day, and my mother moved out to California to join my father in San Francisco.  (Laughter) So--
Speaker 1: So you were close to home, but there was no home left.  I mean, home was out in California.
Speaker 2: California.  So anytime I had a break, I went to California, and I wasn't going back to Toledo [Ohio] as much, because I would go see my folks.  And actually, they would put in the program at Michigan that I was from Daly City, California, because actually that was where my parents lived, in Daly City, California, right outside of San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to fly free because your father worked for the airlines?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, I could fly free, you know.  And since he had a lot of seniority, I could usually upgrade to first class.  So, you know, I was, I used to love to travel back in those days.
Story_ID: 220768
Speaker 1: So that's kind of how I got to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  You know, it was a concerted effort.  We weeded down the choices pretty dramatically, pretty quickly, and I went there.  And Bo Schembechler wasn't a well-renowned coach back then.  I mean he came, he worked for Woody Hayes as an assistant for [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  And then he got, his first head coaching job was at Miami of Ohio [Miami University, Oxford, Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's the cradle of coaches, as they call it.
Speaker 1: The cradle of coaches, that's right.  And, but when we came to Michigan everyone was shocked that, you know, the athletic director Don Canham would hire this guy, you know, with not a lot of experience, from a smaller program into a major program like Michigan.  So, he had a lot to prove.  And he was a madman.  I mean he worked us to death.  I always tell people that my parents [Dorothy Bowers Coleman and Augustus Coleman] kind of raised me right and nurtured me.  And my father helped me understand what I should do as a man.  But Bo Schembechler and his program turned us all into men.  It was short of going to the Vietnam War.  It was that kind of program.
Speaker 2: Almost like the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: It very much was.  And--
Speaker 2: So, you were like in kind of a boot camp situation then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, I mean we hit every day.  You know, it's unheard of today in major college or professional sports to have full contact every day.  We had full contact every day until Friday, you know, when we'd put on some sweats and shoulder pads and do things.  But we hit every day.  And so, it became, we became accustomed to it, and it was just how we did things.  So, I think we--and being young, we recovered faster.  And by the time we got to Saturday, I mean were sick of hitting each other.  We were relishing hitting some other color jerseys.  So we were pretty good teams.  I mean I think we had the best four-year record in Michigan, modern day Michigan football history.
Story_ID: 220769
Speaker 1: Tell me now, as most people probably don't know; I know I don't know.  How much time does it take to be a big-time college football player on a program like [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?  I mean how much?
Speaker 2: A lot of time.  Well, not as much as today.  For instance, I graduated in four years, playing football at Michigan.  Today it's almost impossible for a kid to graduate in four years, with the demands of football.  Because we didn't lift that many weights.  I mean everything for us was just speed and quickness, and we lifted a few weights.  But today, I mean you got to go down and lift every day.  And players have these little magnetic cards that you slide into the weight machines that register you as on the machine; what your workout was previously; what your goals were for this workout; if you achieved those goals.  I mean and the coaches just download that and they figure, they see what players are improving and what players aren't.  So, it's a lot more sophisticated and a lot more time dedicated today.  And that's why most kids need that five years to graduate today.
Speaker 1: So, it takes a lot of time to go down there.
Speaker 2: It takes a lot of time.  We couldn't take a course after two o'clock when I was playing, because we'd have to get ready for practice and all like that.  I think today, I mean, they can't take a course after noon or something.  All the courses have got to be in the morning.
Speaker 1: So, you practiced every day?
Speaker 2: Every day.
Speaker 1: Every day from what, three o'clock or something?
Speaker 2: We used to start at, we started at 3:30 to 5:30.  That's when we would practice.  And then as freshman, we'd have a study table or a first year training table.  You'd eat, and then you'd have a study table, which you'd have to study, you know, when you were a freshman.  Beyond that, you didn't have the restriction of a study table; you'd have to have your own time to study.  But back when I played, you know, the academics were highly stressed at Michigan.  We had like, I think second to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], we had the highest graduation rate of our athletes on the football team.  We were like in the 85th percentile, and Northwestern was like 87th percentile.  Today, Michigan is like the 60th percentile, and Northwestern is like maybe in the 72nd percentile.  So, those numbers have gone down dramatically because of the burdens of the athletics.
Speaker 1: So, so, priorities are slipping backwards?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, some programs like [University of] Tennessee [Knoxville, Tennessee], a few years ago it was publicized that none of their graduating seniors graduated--African American.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: So now you get some programs that appear to just being used for their eligibility to play.  And they don't come close to graduating, and then they don't have any more eligibility left, no more scholarships.  So then they're out, which I think is a travesty in college sports.
Speaker 1: If they're hurt or something, too, it's even worse, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] is making mega-millions on these kids.  And these kids are getting no stipends, you know.  And their ability to graduate is being severely restricted by the rigors of the athletic programs.  So, it's not good.
Story_ID: 220770
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you major in at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I was a journalism major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wanted to be a writer, wanted to be a sportswriter.  I wanted to write for Sports Illustrated, Sport magazine, Inside Sports, something like that.
Speaker 1: Well, did you have any particular writers you were impressed by that you wanted to be like?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, back in those days there weren't a lot of writers.  I remember, you know, Carl Rowan was a journalist back then.  And he had his own report on the radio, 'The Rowan Report.'  And, but there were not a lot of role models in terms of sportswriters or sports journalists.  I just was, you know, I liked to write, and I particularly liked sports.  So I wanted to combine the two, so that's why I chose journalism as a major.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see.  Did you, did you take note of any of the...  I know 'Tony Brown's Journal' was on TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Tony Brown's Journal.'
Speaker 1: Did you ever watch Tony?
Speaker 2: Certainly, on PBS we watched 'Tony Brown's Journal.'  I was committed, I was committed in my mind that I didn't think I was going to ever play professional football.  So, I was always interested in just seeking out different journalistic career opportunities.  My goal was to be a sportswriter.  But then I went to career day that we had on campus, and this advertising agency was there.  And so, I just stuck my head into their booth or whatever.  And I read their literature, and they had copywriters.  And I asked, "What the hell is a copywriter?"  So, I asked some questions.  And you know, a copywriter obviously are people who develop the commercials or the print ads, or whatever.  They write the copy.  So I said, "Oh, that's interesting." You know, so it's not a long form of writing; it's more of a short form of writing.  But it seemed that this whole advertising agency thing was, it seemed like a pretty interesting environment.  So, I applied with this agency called Campbell Ewald [Detroit, Michigan] that had the Chevrolet account.  And subsequently, they wanted to hire me upon graduation.  And I accepted with the caveat that I may have an opportunity to play pro football, but I doubt it.  Because no one was really thinking about--you know a couple guys were, you know, getting All-American renowned, and I wasn't getting--I was all Big Ten, but I wasn't getting All-American renowned so I didn't think, you know, I was going to get a shot to play.
Story_ID: 220771
Speaker 1: Now, what did you play at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I played outside linebacker at Michigan.  When I first got there I was a running back, which was another enlightening time.  You know, you go in and you're All-City or you're All-State, and you're pretty fast, you're a good size.  So you get to a place like Michigan, and all the running backs were All-City, All-State, pretty fast, and good size.  (Laughter) And then it's not only the guys in your class, but you got the two classes or three classes ahead of you, you know.
Speaker 1: A lot of candidates, but few spots?
Speaker 2: A lot of candidates, but few spots.  So, as a sophomore, obviously, I was going to have to sit.  You know, because I'm playing behind Billy Taylor and those seniors, who were, you know, pretty good ballplayers.  So, I'm going to have to sit.  And that really didn't sit too well with me, and I was ready to transfer actually to Stanford [University, Stanford, California], who had expressed an interest.  Again, my father [Augustus Coleman] inquired if they would be interested in me coming out, and they expressed an interest if I wanted to transfer.  And I was ready to go, because they said, "You can play out here, you know, once you're--you're going to have to sit out a year, but once you're, once that year is up, you can play out here right away.  We don't have, you know, All-Americans stacked on one another."  So, I said, "That sounds good to me.  I'll be closer to folks, and I'm going out."  But Bo Schembechler, you know, wanted to talk to me, and I told him I was leaving.  He didn't particularly like it, and, you know, he tried to get me to stay.  But he was more ticked off than anything else.  But the only reason I stayed was because of my teammates, you know, particularly, my class, who convinced me to stay.  So, I went back and talked to Bo.  And I said, "Well, if I'm going to stay, I've got to--you know, I'm good enough to play.  Here or somewhere, I need to play."  So he said, "We got no--there's no place you're going to play on offense.  So, what about moving to defense this year?  And then next year we'll move you back to offense."  So I switched over to defense as a strong safety, and I was getting playing time.  And then two outside linebackers, the first two guys got hurt in the same game.  So the third guy got moved up, and he wasn't a very good outside linebacker.  And so they said, "Well, look, you know, you've got a chance here to play outside linebacker, like right now.  Start."  Because I'd grown to be about 210, 6'2".  "So, you've got the size, and certainly the speed, you know."  And so, I did.  So, I started playing every game as an outside linebacker for about the last eight games of the year.  And I kind of liked it, you know.  I kind of liked sticking people, which is getting stuck, as a running back.  (Laughter) And so when the next year came around, he said, "Okay, we're going to move you back to running back."  I said, "No, I think I want to stay here at linebacker."  And that's how I started playing outside linebacker, which suited me well.  Because I was, I had grown to be about 215 pounds then, but I still had pretty much running back speed.  So, it was a good position for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's how I started playing linebacker.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 220772
Speaker 1: And then, so I did get drafted into the NFL [National Football League] by the New Orleans Saints.  And I told Campbell Ewald [Detroit, Michigan], you know, I can't come to work now, but I'd like to stay in touch, because there'll be a time I might be interested in getting in the business, I'm sure.  So--
Speaker 2: In the advertising business?
Speaker 1: In the advertising business.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  So when you were a senior [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], you had a pretty good--you had a goal, I mean, a career objective?
Speaker 1: Yeah, kind of a career objective.  You know, I wanted to write.  And in what genre, and what, you know, particular area of journalism, I wasn't quite sure.  But I knew I wanted to write.
Speaker 2: Now, were you aware of the black ad agencies out here then, when you were--
Speaker 1: I was not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was not, until after that Campbell Ewald interview thing, and I started doing a little more research into the business.  And I found out that there was, in Chicago [Illinois] there was--oh, God, he passed away here recently.
Speaker 2: Cullers?  Vince Cullers?
Speaker 1: Vince Cullers, it was Vince Cullers.  There was another gentleman, Tom, out of Cleveland [Ohio], actually.  I forget his last name.
Speaker 2: Not [HistoryMaker Thomas J.] Burrell?
Speaker 1: No, Burrell hadn't really gotten going.
Speaker 2: You worked for Burrell.
Speaker 1: I worked for Burrell.
Speaker 2: Yeah, out of Cleveland--I can't...
Speaker 1: Boy, I forget his name.  But there weren't very many.
Speaker 2: Or Proctor was big then.
Speaker 1: Barbara Proctor, yes, out of Chicago, was kind of getting a lot of renowned--her and Vince Cullers, I think were getting to be the most renowned back in those days.  This was about '60 [1960]--it was '73 [1973], '72 [1972] and '73 [1973], or '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Right, they would have been the big ones then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Tom Burrell was just starting to get rolling then.  And I didn't really read about him then.  [HistoryMaker] Byron Lewis at UniWorld [Group, Inc.] was, he was a little later than that.  Frank [L.] Mingo out of New York [New York] was maybe starting to get going then.  But I didn't really know a lot about black ad agencies except for Vince Cullers and Barbara Proctor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, yes, it's interesting.  Very few people in America I think really knew much about them.  You know, I mean, even black people didn't know they existed.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Unless you were in Chicago or in the business community, you probably didn't even know that they were around.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Well, that's--
Speaker 1: Well, Barbara Proctor did a '60 Minutes' interview sometime in the '70s [1970s], which that kind of exposed a lot of people to her and to, you know, black ad agencies.  But she wasn't the biggest at the time, because by then Burrell, and UniWorld, and Mingo were bigger than her.  But because she had that '60 Minutes' piece done on her, everyone thought she was the premiere agency, black agency, at the time, so yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 220773
Speaker 1: So, you were drafted by the New Orleans Saints?
Speaker 2: Yeah, New Orleans Saints.
Speaker 1: Did you graduate [from University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] before--I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, I graduated on time, in four years, as did most of my roommates.  Most of us, in fact all of us except one got our diplomas.  There was, I lived in a house with six other guys, a pretty big house on campus.  We called ourselves "The men of all men (laughter)."
Speaker 1: Who was with you there?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was Ed Shuttlesworth, Clint Haslerig, they were both out of Cincinnati [Ohio]; Harry [Banks] and Larry Banks were twins out of Cleveland, Ohio; Curtis Tucker out of Cleveland, Ohio; Paul Seal out of Detroit [Michigan]; Walt Williamson out of Detroit, and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: And we had some, we had some good times in the house.  We had such good times that Bo Schembechler put down the proclamation that there will be no more houses for players ever at Michigan (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you all get into any trouble or anything?  Or was it just--
Speaker 2: Oh, we, I wouldn't call it trouble.  But I'm sure we had a lot of fun; we had a lot fun.  A lot of parties after the big games, you know, we were renowned for that.  I mean, people would kind of like come from all over to our parties.
Story_ID: 220774
Speaker 1: Now, didn't you all [football team, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] go to the Rose Bowl [Game] a couple of times?
Speaker 2: Went to the Rose Bowl once.  We went to Rose Bowl in, '72 [1972] Rose Bowl where we lost to Stanford [University, Stanford, California], by the way, 13-12, on a field goal in the last like ten seconds of the game or something like that.
Speaker 1: Was that Jim Plunkett playing for them?  Who was playing for Stanford?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was guy named Don Bunce, who was a quarterback.  And a guy named Jackie... what's Jackie's... he was a running back, Jackie Harris [sic. Jackie Brown] or something like that.  I mean they weren't, they were a good team, but there's no way, no way they should have beat us.  That was a learning experience for Bo Schembechler, I think.  Because we went out to California, and this was supposed to be a reward trip, you know, over the Christmas holidays and the like.  I mean you take a bunch of kids who are used to being home with their families at Christmas, and you take them out to the Rose Bowls and you practice them two a day, like it was training camp again.  And you're, you know, you're eating hotel food or, you know, banquet type food, and everybody gets a little homesick.  And you're working harder than ever.  And it didn't seem like a reward trip. It seemed like, you know--
Speaker 1: Like punishment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what's the deal about being at the Rose Bowl, you know?  So, we'd come out of Michigan Stadium [Ann Arbor, Michigan], so the Rose Bowl's no big deal to us (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, for those who are watching this, and who have no idea of college football--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You played football at the University of Michigan.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in Michigan Stadium, you're playing before what, 90,000?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, 111,000.
Speaker 1: A hundred and eleven thousand people [111,000].
Speaker 2: Every week.  So, the 111,000 [sic.] at the Rose Bowl was no big deal to us.  And so, I think mentally most of the guys were down going into that game.  You know, we weren't like charged up, you know, mentally to play.  And this is hindsight.  We were kind of ready to get it over with and go home.  So, we took a team that we should have beaten by thirty points, and we lose by a point.  And I think Bo Schembechler learned a lesson from that.  And so--
Speaker 1: Was that your senior year?
Speaker 2: That was my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In subsequent years he changed his strategy, and he won a couple of Rose Bowls.  In my junior year, we didn't go at all.  We lost to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], so we had a loss on our record and we didn't go to the Rose Bowl.
Speaker 1: Did you go to another bowl?
Speaker 2: We couldn't.  Because back in those days, you were restricted.  The Big Ten could only go to the Rose Bowl.  In my senior year, we tied Ohio State, but our quarterback, Dennis Franklin, hurt his shoulder in that game.  So, the athletic directors around in the conference voted on who would go to the Rose Bowl, and they voted for Ohio State because our quarterback was hurt.  So, we sat home.  Our record was 10-0-1, and we had no bowl game to go to.  I remember that poignantly, watching TV with my girlfriend who later became my wife [Jo Moore Coleman].  And it was like, we were stunned.  I'm sitting there watching this 25 inch screen of the Rose Bowl, and you know, knowing that we had an undefeated team sitting at home.  And then you watch other bowls, and you had teams that lost two games or three games or whatever, and they're playing in the bowl games.  So I think that subsequent year, they changed the rule, that you could go to other bowls other than the Rose Bowl.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, you know, when you think about that 111,000, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Compared to the average football stadium in the NFL [National Football League], you got like 45,000 or 50,000 people--sixty [60,000].
Speaker 2: Well, probably 65,000.  Sixty-five.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a lot more people.
Speaker 2: A lot more people--
Story_ID: 220775
Speaker 1: --Michigan Stadium [Ann Arbor, Michigan], there is nothing like coming out of the tunnel in a big game in Michigan Stadium.  Nothing, nothing like it.
Speaker 2: What's it like?  Tell us, what do you hear?  What are the sights and sounds and smells of that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, when you come out of the locker room, you know, you're at the end of the tunnel.  And as you walk down the tunnel towards the stadium, obviously, you hear more of the roar of the crowd as you get closer to the mouth of the tunnel.  And then when they know we're coming out, the band strikes up with 'The Victors,' the [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] fight song.  And the crowd's on its feet--screams, really starts screaming.  And then, you know, you break out on to the field, and it just goes wild.  I mean the adrenaline rush is, I mean, never duplicated.  I mean, you never relive that kind of high, in terms of everyday life.  There's no way.  And then when you go out to play, I mean which is--you're just so high, so ready to go--that you know, you perform at a level that maybe you never thought you could perform at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, college football players, in the first quarter it looks like they're just flying everywhere.
Speaker 1: Everywhere, man.  And when you play like [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] or Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], I mean for four quarters, guys are flying everywhere, particularly if it's a close game.  You know, Ohio State and Michigan, in my senior year--you know, and I played pro ball--but I've never been as physically drained and mentally drained and as sore--overall just my whole body ached--never more than in that game.  Because I don't I've ever been able to sell out, if you will, just give a hundred and fifty percent for two straight hours, or three hours, however long the game lasts.  You know, I've never done that before--just flat out, all out, every minute, mentally and physically.
Speaker 2: Is it a difference when you play in Ohio, in The Horseshoe [Ohio Stadium, Columbus, Ohio] in Ohio?  I mean, do they make--
Speaker 1: Well, back then, you know, The Horseshoe wasn't as big as it is now.  You know, they closed in The Horseshoe now.  It used to be open-ended.  They, you know, don't get me wrong.  That stadium was, it was off the hook, too, in terms of the noise and the crowd and their vehement support of Ohio State.
Speaker 2: Does it make, how does it make you feel, being on the opposite side of that kind of enthusiasm?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, one thing--when the game starts, once it starts, you don't really hear the crowd that much.  You know, it's all what leads up to the start of the game.  You know, you get a few jitters at an away stadium.  You know, but once the game starts, once that first hit takes place, you don't, you tune that out.
Story_ID: 220776
Speaker 1: Is there, is any one play that you remember as being the most memorable play in your college career [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a lot of them.  You know, I think there are a lot of different plays.  I mean you know, you always think about those more, those more out-front plays, you know, where you make the interceptions as a linebacker, and then you run them back for touchdowns.  And I remember a lot of those.  But I think, you know, one of the most--for me, it was, we were playing [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] at Michigan Stadium [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And the quarterback then, one of the quarterbacks, was Tyrone Willingham, you know, from--an ex of [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], now at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] or wherever.  Who knows where he may be.
Speaker 1: Stanford [University, Stanford, California], too, he was the coach at Stanford.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a pretty close game at Michigan Stadium in my junior year.  And I remember he was quick.  Man, he was so fast and quick.  And he was an option quarterback, he wasn't a passing quarterback.  And it was a 4th down and 2 play, and they ran a bootleg type play to my side of the field.  And I just remember beating the blocker.  Really I did an unorthodox move.  You're not supposed to cut, go inside the blocker, particularly when there's a fast guy who can get outside or around you and go around the corner.  You're supposed to, what they call, contain.  So you're supposed to stay on the outside, to turn him back in, to the pursuit of the defense.  Well, on the 4th, it was the 4th and 2.  And sometimes, you know, just your instinct tells you to gamble.  You feel like, you know, you've got an edge in the situation, so you, you just go for it.  So, I felt I had an edge on the blocker.  I went inside of him and tackled Willingham for a loss on his 4th and 2, which was a pretty big play.
