Story_ID: 4833
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Sandra Johnson.  And, sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, James E. Cheek, C-H-E-E-K.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December fourth, 1932, Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess you call me an educator, but I'm, you know, president emeritus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], is the title that I go by.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: The sixteenth of September, 2003.
Speaker 1: Right.  And where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: We're at the Crystal Gateway Marriott Hotel in Room 1644--
Speaker 1: Crystal City is in Virginia, right?
Speaker 2: In Arlington, Virginia, Crystal City.
Story_ID: 4834
Speaker 1: All right.  Sir, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask.  And they just deserve brief answers. The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ham and potato salad.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not the Virgin Islands?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head for no).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--if you go back to my high school and look in the yearbook, and the Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] yearbook, you'll this expression, "I would rather fail in a cause that will ultimately succeed than succeed in a cause that will ultimately fail."
Story_ID: 4835
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, I'd like to ask you about your family history.  And could you give us the names of your parents and their dates and places of birth, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name is Lee Ella Williams Cheek.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's L-E-E, two words, E-L-L-A, and of course Williams. I don't need to spell that. She was born in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina] in September 1904.  My father was Reverend King Virgil Cheek.  That's V-I-R-G-I-L.  And he was born in Littleton, North Carolina in September 1903.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family?  How much do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far can you trace the--
Speaker 2: We, we have traced my mother's family back to my great grandfather, who was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian, who was a Constable in Halifax County [North Carolina].  And, and he married a black woman. That's as far back as we have gotten with, with her family.  On--that's her--that's the maternal part.  Her father's father was white, and, of course, his mother was mulatto. And they were from the Tidewater area of Virginia [eastern coastal area].  On my father's side we, we have gone as far back as my great grandmother, Emily, who was his mother and his father, Walter.  And that's as far back as we have, have gotten.  We didn't--I don't--they're not--we went further back on my mother's side than we did on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories about your ancestors that were passed down, about, you know, things they were doing in the Nineteenth Century or, or--
Speaker 2: There're none I want to relate.  Yeah, there are a lot of stories, but--
Speaker 1: Are you sure there's not one you can tell us for the sake of history?  Give us an idea of what life was like then.
Speaker 2: No, not--not anything that I, you know, can think of at the moment that would be of significance, historically, except to members of the family.
Story_ID: 4836
Speaker 1: Well, sir, tell us about your mother [Lee Ella Williams Cheek].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my mother was the eldest daughter.  Her father, whose name is Jimmy Williams, they had seven daughters and one son.  Well, they had four sons, but three of the sons died, only one survived to adulthood.  She was a school teacher.  And she finished Shaw, and when she--what then was called Slater Institute--I guess she went to Slater Institute first, which is now Winston-Salem State Teachers--Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina].  You asked what was she like, very disciplined, very firm in her philosophy of life and her goals and objectives; very clear about what she wanted her children to do and become.  And I guess in a way, she and my father [Reverend King Virgil Cheek] were similar in that regard.  My father was a clergyman who did not practice the ministry, but became an insurance salesman for Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company.  And, and he later brought my--my mother taught school until she started having children.  And she stopped teaching to raise the five of us.  And she was an excellent seamstress, and she did sewing on the side and things like that during the [Great] Depression.  And she taught evening school to adults, but she gave up full time, working outside of the house when she started having a family.  My father was not much of a disciplinarian, but he had, you know, along with my mother's strong views as to what each of their five children were to do in life, they selected our ultimate professions.  I mean literally, we became what they had decided we were to become in terms of our educational preparation.  And they didn't decide I would become a college president, but that was told to me by the pastor of my church from the time I was about ten years old.  They ran a typical black household.
Story_ID: 4837
Speaker 1: And we moved from Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina--well, there is a story I could tell about that.  My grandfather on my mother's side [Jimmy Williams] died early at the age of fifty-three.  And he had insisted that the--he had a 500-acre farm--and he had insisted that the farm not be sold.  And shortly after his passing, the family was gathered at the house on the front porch, discussing whether or not to honor his request and not to sell the farm.  And all of a sudden somebody looked up and they said that "there's Papa."  And he was a man that was a very handsome fellow who wore his topcoat folded over his left shoulder.  And they saw him coming through the gate down the walkway, towards the house.  And my mother jumped up to--ran toward him and she said, said something about, "Papa we're glad you're back."  And when she got close to him, he disappeared.  They took that as an omen that they were not to sell the house.  But later, they decided to sell the house and the house burned down.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's some omen.
Speaker 1: Now, that's 500 acres that, where the house was, and now it is a part of Gaston Lake.  It's underwater.  You know Gaston Lake in Virginia--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well, that's the large lake that you'll find if you take [Interstate] Route 85 going toward Richmond.  You'll see Gaston Lake.  It stretches all the way from Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina and all the way into Virginia.  So his 500 acres are underwater.  And my grandmother lived with us and the two younger girls were raised by my mother and father.  And I always thought I had three sisters until it was time for them to go to college.  And that's when I discovered that they were my aunts, rather than my sisters.  So that's a piece of, you know, that side of the family that I had forgotten about.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's quite a story, and--
Speaker 1: And everybody verifies the story about the, you know, my grandfather--
Speaker 2: So a number of people saw him.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, all of the members of the, all of the--they used to tell that story whenever they got together, you know.  And my grandmother lived until 1965, and, of course, she was a part of the group, and, of course, she, you know,--everybody witnessed seeing him and, and everybody swears that it was him.  I, myself, don't believe in ghosts or apparitions of that nature, but everybody swears that is, in fact, what happened.
Speaker 2: It seems amazing that they would go on and sell it anyway after seeing that, I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they decided that there were no men in the family, you see, except this young boy.  And that the women just could not manage, you know, a farm without having a man in charge, so. And that was the reason they decided to sell it.
Story_ID: 4838
Speaker 1: Can you describe--now, you were born in Roanoke Rapids [North Carolina], but you grew up in Virginia though?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I was born in Roanoke Rapids, and the first seven years of my life, I lived in Weldon, North Carolina, which is just across the, just, you know, is right next door to Roanoke Rapids.  But the part about Virginia, that's where my grandmother--that's where father--my grandfather's mother is from.  That's where she and this white person that I told you about cohabitated and produced him.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where the land was we just discussed?
Speaker 2: The land was in Roanoke Rapids.
Speaker 1: Oh, the land was Roanoke Rapids.
Speaker 2: In Roanoke Rapids, that's right.  And he moved to--out to Roanoke Rapids when he got married.  That's where he met my grandmother in Roanoke Rapids.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, how did your parents meet?  How did they meet?  Is there a story about that?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I know only that my father was dating one of my aunts, who eloped with another man when she was about nineteen. And after that he and my mother started, you know, seeing each other.  That's all I know about that.
Speaker 1: All right, well, that's a story.  That's the kind of a story--that's how he came in contact with her, I suppose.
Speaker 2: Yes, see, he had--you know, Littleton, North Carolina and Roanoke Rapids are not that far apart.  They are, you know, pretty close together.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about growing up.  What did the--now, you grew up in--you spent the first seven years at Weldon, and then the rest of that was in--
Speaker 2: In January, 1940 we moved to Greensboro [North Carolina].  We were still in the [Great] Depression.  My father was transferred from working the area where he was working in the insurance business to Greensboro.  And we already had an aunt, one of my mother's sisters who had married a Cheek--but no relation--who were already living in Greensboro.  So we moved to Greensboro in preparation for my father eventually coming to Greensboro.
Story_ID: 4839
Speaker 1: An important of my growing up that I need to let you know about was that in 1937, when my third brother was born or my second brother rather, I was then five years old.  And the doctor who was attending my mother [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] and that delivered the baby was coming to the house to, you know, to check on her.  And on this particular day, he--I was playing in the front yard and, and he stopped and, you know, looked at me very carefully.  And when he went inside, he told my parents that, told my mother that your son has something wrong with his eyes, and you need to have him checked.  Shortly after that--well, my mother called me to the, into the room and, and told me this, that--and she looked at me and I was squinting.  And that's what Dr. Tinsley had noticed.  And she said, "yes, Dr. Tinsley is right."  And that night, my father [Reverend King Virgil Cheek], when he came home, she talked to him about it.  And they carried me to see an eye, I guess it was somebody who specialized in eye, ear, nose and throat at that time.  And I was examined and they told my parents that I had been born with cataracts and that I would--by the time I got to be fifteen, that I would be blind, and they should prepare me for a life of blindness.  Well, my father carried me up and down the East Coast to various eye doctors and got the same story, that by the time I got to be fifteen, I would be blind.  Well, it turned out that my father had a brother, name was Sam, who had gone blind at the age of fifteen.  And they speculated that he must have had cataracts.  When we moved to Greensboro [North Carolina], I was seven years old.  I was in the second grade.  And in order for me to, to see anything written on the blackboard, I had to get up out of my seat and go to the blackboard and cover my face like that (covers his eyes), and look through the slits of my fingers and memorize everything that was on the blackboard.  And then go back to my seat and write it down.  And that continued, that practice, until I was ten.  And that's the reason they say I have a photographic memory.  If my eyes see something, it registers it, and it stays with me. They knew how to remove cataracts.  It was a long procedure, but they didn't have any way of--once they took the lens out of your eye, they had no way of replacing the lens. So while surgically, they could, you know, get rid of the cataract, it didn't do any good because without, you know, an ocular lens in your eye, you couldn't see anyway.  Well, it so happened--we went to Greensboro in 1940.  I, from the time I was seven until ten, I--one day I was walking in the backyard of my house.  There was a field, and--where we played--and I found a large flashlight cover.  In those days, they had flashlight covers that were magnifying glasses.  And I found that piece of glass and discovered that I could read with it.  And that became my most precious possession.  And I read everything that I could find because I was going to be blind in five years, a few years anyway.  And my mother's baby sister, whom I thought was my sister, had subscribed to what we would call today, the "Great Books," Plato's philosophy, Socrates, Aeschylus, you know, the Greek tragedies and so forth.  And I read all of that with that magnifying glass-- and the Bible.  And by the time World War II came, which was just a year and a half after we had moved to Greensboro--
Speaker 2: You're about eight and a half, I guess then.
Speaker 1: Yeah--in the course of experimenting with optics for periscopes for submarines, they discovered what came to be known as the lenticular lens, which had the same characteristics of your natural lens in your eye that they could make glasses from.  And my parents heard about this and carried me to see an eye doctor, Dr. Shane Taylor--.
Story_ID: 4840
Speaker 1: Where did I leave off?
Speaker 2: You were just going to the doctor, and they found--
Speaker 1: (off-camera voice) They just discovered this lens.
Speaker 2: Okay, they had discovered this lens [lenticular lens].  And my next door neighbor told my parents [Reverend King Virgil Cheek and Lee Ella Williams Cheek] about this surgeon, Dr. Shane Taylor, who lived in Greensboro [North Carolina] that he thought could be of some help.  And they made an appointment and carried me to Dr. Taylor's office.  And, you know, Dr. Taylor--I was just short of my tenth birthday when that happened.  And this was a southern, white physician, surgeon's office, where you--as a black person, you couldn't sit in the waiting room.  And when we would go, he would have us come on in and sit in one of the examining rooms and wait until it was his turn to see me.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you couldn't sit in the waiting room?
Speaker 2: No, we couldn't sit in the waiting room with other, with the white patients.  This is Greensboro, North Carolina in, nineteen--
Speaker 1: In the late Thirties [1930s], I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, no--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) It was 1940 by that time?
Speaker 2: 1932, from around--it was around '43 [1943] because they, they had done the experimenting and had--we were, you know, getting deep into the war [World War II], and we were, had started building ships and submarines and, and all of that.  So, they--he examined me and told my parents that all of the information that they had related to him about my being blind by the time I was 15 was true, that the cataracts would ripen in five years from that time.  And he said, "once the cataract has ripened"--ripened meant that it grows and spreads--and when it has completely covered the lens, there's nothing they can do, he said "because you will develop ambylopia."  And, you know, "your sight will be gone."  He said, "now, there is something we can do."  He said, "we can operate and he will have to wear this heavy lens."  And he brought out the type of lens that I would have to wear.  And it was as thick as the flashlight cover that I had been using to read with.  I'm talking about thick, that thick (approximates thickness with thumb and forefinger).  And he said, "we will operate on the, on the right eye first because that is the one that is the weaker of the two, and that's the one that's gonna require more operations than the left eye."  And he said, "he will have to"--he said, "it's gonna take at least five operations, possibly six."
Story_ID: 4841
Speaker 1: So for five years, every summer I went to the hospital, had surgery on one eye, and it was bandaged up and was like that during the entire summer.  I would go, and he would inspect it about every week, put drops in it and all kinds of crazy stuff.  And the one operation next to the last one, he said he was gonna have to operate on both eyes.  So that summer I spent completely blind because I had--both eyes were bandaged.  In those days, the only kind of anesthesia they could use was ether.  Well, the first operation that I had I raised so much hell when they put the ether cup over my nose and mouth.  And I was yelling out, "you're trying to kill me," and "I'm gonna get my daddy" and all this stuff.  And they finally got me to sleep, and, you know, he operated.  And he had to do that every time.  When it got to my fifth operation, he said, he said, "you know, this boy hates like the devil to go to sleep."  And he said, "we have more problems getting him to sleep than I do doing the needling," that's what they called the process they used.  And he said, "I'm gonna make a suggestion that we do this operation in the office with him awake."  And he said "now, James, I'm gonna tell you what you have to do," said "when I put you on the table, I'll put a clamp over your eye."  And he said, "there will be a bright light right up at the top."  And he said, "you have to look at that light and keep your eye on that light the entire time I am needling," to get, you know, the residue of the lens out.  And he said, "if you move at all," he said, "you may destroy the entire work and you will blind."  And I said, "well, let's do it if you let my daddy stay in the room with me and hold my hand."  And so he did that, that operation on this eye (points to right eye).  I don't know how long it lasted, but I looked and, you know, kept my eye on the light and was squeezing my daddy's hand, without any anesthesia except Atropine, because he used drops of Atropine, and he would needle a while, and then he would--his nurse would put more drops in.  And he wanted to do a final operation.  He said, "listen, I think I could make this eye as, as good as the left one if I do this final operation.  And he said, but I'd want to do it the same way I did the last one.  And, and I told him, no, sir.  See I was then 15, getting ready to be 16.  And I was becoming more and more conscious of, you know, of what he was doing.  And I, I felt that I could not hold my head still long enough for him to do that.  But when he, he said, okay.  He said, you know, we'll, you know, let it go and see how you turn out.  Well, I wore those great, big thick glasses, I mean looked like, like bull eyes or something.  I would have to get the--I wore, they were round and temples, thin temples that are like the glasses are now.  They have come back in style.  And about every 3 months, I'd have to get the temples replaced because the weight of the, of the lens would break the temple, where it fitted on my, over my ear and came at--it would break right at that point.  And I wore those heavy glasses until they developed plastic lens.  And, but when, when he finished the operation with my glasses, my vision was 20/10.  And when I, just two years after that, went into the Air Force, that's what the Military Record shows.  My vision was 20/10.  I could, I could see the last thing after, you know, the last thing on the chart.  I could read everything on the chart.
Story_ID: 4842
Speaker 1: When I was seventeen--that's when I went to college, and of course--my parents [Reverend King Virgil Cheek and Lee Ella Williams Cheek] had decided that I was to be the person in the family that would become a minister.  And I also would go to my mother's school, to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And I went to Shaw, I was seventeen years old, my freshman year, and met a young lady that I thought I was in love with, and carried her home to see my, you know, to meet my parents.  I took her to the Debutante Ball at Thanksgiving.  And Christmas she came to my house and my father, who had a prejudice, told me that I had to find another girlfriend.
Speaker 2: What was wrong with that one?
Speaker 1: She was the prettiest girl I had ever seen in my life.  Her father was a dentist in Laurinburg, North Carolina.  She had long, silky black hair.  But she was exceedingly dark.  And his [Cheek's father] attitude was, "not in this family."  And I, you know, went back to Shaw and met a young lady that met his specifications.  And she was an upperclassman.  And Gloria was a freshman.  So I dated Gloria in the daytime and Celestine in the evening because she could stay out later.  And in those days, they had very strict rules for, for freshmen boys and girls, for that matter, but more strict for, for women.  And I was so frustrated because I could not ultimately marry both of these girls.
Story_ID: 4843
Speaker 1: World War--I mean Korean War had broken out.  And there were thirty-two of us at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] that had talked about, you know, the military from time to time.  And even though I got a notice from the Draft Board [U.S. Selective Service System] saying that I had thirty days in which to decide what service [branch] I wanted to go into or I would be drafted for the [U.S.] Army.  Well, I knew that that was not gonna work for me because I, you know, I didn't care for no Army.  And being a Negro, I knew that I'd go right into the--I'd either be a cook or I'd be in the infantry--infantry.  So I decided to go into the [U.S.] Air Force.  And my parents thought I was in summer school.
Speaker 2: And you were actually in the Air Force?
Speaker 1: And I called my mother from San Antonio, Texas and told her that I was a member of the United States Air Force.
Story_ID: 4844
Speaker 1: Yeah, I skipped over my entire high school, you know, experience.  I didn't--I forgot about that.
Speaker 2: Right, and what grade school did you attend?
Speaker 1: Washington Street Grammar School [Greensboro, North Carolina] and James B. Dudley High School [Greensboro, North Carolina].  And I, you know, I was a good student, obviously.  And I also was a kind of teacher's pet you would call it because I wore those heavy glasses.  And the teachers sort of made themselves my protector, although I had learned to box.  And my father had built a ring in the backyard of our house, and I became Golden Glove Boxer.  And I could box without my glasses--don't ask me how I could see because I wasn't supposed to see without my glasses.  I had no lenses in my eyes, but I did.  My--James B. Dudley High School was a fantastic high school.  The principal of the school was a man whose name was John B. Tarpley from Texas, who was a firm disciplinarian with respect to students and so forth.  I was a--I had started playing the clarinet when I was seven years old.  And I had become a member of the band.  And I had also, because of my literary interests, I had become editor of the 'Panthers Claw,' the school newspaper.  And I was president of the student body.  And the band had to play at every football game.  We had to wear a uniform and, and the band director would not let the band disperse or anything.  He kept the band members together.  And this was in my junior year--the band members decided that for the last game of the year, they wanted to be with their boyfriends and girlfriends.  And they debated that and they decided that they were not gonna show up in uniform because they were coming to the last game of the year with their boyfriends and girlfriends.  It so happened that that day--it was on a Friday, we always had our games on a Friday night--I was at home in bed with the flu and I didn't participate in the discussion.  But I also didn't show up at the game either.  And that Monday, I was summoned to Dr. Tarpley's office.  And he told me, he said, "James nothing happens at this school without your involvement.  And the band has embarrassed the school.  It has been insubordinate to the director and to me, the principal."  And he said, "I'm gonna expel you," said, "so you go home and get your parents and bring them back and I'll tell them myself."  The others were suspended, but because of--I was president of the student body and editor of the paper, you know, he felt that I needed to--he needed to cut the head off so that the rest of it would go away.  So I was expelled, despite the protests of my teachers and my parents and despite my insistence that, you know, Dr. Tarpley, my parents will tell you, I was at home, ill with the flu.  I didn't participate in any discussion about striking.  I didn't, you know, vote on it, and I was not striking.  The reason I was not at the ballgame, I didn't even go to the ballgame, the reason I wasn't there in uniform is because I was in bed with the flu.  And he, you know, he said, "that's typical, you know, bring your lie, you just made up.  You're expelled."
Story_ID: 4845
Speaker 1: So he [James B. Dudley High School principal John B. Tarpley] expelled me, and we had in Greensboro [North Carolina] a private school, Immanuel Lutheran College [Greensboro, North Carolina] that had a high school, a junior college and theological seminary.  And most of the students who were there in high school were boarding students from all over the United States, from as far away as California, New York and so forth.  So I went over there and talked to the dean.  And since I was, you know, I wanted to--I had been taking Latin, and I wanted to learn Greek, but they didn't offer Greek in, at the public high school, I could take Greek.  So I enrolled.  I caused my parents a great deal of, you know, distress because I went from a public school, where they didn't have to pay anything, to a private school that was pretty expensive even for a day student.  Well, midway through my senior year, they discovered through some kind of means that, that I had been telling the truth, that I did not participate in, you know, and so forth--
Speaker 2: The professor--I mean the principal, Tarpley.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, Tarpley.  And he tried to get me to return.  And I said, "no way."  I mean I had, you know, fallen in love--what I call love--with a pretty young girl from Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  And I was having a ball.  In addition to the fact that I was also being taught at a level that was better than Dudley, although Dudley's teaching was superb.  And, I wasn't--I didn't go back.  I wouldn't--I refused to go back.  And so I, I have a diploma from Immanuel Lutheran College and not from Dudley High School.  And when I was in divinity school my third year, the principal invited me to deliver the Baccalaureate address.  And, I did.  And I--and he gave me an honorary diploma from the school.  So I--
Speaker 2: And so you got from Dudley too eventually--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I, and I have to go to both reunions, both class reunions.
Speaker 2: Now, you graduated from Immanuel Lutheran in  --
Speaker 1: College, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In, in 1950.
Speaker 2: Fifty, okay.
Story_ID: 4846
Speaker 1: All right, now who--ust in terms of influence, you talk about your aunt having the "Great Books" and reading those when you were young.  And, you know, was she like your tutor with the "Great Books" too.  Does she, did she explain them and talk about them, discuss them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of.
Speaker 1: That's something for a child to tackle that without any guidances.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, no, she did.  She, she was a bright, bright woman.  She went to--when she left to go to college, that's when I discovered, you know, she was not my sister.  And she went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  And, but she was a very bright girl, and she became a school teacher in Cleveland [Ohio].  But that, you know, we would--well, after, you know, after I got into high school, you know, I had my glasses, you know, and everything and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but at that age, I mean--
Speaker 2: And I would, you know, I would write essays for the English [classes] and so forth on things that I had read, you know--they didn't know where it came from.  When I went to [Immanuel] Lutheran [College, Greensboro, North Carolina] many of the reasons I, that I liked it so well, was you had these three groups, the high school [where Cheek studied], college and theological seminary.  And the theological seminary guys fit right in with me.  I, you know, I mean they were being taught stuff that I had read a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you had read stuff like St. Augustine and all that?
Speaker 2: Yes, and--
Speaker 1: St. Thomas Aquinas?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, we would have discussions and debates about, about those things in, at Lutheran.  And, that was one of the greatest experiences of my life.  I mean [James B. Dudley High School principal John B.] Tarpley did me a favor, expelling me and sending me--causing me to, to finish my high school education in that setting.
Story_ID: 4847
Speaker 1: Now, when I went to, when I went into the military, I went to--I finished basic training, I would write like most military men, almost every day to these two girls, to Gloria Moore and Celestine Williams. Celestine Williams wrote me once and that was a postal card. I got a letter from Gloria Moore almost every mail call.  And I went to the USO [United Service Organizations] Club one day and I bought some red ink.  And I think I wrote Celestine about twenty pages.  And I started off by saying, "I dip my pen in my bleeding heart."
Speaker 2: That's pretty dramatic.
Speaker 1: (Laughs). And, you know, "because you have not, you know, responded to my writing, to my letters."  And she, she didn't even answer back. It's very interesting that the girl that wrote me every day, I started losing my affection for. And the one who didn't write was the one I started getting deeper and deeper in love with. Until I went to Fort Warren Communications School [Wyoming], and graduated first in my class.  And ordinarily, the person that graduates first in your, in your class in communications school, you're offered an instructorship.  This is 1951.  The [U.S.] military had just been desegregated.  And they, the [U.S.] Air Force said they could not--they were not going to take a chance of putting a Negro instructor in front of a major, predominantly white class.
Story_ID: 4848
Speaker 1: And you were talking the [U.S.] Air Force, that they would not appoint you to the position
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, they would not appoint me as an instructor at Fort Warren [Wyoming], the School of Communications.  And they decided to send me to an aircraft warning station that was located in the--right on the border of Canada, in Minnesota.  But in the meantime, I had come home and, and gotten engaged to Celestine [Williams].  And my mother [Lee Ella Williams Cheek] bought the engagement ring.  My, my father [Reverend King Virgil Cheek] didn't know that, but, you know, she took me to the jewelry store and bought the engagement ring and I presented it to her at that Christmas.  But I'm--that's a little bit ahead of this, in sequence, the story.  I went to this aircraft control and warning station, and there were--this was a small squadron of about 150 men, and I was the only Negro in the squadron.  And because, you know, whenever we went into the little small town where this place was located, people would stop and stare at me the way we used to stop and stare at Indians in, when I was in North Carolina.  We'd see an Indian on the street, we'd, you know, we saw them so rarely, we'd stop and stare.  Well, people did that to me. And they also started doing something else.  Every Sunday I was invited to have dinner at somebody's house, and interestingly enough, now this is 1950, 1950 and '51 [1951], there were families that allowed me to take their daughter, their white daughters to the movies.  And I was in the communications room one day and the bells started ringing on the teletype machine.  And I went over to see what was, you know, what it was.  And it was my orders, giving me a thirty-day leave and so many hundreds of dollars for travel and so forth, to go to Greensboro [North Carolina] and from Greensboro to San Francisco [California], and from San Francisco to the Fifth Air Force in Seoul, Korea.  The, I took those rders to the Commanding Officer and told him, I said, "look, I don't understand it.  This is crazy."  And he sat me down and told me that I was bad for morale, that--I mean he went through the whole bit about I was the only one that got invited every Sunday to somebody's house.  And I always had a date.  Well, the problem was I was dating white girls because there were no Negroes, in that part of Minnesota.  It's just like Rochester, Minnesota, where Mayo Clinic [medical treatment center] is.  This was even further north.  And he said, "I requested that you be transferred to another command.  And I don't know who made the decision for you to go to Korea, but I didn't make that decision."  So I came home and that's when I got, that's when I gave Celestine a ring.
Story_ID: 4849
Speaker 1: Well when I got to [the U.S. Air Force base in] San Francisco [California], I, you know, was--every day we would muster, and they would call the names of the people who were shipping out [to combat duty in Korea].  And I was there for a month.  And then I was there for two months, and everybody who had come with me, were long gone to Korea.  And so I finally one day went to see the, you know, the Commanding Officer to find out what the problem was.  And he said, "well, I thought you had been informed."  He said, "you know, your orders were changed by the Pentagon [U.S. Department of Defense Headquarters]."  And I said, "I don't understand."  He said, "I don't"--he said, "we just had orders for you not to go to Korea, that you had been reassigned to the such and such a wing at Eielson Air Force Base in Fairbanks, Alaska.  And you are being held here until we get enough of the group that is going to Alaska together to give you arctic training, arctic survival training."  And he said, "that's the reason you've been here for two and a half months."  Well, I--you know, that shocked me.  Well, I discovered that my parents [Reverend King Virgil Cheek and Lee Ella Williams Cheek] were very active in the Democratic Party.  And the person who was the Chairman of the Committee that conducted the Watergate Hearings, [U.S.] Senator [Sam] Ervin [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Sam Ervin, yeah.
Speaker 1: was on the [U.S.] Supreme Court [sic, Ervin never served on the U.S. Supreme Court].  And my parents went to him--they first went to Dr. [Shane] Taylor, who was shocked to discover that I was in the Air Force.  He said, "that boy's eyes are such that he got no business being in the Air Force."  But he, along with my mother and father, got in touch with Judge [Senator] Ervin.  And they got in touch with somebody at the Pentagon and they changed my orders from the Fifth Air Force in Seoul, Korea to this place Elmendorf--I mean Fairbanks, Alaska.  The day I shipped out, I stayed on a ship nine days on the Pacific [Ocean] going to Alaska.  When I got to Alaska, we got off the ship at Anchorage [Alaska].  It was sixty [degrees Fahrenheit] below zero.  And I said, "I wish to hell my mother and father had stayed out of my business" (laughs).  And, you know, 'cause, and I was, so far as I was concerned, you know, I'd keep myself from getting killed in Korea.  There weren't many air people--not many people in the Air Force were being killed anyway.  And most of the folk being killed in Korea were, you know, infantry soldiers in the [U.S.] Army.  But, I, you know, I stayed in Alaska, and my future wife [Celestine Williams] was graduating that year.  And we had decided that she was coming to Alaska.  And we were gonna get married in Alaska.  It shows you how, when you're eighteen, nineteen years old, the kind of thinking, crazy stuff you can dream about or think about or even--I mean--contemplate doing.  They had on the, right on the outside of the base, a trailer camp for soldiers--I mean airmen who had their wives.  And so I paid the rent.  I reserved a trailer camp.  Now, this is the crazy part.  We were gonna get married in Alaska.  We were going to take a trip, go all the way as far north as we could and rent a canoe and cruise back to Fairbanks on the Yukon River.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) This was summertime, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: That was gonna be our honeymoon.  Well, you see, in Fairbanks, Alaska, the seasons go like this.  You have four months of twenty-four-hour darkness and four months of twenty-four-hour daylight and four months of half and half.  So we were going to get married in June of the year, where we would have twenty-four-hour daylight.  And so we were gonna, you know--the crazy part to me now, is that our honeymoon was going to be cruising in a canoe down the Yukon River.
Story_ID: 4850
Speaker 1: So what happened?  How did--
Speaker 2: My wife's [Celestine Williams Cheek] mother had a stroke.  And I remember the day that the letter came, telling me that she [Celestine] could not come to Alaska because of her mother's condition.  And we would have to postpone the marriage.  That day, I decided to get out of the [U.S.] Air Force.  So I sat up in bed all night and plotted a course of action to get out of the Air Force.  Being in communications, I knew all the regulations of the Air Force.  And I knew about the regulation about a physical condition, EPTS, Existing Prior to Service, that you could use as a basis for getting an honorable discharge for the convenience of the government.  So I decided that the next morning, I was gonna go to roll call, sick call, with a complaint that I was going blind.  And I was assigned to, you know, in communications, I had flight status, and I had to sit in a little cubicle at the tail of a B-26 or a B-29 [airplanes] with all these lights and so forth.  And I told the flight surgeon that these lights were interfering with my eyes.  Well, he would look in my eye with the ophthalmoscope and what he saw baffled the daylights out of him 'cause he'd never seen anything like he saw in my eyes.  And with, you know, with the kind of lights they had to look deep into your eye and so forth.  And I knew how the Air Force worked, that the Air Force does not make a decision except at the command level.  So I went to him for about three or four days, and he said, "look, I'm gonna send you to a higher command."  So he sent me to Elmendorf Air Force Base, which was also in Fairbanks [Alaska].  And I stayed there for a day, and they said, "we're gonna have to ship you to headquarters and let them, you know, decide what to do because we ain't never seen anything like this before."  And I went to Anchorage [Alaska] where the command of the Air Force in Alaska was located.  And I never will forget, there was this young Captain, an eye doctor, and took one look in my eyes with the big lights.  And he said, "excuse me a minute.  I've got to go to the library" (laughs).  And he went to the library, and he looked, and I mean he'd just examined my eyes.  And see, and I knew what he was seeing because I, you know, had drawn pictures, had--Dr. [Shane] Taylor had drawn pictures of the, you know, of the way my eyes would look when you looked in them.  And they--I stayed there in the hospital for about a month.  And they decided to ship me back to the United States.  And I landed at the command headquarters in Houston, Texas and was immediately taken into the office of a full Colonel.  And he just sat there and looked at me.  And he said, "you know, anybody who has worked as hard as you have to get out of the Air Force, needs to be out."  And he said, "I'm reading your record here.  And he said, "it, you know, it's strange that your eyesight has gone down gradually from 20/10 to something like 20/60."  I think I'd overdone it.  And he said, "and I'm gonna tell you.  You know, we made a lot of investment in you."  He said, "but I," he said, "I don't think we're gonna get out of you what we have invested in you because of whatever the reason is that you are putting forth such an effort to get out of the Air Force."  I mean he knew from the reading the record that I was telling a lie about going blind.  I mean he knew enough about the cataracts operations [from Cheek's childhood] and the effect of the lights in that little room that I had to sit in.  And he, it would have just been a, you know, a reportable medical paper if all that was true.  And he said, "now, tomorrow," he said, "I'll tell you, I'm gonna make a deal with you, Corporal Cheek."  He said "starting tomorrow morning at 0600, we're gonna put you through a battery of tests.  And if you see as well on these tests as you saw when you came in this man's Air Force," he said "I will sign the orders for you to get an honorable discharge."  He said, "but I want to tell you, one false move, one, in any area of your test, if you do not measure up to what the record shows was the case when you were admitted," he said, "there ain't no deal."  I stayed awake all that night.  I did not sleep because I didn't know whether I could trust this guy.  And I started thinking that, hell, I, you know, I'm getting ready to blow, you know, half a year's work to get out of this man's Air Force.  If I go down there tomorrow and I, read on that chart and see 20/10 and I, you know, and on the record it says that my sight has been lowered to 20/60.  But I decided, but he also may not be bluffing.  He may be telling the truth that, you know, if I see as well as I saw when I came in, that I'll get a discharge.  So I labored all night.  I tossed and turned as to, you know, did I want to take that chance.  So, I--that morning I just went on down there and, and I, I read 20/10.  My peripheral vision was perfect.  I mean everything came out to be perfect the way it was when I went into the Air Force.  They also sent me to the psychiatrist, that he hadn't told me was gonna be part of the deal.  But the psychiatrist, you know, in their write-up said that, this man has an obsession with getting out, and he's gonna go AWOL [Absent Without Leave] or something, and he is determined to get out.  After all of--after the psychiatrist's tests, and he's--you know, I went back to this Colonel's office.  And he sat and just stared at me.  And he said, "um-hum, just what I thought."  And he picked up his pen and signed the order, granting me a discharge.  I'm gonna tell you, they gave me so much money, I, I thought that I was the richest person.  I went out and bought 3 suits for catching the plane to come home.
Story_ID: 4851
Speaker 1: I got as a result of the [U.S.] Air Force, I did two--I did a whole year of my college in the service.  They had what they called USAFI, United States Armed Forces Institute Program, which is one of the best programs in the world, where you could go to college through correspondence, and get full credits.  So I took courses that were offered from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] that Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] gave me credit for.  So I did an entire year of my college while I was in the Air Force.  And when I got discharged, I didn't have to spend, I mean I had an entire semester where I just had one or two courses to take.  But I came out and two years later, you know, I got married on the fourteenth of June, 1953 [to Celestine Williams Cheek].  And we just had our fiftieth wedding anniversary a few weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, so when you got out,--
Speaker 1: Well, I got out and went back to college [Shaw University] and, and I was a year late because I, you know, I had to have the semester of work that still had to be done.  And Shaw did not give diplomas, you know, in the middle of the year.  So I had to wait an entire year to get my diploma.  So I graduated in the Class of '55 [1955].  But I, I had my, I had my wife that I, you know, that I could not marry in Alaska.  And that was the important thing to me.  But I came back, and I became editor of the [news]paper.
Story_ID: 4852
Speaker 1: But during college [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], when I came back, I got expelled again.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you manage that, now?
Speaker 1: Well, this time, I was guilty.  I was editor of the, of the Shaw 'Journal' [newspaper].  And we had a President, William R. Strassner, who was just no do--no good, just absolute--I, you know, the school was going nowhere, faculty discontent all over the place.  And so we had just got together one day and decided we were gonna strike.  Well, what provoked it was, they had a policy that women could not ride in cars with men.  And they had caught these four senior, senior girls in a car with their boyfriends, just before graduation.  And they expelled them.  I mean the president expelled--it didn't have no--you didn't have any such thing as disciplinary committees and so forth.  The president could expel you with the signing of his name.  He, you'd go in his office.  He'd tell you "you're out, you're out."
Speaker 2: Now, what was the President's name at Shaw?
Speaker 1: William R. Strassner.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Strassner?
Speaker 1: S-T-R-A-S-S-N-E-R.  Well, you know, he expelled the ten, there were ten of us that were expelled [for starting the strike].  We were the leaders.  And we also were the brightest, among the brightest students on campus.  And, you know, he expelled us in such a way, they put letters under our door at thee o'clock in the morning, informing us that, if by, by noontime or something like that, the next day, if classes had not resumed, we were expelled.  We rang the school bell at six o'clock [AM] and summoned all the students--whenever they heard the bell, they knew that was our signal for them to come to the auditorium.  And we read them the letter.  That solidified the student body even more than we ever could have done.  It also solidified the faculty that were with us.  And we met with the Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees, who reinstated us.  They overruled the president.  And I mean after they looked at our records, said, they told him, "you can't expel these people."  And I remember talking to Dr. Edward Poteat, who was chairman of the Executive Committee, who was pastor of the, the largest white Baptist church in Raleigh.  And he said, "we know your complaints about Dr. Strassner are legitimate and, in due course, we will take care of them."  Well, that year [1955] I graduated and they always had a receiving line after Commencement.  And the graduates would come through and the speaker at Commencement would be next to the president, the president's wife and the president--the speaker.  And they would, you know, congratulate you. And, and so when I came through Mrs. Strassner said to--she, you know, reached past her husband and said to the Commencement speaker who was Dr. Fred Patterson, who was President of Tuskegee University Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama] at the time, said "here was the young man who thinks that he is the president."  And that's the way she introduced me to Dr. Patterson.  Well, eight years later, I went back as president.
Speaker 2: That's amazing.  And you were the youngest president ever at Shaw?
Speaker 1: Yes. Thirty years old.  Two years out of graduate school, never administered a thing in my life, thought that the president of a university had all the power in the world, had so much power that he could expel the Board [of Trustees], so I did.
Story_ID: 4853
Speaker 1: Okay, I was in, in line one day for dinner--
Speaker 2: Now, you're telling the story now of how you met Celestine [Williams Cheek, Cheek's wife]--
Speaker 1: How I met Celestine, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, this is like a diversion from what we were discussing before, but let's just take this--
Speaker 1: Yes, because this is going backwards to the year 1950, my freshman year in college [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina], second semester.  I had two roommates, both of whom unfortunately, are dead now.  Charles Coleman and Ralph Grooms.  We were standing in line to go through the cafeteria, you know, to get our food at the cafeteria table.  Ralph was in front me, Charles Coleman was behind me.  And I looked out, as I was in line, and, and I saw this pretty hair, with this long, black hair, you know.  She was the right complexion for my daddy at least.  And a voice said to me just as clear as you would say, "that's your wife."  And, and I said, "Ralph, what, what did you say?"  He said, "I didn't say anything."  And I turned to Charles Coleman, and I said, "Charles, what did you say to me just now?"  He said, "I haven't said anything either."  I said, well--I said, "listen, one of y'all said something to me about that girl sitting over there."  And Ralph said, "no, no."  And Charles said, "no, no, we"--he said, "I"--I said, "do you y'all know her?"  They said, "oh, sure we know her," said, "her name is Celestine Williams."  And I said, "well"--I went on through the line and Charles--Ralph Grooms was in front.  And so he went to the table where she was because she, the other people who had been sitting with her had finished their dinner and had gotten up and gone.  So there were three chairs left.  And we sat down.  And Ralph said, introduced us.  And he said, "you know, there's somebody at this table that is interested in you, and it ain't me."  And Charles Coleman said, "well, it ain't me either."  And that left me.  And so I didn't say anything except that we just kept looking at each other.  And they eventually got up and they finished their meal and left.  And I walked her to the dormitory, and that's when they--that's how the love affair got started.  But I still was dating Gloria [Moore], my freshman girlfriend in the daytime.  And Celestine was a junior, and I could date her, you know, she could stay out evenings and I could walk her from the library and do all kinds of things that you couldn't do with a freshman.  So that's how that happened.
Story_ID: 4854
Speaker 1: And, you know, as a digression, I have two children, one whose now a physician and the other one is a computer engineer.  My daughter got married and stayed married less than a year.  And my son is in the process of getting his third divorce.  Now, both of them gave us, they invited a 120 people on my son's estate in, in Upper Marlboro, Maryland.  They had a big tent, and they invited 120 people on the fourteenth of June for our [fiftieth] wedding anniversary.  All my cabinet [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.], except one member who was in the Virgin Islands, were reunited.  They all came, the former faculty members and everything.  And, you know, and I thought about we've been--here we are celebrating our fiftieth wedding anniversary and here's--you know, if parents are supposed to set an example for their children, we have set one.  But, you know, they didn't--this is one example that didn't take.
Speaker 2: What do you think the difference is?
Speaker 1: I'm afraid that, that today--my daughter is too much--well, her mother says that she's too much like me and that ain't no man gonna take her bossing him around (laughs), the way I let her boss me, you know, and so forth, that she's too independent minded.  See, and that's another story there that she was supposed to be dead at the age of fourteen.  But she's now a physician.  And we have the Mayo Clinic [medical treatment center, Rochester, Minnesota] to thank for that.
Story_ID: 4855
Speaker 1: So she [Cheek's daughter Janet Cheek] was sick when she was young--
Speaker 2: She was born with transposition of the great vessels, which is a condition that you're not supposed to live with.  I mean you--most babies born that way are born dead.  She was born that way.  We discovered it when she was nine months old.  We took her to, to Duke [University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina] and they confirmed it with the catherization that she had transposition.  They said the optimum age to operate was the age of four.  And they could not do corrective surgery, but they could do palliative surgery.  And I said, "well, then I'm gonna take her to Johns Hopkins [University Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland]."  And they said, "Dr. Cheek, it's not necessary to take her to Johns Hopkins because Johns Hopkins is coming to Duke."  And I said, "what do you mean?"  They said, "who are you gonna see at Johns Hopkins?"  I said, "I'm gonna see the person that trained under Dr."--and I called his name, the guy who invented the procedure that they were gonna do.  And they said, "well, he's coming to Duke as chairman of surgery next month."  Dr. David Sabiston.  And we--when she became four, we had to--had him do the operation.  He followed her from the time she was nine months old until she was four.  And he did the, did the surgery and the next morning, called me on the phone, and I could tell from his voice that something had gone wrong.  And I was president of Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] then and he said, Dr. Cheek, you and Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek need to get over here because we have a--Janet has developed a complication that is very, very serious.  And we went over and they sat us down and told us that in doing the anastomosis in connecting the subclavian artery to the pulmonary artery to shunt the blood so she could get more oxygenated blood, that it was always a guess as to how large to make the surgery, the shunt or how small to make it.  And that Dr. Sabiston had simply made it too large.  And her left lung, in reacting to the, this flow of blood, had hyper-tensed and she had pulmonary hypertension.  And Dr. Sabiston said to me, he said, "but the thing that bothers us, that we cannot understand is," he said, "it--when something happens in one lung, it happens in the other.  And she has unilateral pulmonary hypertension."  And he said, "I have called all my colleagues at Johns Hopkins."  He said, "I've called John--out to Houston [Texas] where [Dr. Michael] DeBakey is," and he said, "and nobody has ever heard of a person with a Taussig Shunt developing hypertension and it only happens in one lung."  And he said, "but the problem is Dr. Cheek is that, we can't do anything about it"--said that Janet, when she gets to be about fourteen or fifteen, she will be dead because her, you know, lung will have given out.  And her heart will too.  And they said, "we are awfully sorry."  And that's the--see, you know, that they, what Duke did a few weeks ago [in 2003] was written up in 'Time' magazine and the 'New York Times' [newspaper] and everything when they--the Mexican girl that died from the, you know, transplant that they did wrong, well, see this never got reported.  So we, you know, we decided that, okay, this is something we just have to live with.  So when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], two years later, we got--on our staff was a, a pediatric cardiologist, and we put Janet under his care.  And as she got older, she started getting worse and her fingers clubbed badly.  And she was blue, blue around the lips and nail beds and everything.  So I called Dr. "What-ma-jig" into my office one day, and I said, "listen, Celestine and I have decided that we're gonna take Janet to the Mayo Clinic [medical research center, Rochester, Minnesota]."  And he said, "okay," he said because I--he said, "she is deteriorating rapidly."
Story_ID: 4856
Speaker 1: We carried her [Janet Cheek, Cheek's daughter] to Mayo Clinic [medical research center, Rochester, Minnesota] in August of 1978.  And we spent a week.  And they had--and the Mayo Clinic is a fantastic place.  That's--that is the way medicine is supposed to be practiced.  They evaluated Janet and they sat us down after the end of that week.  And they said, "Dr. and Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek [Cheek's wife], dealing with Janet's heart is a cakewalk," said "since Dr. [David] Sabiston did the shunt back in nineteen so-and-so," said, "we've come a long way."  He said, "we now know how to correct transposition of the great vessels," said, "we can take care of that," said that--"we can do that with our eyes closed."  He said, "but we found a problem though that we didn't know existed."  And we said, "what's that?"  They said "her right lung has never been used.  And we don't know what is going to happen when we correct the transposition situation and open up the right lung," because they're gonna completely close the left one; that the, the right lung for fourteen years has never had any blood flowing through it because it's hyper-tense, it has a stenosis, which means the vessel is closed up.  Said "we're gonna put a valve in there that, it's a Hancock valve"--which I thought was named after somebody who invented it.  It was named after a pig, it's a Hancock farms that raises pigs and they use there valves for the human beings.  And he said, "we'll put this Hancock valve in there, but when the blood starts flowing through," he said, "the lung might take it and it might not." Said, "if it rejects it, then that's the end of the ballgame.  She'll die on the table."  So I said, "well, what are you saying?"  He said, "well, I'm saying that she's got an 80 percent chance of not surviving the operation. But within a year, it's 100 percent certainty that you'll be burying her."  So my wife and I looked at each other and we said, "well, I tell you what, we gonna put the situation to Janet."  I said, "do you mind telling Janet everything you've told us, and we'll let her make the decision."  He said, "no," said, "I think that's a --she's old enough.  She's fourteen."  And so the team went in and drew diagrams and showed her everything that they were going to do and told her about the right lung problem.  And she said, "fine, go ahead."  So we set the operation for October of that year.  And we went back in October.  I carried my Vice President for Health Affairs [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with me so he could see how medicine was practiced, that the--at the Mayo Clinic, they've got a--it's a very religious institution.  They've got a sign up over an arch that says, "we treat, but God heals."  They don't take any--they said, "we don't consider ourselves healing anybody.  We treat, but God does the healing."  At the Mayo Clinic, you sign no paper, you know, protecting the hospital.  And I found out why.  But Janet went through the operation; it's the longest eight hours I ever spent in my life 'cause, you know, they would come in after--I mean everybody's got patients in the Operating Room.  And they come in and call your name and you go up and they take you in a room and, you know.  And some people come out crying and some come out, you know, happy, and you don't know what the circumstances are gonna be.  And we sit there, and you wait and you wait and you wait.  And they came out and got us and carried us in the room.  And the first they, the surgeon said, said, "Janet came through beautifully."  We went in and saw our daughter, we didn't even know what complexion she was.  I mean I--all these years we, you know, we couldn't tell her complexion.  She was just as pink and pretty as--and, you know, nail beds, everything, perfect.  She got released from the hospital a week earlier than she was supposed to have been released.  And her case was reportable.  It was, you know, printed in one of the [medical] journals as, you know, one of the, "another Mayo Miracle," that they had performed.  And that was in 1978.  And she had decided to, you know, that she--she had been a very religious girl.  And after her operation, it went the opposite direction.  And she's now an agnostic.  She said that God sent her into the world with this messed up condition with her heart, you know, see everything was on the wrong side, I forgot to tell you that.  She has dextrocardia, the, the heart is on the right side rather than the left, the liver is over here, rather than over here.  And she said "but man corrected it."  And so she decided that she was gonna become a physician so she could do for other people what had been done for her.  So she's in Chicago [Illinois] today, at the second day of her examinations for board certification [American Board of Medical Specialties] in Internal Medicine.  And she took the first set of exams yesterday and the second set, and last set today.
Story_ID: 4857
Speaker 1: But we were at the point where you had finished at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and you--before you went to graduate school, it was eight years before you became president [of Shaw University].  And what--did you go to graduate school right away after you--
Speaker 2: I had decided that I was going to go to either [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] or Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana]--two of the schools that I had taken [correspondence] courses from when I was in the [U.S.] Air Force and get a Ph.D in Sociology.  And--but I got a job that year, that summer at a migrant camp in Pennsylvania.  And that experience convinced me that I should go to divinity school.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 2: It was 1955.  And I applied to Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York] because Mordecai Johnson [minister, educator] had gone there, Rochester, Colgate Rochester, Howard Thurman [minister, author, civil rights activist] had gone to Colgate Rochester.  All of the great guys that I knew had gone there.  And also they had the tradition of the social gospel--Walter Raushenbush's [clergyman] great philosophy.  And they had a policy of not having more than five black students in the school at one time.  And they had already--this is in the middle of the summer now, and they had admitted their class way back in April.  I had said on my application, I wrote a letter with it, that I was not interested in the ministry to become a minister, that I was interested in becoming a professor.  And I was requesting them to exempt me from all of the courses that were required for ordination and let me substitute courses in Greek and, you know, Hebrew and so forth for those courses, and, you know, Classical Philosophy and so forth because I planned to go on and get a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: But, now--
Speaker 2: And so they admitted me as the sixth black student, only because I did not require to be placed in a church to go through the practice of the ministry because they only had five black churches that cooperated with Colgate Rochester in servicing the students.  But it's very interesting that they only took five--now this is the most liberal theological school in the United States, more liberal than Harvard [Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Andover Newton [Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] or [University of] Chicago [Divinity School, Chicago, Illinois], that they had a quota of five students. I got in because of my grades and so forth and because I did not require a church to, for externship.
Story_ID: 4858
Speaker 1: Okay, now, but you also, you came in with already quite a bit of training in the Classics, philosophy and so forth after having read all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I--that was a snap for me.
Speaker 1: I would guess.
Speaker 2: I mean, and more so once I--when I went to graduate school because that's where I did Classical philosophy.  So that, you know, that was, you know--I, at Colgate Rochester [Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York], I wrote extensive term papers, I'm talking about 120, 140-page term papers.  And I was the first Negro, as we called them at the time, to be elected to the Colgate Rochester Society of Fellows.  So I got the fellowship.  And I was supposed to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], that's where I had been admitted.  And about five members of our faculty were graduates of the University of Chicago, they had gotten their doctorates from there.  And at that time, the University of Chicago's faculty was in a state of disarray.  And they took out their grievances among each other on their doctoral candidates.  And they met with me after they had elected me, that next morning, they said, "one of the provisions that we made in electing you, Jim, is that you cannot use the fellowship at the University of Chicago."  And it had been my dream because I was gonna go there for a Ph.D in sociology.  And that was my end.  That just, had (unclear)--just destroyed all my hopes.  Well, I wanted to do a double-major, so to speak, in theological, in graduate school.  I wanted to specialize in Classical philosophy and historical theology.  And they called Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], couldn't do it at Harvard.  I had to make a choice. They called Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], same thing.  I could have done it at Chicago.  Chicago was one of those kind of schools that--. They told me, said, "look, there's one other school on the list that we have not called.  And we're reluctant to call it, to even have you consider it because its reputation among its, among people in Classical philosophy and historical theology is tremendous, but it is not a known university the way Harvard and Yale and Chicago are known."  And I said, "what's the school?"  And they said, "Drew [University, Madison, New Jersey]."  And I said, "Drew, what?"  And, and they said, "Drew University."  And I said, "where is it located?"  And they told me "in Madison, New Jersey."  And I said, "I've never heard of it."  They said, "well, we, we didn't think you had," said, "but they have, they have a better Classical philosophy department and historical theology department than any of the other schools, even better than Chicago or Harvard or Yale."  And they said, you know, "we would agree to your using the fellowship at Drew," said, "and you could do your double major."  So I drove to Madison with my wife [Celestine Williams Cheek].  I met with the Dean.  They didn't have any black students in the graduate school.  And they pointed out to me that they did not have any provisions for graduate students to live on the campus.  And I could not rent any place in Madison, New Jersey because I was a Negro.
Story_ID: 4859
Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, please tell us today's date.
Speaker 2: This is November the sixth, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we--where is shoot taking place?
Speaker 2: This is in the studio at WHUT, Howard's [University, Washington, D.C.] television station.
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Washington, Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 4860
Speaker 1: And we want to resume with your years in graduate school.  Any interesting anecdotes that you wanted to share with us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I, when I went to Drew [University, Madison, New Jersey]--I won't go into why I selected Drew, but they required you to do all of your, your exams that you had to have prior to your matriculation.  And I had to go during the summer and take the exams in Latin and Greek, French and German.  And there was an additional language requirement that they placed on me because of my specialty, and that was Coptic.  And there were only two places that taught Coptic in the United States.  That was at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  So I went to Princeton.  It, you know, so happened I was specializing in a field that--what we at that time called Negro students--did not, you know, normally go into.  And, but I was determined that I was, you know, going to pursue this double degree in Classical philosophy and historical theology.  And during my first year, I had a professor who had been a professor at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], who turned out to be--he was German.  And he had been--we found out later, a Nazi.  And he filed a protest with the dean of the graduate school of my pursuing a degree in that field, that I was not qualified, despite the fact that I had passed all the language examinations and, of course, my committee had approved the prospectus for my dissertation.  And that year my chairman, that summer, my chairman went on an expedition in--some place in Jerusalem, in Israel, and so he wasn't present for this brouhaha, as I call it, of this professor trying to persuade the dean to persuade me to change my specialty to social ethics or something he felt that I could handle, that did not require the language skills that this field required.
Speaker 1: But refresh us again, what was this field?
Speaker 2: Classical philosophy and historical theology.  It was a double major, double specialty, as they called it.  And every day in class, he would recite something in Latin with his German, thick German accent and then point to me to translate.  And this went on for, you know, a semester.  And it so happened that one of my most important professors at Drew was Will Herberg, the famous Jewish philosopher, theologian, who was not a member of my committee, but was one of my principal advisors.  And when the school returned, when the school year resumed, my chairman and so forth were informed, they got together and managed to--I was taking two courses under him, and they told me I should drop one.  And at the end of the year, he gave me an "A minus" on the paper that I had written.  And he just could not bring himself to give me an "A."  And they finally removed him from the faculty.  They said it was the first time that a, a student had caused a professor to be removed.  Well, that's one of the experiences I recall very vividly that caused me to sometimes ponder whether I should continue, you know, to pursue a degree there, but I did.  And I graduated on time, the usual four years and, and went from there to my first job.
Story_ID: 4861
Speaker 1: Now, the interesting thing about that is I was offered a position at Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania.  This was in 1961.  My wife [Celestine Williams Cheek] and I were invited over to Easton, Pennsylvania.  We spent an entire day there being interviewed by the faculty.  And near the end of the day, they told me they had planned for my arrival to have--they were first going to have a, a special kind of convocation to welcome me.  And then they were going to, they wanted me--they designated the church they wanted me to attend--
Speaker 2: This was for a faculty position?
Speaker 1: This is for a faculty position.  They went through a number of things that they had planned for me to do, all kinds of receptions and so forth.  And I asked the dean, you know, "why are you doing this?"  And he said, "well, it is necessary for us to make this witness."  I was going to be their first Negro professor. And he said, "it's necessary for us to make this witness and let the community know what Lafayette College is doing."  I had also been interviewed by Sam Proctor who was the president at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia].  And Sam had asked me to come to Virginia Union, and, you know, I thought that going to Lafayette College would be a better course for my career.  And after listening to them [Lafayette College] talk about all the special arrangements that they had made, were making, I asked them, "do you do this for all of your new assistant professors?"  And they said, "no."  And I said, "well, why are you doing this in my case?"  And that was when they said "it's necessary for us to make this witness."  And I recall--and my wife is sitting here, she will remember this, I told them that I, you know, considered that discrimination--that anything done against me because of my race, I considered discrimination, but I also considered anything done in my favor because of my race was discrimination.  And I turned that job down.  And, of course, they were, you know, white, they didn't understand a Negro turning down a position being offered by a white school.  So I went to little Virginia Union in Richmond, and at a much higher salary, I should say, than they were going to give me at Lafayette.  As a matter of fact, I took the letter from Sam Proctor to George Kelsey, who was the only black professor at Drew [University, Madison, New Jersey].  And he told me that Sam Proctor was offering me more money than he was being paid at Drew.  And he was a full professor.  So I went to Virginia Union, and that's when my career, that's where it started.  And I was there for two years.
Speaker 2: What year was that?
Speaker 1: 1961. And I--the president, Sam Proctor had left.  If--he hired me, but he left and went to A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And the new president, Tom Henderson, gave me his secretary to type my dissertation, which was a very complex document filled with a lot of Greek and, you know, German, French and so forth citations. And I stayed there only two years.
Story_ID: 4862
Speaker 1: And I was asked to come to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  Shaw was about to be closed up.  It was in debt.  It--that coming December it was facing the loss of accreditation and right after I was elected, I--the 'Journal and Guide', which was a very famous black newspaper in the South at that time, the 'Norfolk Journal and Guide,' had it in great big red ink, "Thirty-year old Educator becomes Prexy of Shaw"--to close it--"to bury it."  That was the headline.
Speaker 2: So, Dr. Cheek, you went from a position as the, as faculty member--
Speaker 1: As assistant professor at--
Speaker 2: At Virginia--
Speaker 1: At Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: To President at Shaw.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) President at Shaw, yes.
Speaker 2: That was, that was quite something, quite an accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, as--the first person that I went to see on my way to Memphis.  Memphis, Tennessee was where the Southern Association [of Colleges and Schools, accreditation organization] was meeting and was going to decide what was going to happen to Shaw.  And I decided to go see Dr. [Benjamin Elijah] Mays [preacher, educator].  And I sat in his office, and he said, "Cheek, how old are you?"  And I said, "well, I'm thirty years old, but I'll be thirty-one soon."  He said, "well, that's good." He said, "you're young enough to survive Shaw's downfall."  And, of course, that sent shivers up and down my back.  And, but I asked him to, to do one thing for me, and that was to go before the Commission on Accreditation and ask them to give a young man a chance.  And we talked about that.  And I told him that all I wanted was a year to get the school out of debt and to demonstrate that Shaw was worth surviving.  And he did.  He went to Memphis, and he went before the Commission, and he told them that.  And when they brought me before the Commission, I told them all kinds of things that I had put in motion that were in the process of being done at Shaw.  They--none of which was true.  I just told them, you know, things I had planned to do as though they were already being done.  And so the Commission voted to extend the probation for another year.  But while I was in Memphis, the business manager was with me, and he had been trying to tell me that when we got back to the campus, we had a problem.  And the problem was that the university didn't have any food to feed the students.  The students had gone home for the Christmas holidays.  And I said, "well, you know, we'll just the money, you know, we'll just go buy, you know, get the suppliers to provide the food."  He said, "Dr. Cheek, the [Board of] Trustees didn't tell you everything."  He said, "Shaw doesn't have any credit."  And he said, "we only have $100 in the bank."  Well, that scared the daylights out of me.  I had a new baby on the way, and I was leaving a secure job at the Virginia Union to go to Shaw to take a position that only had $100.  That's all the school had.  And I cannot describe the feeling I had.  I prayed all night and the first thing I did when I got back, my--I got informed while I was in Memphis that my baby daughter had been named--had been born.  And she was--my son's name was James Edward Cheek, and my daughter's name was supposed to have Jamisina Edwardina.  So when I got to the hospital, you know, I went and saw this little girl and I looked in there on the tag.  And the name was Janet Elizabeth Cheek.  And I went in the hospital room and saw Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek [Cheek's wife] and, you know, I said, "you made a mistake--somebody made a mistake.  This baby's name is supposed to be Jamisina Edwardina."  She said, "well, I tell you, I at least kept your initials.  I named her Janet Elizabeth."  And I can't say on tape what she said, but she--but she let me know that her baby was not gonna be named Jamisina Edwardina.  And, you know, it turned out to be all right there.  I learned a long time ago, things you can't do anything about, you don't worry about.  And, but the, the business manager and I took the $100 and, and went to the supermarket and bought bulk stuff, like potatoes and rice and things like--and that's what we had for the students when they returned.
Speaker 2: Do you recall how many students there were enrolled there at the time?
Speaker 1: There were about 600 students at Shaw at that time.
Story_ID: 4863
Speaker 1: But I decided, you know, that we could not raise money to--the school [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] didn't--wasn't in debt but for $300,000, but $300,000 in 1963 was a lot of money.  It doesn't seem like it now, but it was.  And I got a sign painter to create a sign with a thermometer.  And I had at the top "Shaw University's Renaissance Program--Renaissance Development Program" at five million dollars.  And I had at the very bottom, the 300,000 that we needed to raise for--to liquidate the debt.  But my strategy was to raise the money to liquidate the debt as a part of a larger program, a development program.  And Shaw is located right where an intersection, major intersection in Raleigh.  And so people would drive by just to see, you know, how much red was going, you know, on the thermometer.  And we had the first telethon that had ever been had in Raleigh.  It was sponsored by A.J. [Alfred Johnston] Fletcher [businessman, arts advocate], who was a Segregationist, or supposed to have been, with [U.S. Senator] Jesse Helms as the major person in the studio.  And Jesse Helms decided, for reasons that I don't have time to go into now, that while I was a good man, I was too militant.  So he decided that he was going to have an editorial to say something negative about me, just about every other week.
Speaker 2: Jesse Helms was at that time, what was his title?
Speaker 1: He was the vice president of the radio--I mean the, the tobacco network.  And he--I've forgotten what his title was at WRAL [radio station, Raleigh, North Carolina] in Raleigh at that station.
Speaker 2: So this is prior to his--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, prior to his becoming Senator.  And Jesse, Mr. Fletcher sent for me one day to come to his office.  And he said, "Doctor I want to tell you something."  He said, "every editorial that Jesse writes is approved right here at this office, at this desk," and said, "now, here's my deal with you. Whenever Jesse comes in with an editorial about you, I want to have the opportunity to call you and have you come down here and read it.  And if he has gone too far, I want you to tell me, and I'll put it in the trashcan."  And, now, Jesse didn't know that.
Speaker 2: That was unprecedented, wouldn't you say?
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: That was unprecedented, wouldn't you say?
Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely, so far unprecedented, it angered the Washington [D.C.] press corps when I told that story at their, you know--I told them thatat, you know, I was not curtailing freedom of speech.  Freedom of speech was the, you know, the province of the owner of the radio--of the television station.  And if he wanted me to act as a censor, then that was the role that I was gonna play on behalf of the institution that I represented.
Story_ID: 4864
Speaker 1: But the interesting thing about that is that when we finally got things desegregated in Raleigh [North Carolina], [U.S. Senator] Jesse Helms and I would be--would eat lunch occasionally at the S&W Cafeteria.  He was still airing these negative editorials because I had become more than militant then.  That was, you know, when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was killed, I had a confrontation with the police.  I had a .38 [caliber pistol] on my side and a carbine [rifle] on my shoulder.  And I made it clear to the captain of the police with whom I had had cordial relations that if any of his policemen who were lined up across the front of the campus, came on campus, that they might take me away, but I was gonna take some of them.  And, he had his men leave.  Well, people, you know, would come in the S&W and see Jesse and me sitting there talking and laughing.  So somebody asked him one day, said, "how can you, how can you, how--carry on these kinds of editorials against Dr. Cheek and we see you in the S&W Cafeteria, you know, discussing, talking like friends." He said, "well, I'll tell you, there's a reason for that."  He said, "I do the Editorials about Dr. Cheek so he can maintain his credibility with his constituents." There's a lot about Jesse Helms and black people that has not yet been made known, which I plan to do if they ever write my book.  He was not at all the kind of racist that I know about and that I talk about.  He had a totally different, you know, attitude toward us.  I can name names of blacks that he, as [U.S.] Senator, came to their rescue.  And he was one of the best Senators in the United States Senate on constituency relations.
Speaker 2: So I've heard.
Speaker 1: He--but he had develop a persona that required him to maintain a certain political, you know--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Aura.
Speaker 1: Reputation.
Speaker 2: Reputation.
Speaker 1: (Nods for yes).
Story_ID: 4865
Speaker 1: Well, at any rate, when, you know, we got Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] out of debt and at the, at the 100th Anniversary of the school, in 1865 [to 1965], we had--I had--I got the school out of debt in six months, rather than a year.  And we had new buildings going up.  We had a whole new campus planned, that I had hired architects to design.  And the school was really on the move.  I tried to change the name from Shaw University to Shaw College because, you know, it--my view was that a university, that an educational institution ought to be true to itself.  And university was not what we were.  We once were a university when we had a law school, a medical school, pharmacy school, school of education and so forth.  And the alumni raised so much ruckus about changing the name from Shaw University to Shaw College. They talked about college wouldn't rhyme with certain things in alma mater.  I would couldn't find anything in the alma mater that rhymed with "university."  But they had all kinds of reasons why, you know, Shaw University had to remain Shaw University and not Shaw College.
Speaker 2: Dr. Cheek, that's a tremendous achievement, though, to bring the school completely out of debt and turn it around in six months.  What would you attribute that to?
Speaker 1: Well, Mr. [Alfred Johnston 'A.J.'] Fletcher [businessman, arts advocate] had a telethon on a Sunday afternoon, after twelve o'clock [PM], after white church services were over.  Black ones were still going on, but the white ones were out.  He had a telethon.  It started at twelve o'clock and went until, I think nine or ten o'clock [PM] that night.  And we raised all the money that was necessary to get the school out of debt from that telethon.
Story_ID: 4866
Speaker 1: Yes, well, you know, I, I was able to dig the founder [Henry Martin Tupper] up, the founder was buried right in the middle of the campus [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And he--we had planned a new library to go in that location.  And I was able to dig him up and move him and keep in the funeral home for about two years.  And no alumnus, nobody made a peep, nobody objected at all.  Now, he is buried in a much, you know--if he were to see himself how he's laid out now in a sunken garden right beside the new library, he would be delighted.  But it was, I thought it was rather interesting that nobody, you know, fussed or gave any thought to my digging up the founder, but they raised all kinds of ruckus about changing the name [from Shaw University to Shaw College].  So I told the Board [of Trustees], "well, if we cannot, if we cannot change the name to Shaw College, then we're gonna become a university."  And the Board voted to change the departments to schools.  And so we--the, you know, Department of Arts and Sciences became the School of Arts and Sciences.  Communications--I had created a Communications Program, became the School of Communications--
Speaker 2: And this was in what year?
Speaker 1: This was from, I--the years are gonna get messed up if I try to, you know--
Speaker 2: Not '67 [1967] though.
Speaker 1: No, this was from '64 [1964] through--see, I tried to do, to change the name around '64 [1964].  Sixty-five [1965] was the year we had the 100th anniversary of the school, and that was the year I was inaugurated.  And I had already built my--the first new building at Shaw.  And we were on our way to building, you know, the whole thing that the architects had designed for us.  And I had the--we got them to name several of the programs, schools, and I was going to reopen the School of Medicine.  And one evening at Cappahosic [Virginia], I was telling a group of presidents my plans for Shaw, and that we were going to--that there was a necessity for another black medical school in the South, and that I was going to reopen the school of--the Leonard School of Medicine.  And I was going to--[The University of] North Carolina [at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] was considering closing the Law School at North Carolina college.  And Bill Friday [president of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill] became a Trustee at Shaw, and we were having discussions about our acquiring the library because for a law school all you need is a first-rate faculty and a first-rate library and that, you know, you don't have to equipment and all that stuff, and you've got a law school.  We were going to have all of the professional schools that Shaw had once had.  And I started looking for--because Shaw is in downtown Raleigh, and is landlocked.  It can't expand very much.  And we had acquired all the land that we could acquire at that time.  So I started looking for land elsewhere.  And we bought twenty acres of a ranch right outside of the city limits of Raleigh, that had a lake on it.  It had a house.  We converted the house into a faculty club.  And the architects were designing the president's house on a hill overlooking the lake.  And I was going to acquire at least 200 acres from the farmers out there who were, you know, at the right price, who were willing to sell.  And the city had agreed to expand the city limits.  And that was going to be Shaw's, the liberal arts, you know, component.  And the downtown area was going to be the professional part of Shaw.  We had a press conference in 1969 where I announced a $200 million fundraising campaign.  You know I was crazy in 1969, $200 million.  But by that time Shaw had--we had been written up in, you know, 'Time' magazine and we had gotten national exposure.  The school was being talked about.  The student population had increased 1,300 students.  It had doubled.
Story_ID: 4867
Speaker 1: We [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] had an International Studies Program.  We were, you know, involved with the, with the Saudis and the other Arab countries.
Speaker 2: How'd you forge that relationship?
Speaker 1: I had on our faculty a person who was a Jordanian and whose wife was a Lebanese.  And we just started talking about the importance of, of black American students getting to know more about the Middle East.  And so we started the program with the, with all of the Middle Eastern countries participating, except Israel.  And I got a letter one day from the Ambassador from Israel informing me that he understood that Shaw had a Mid-Eastern Studies program.  And he demanded that Israel, and I mean demanded, that Israel be included on the itinerary that we sent students to--because Israel was a part of the Middle East.  Well, I can't tell you what I wrote him back, but I, you know, I indicated, Shaw was a private institution and we do what we damn well wanted to do.  I had a similar experience at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] where I couldn't use that kind of language or tell a person that.  And we didn't use Mid-East, we used the name Islamic Studies, rather than Mid-East Studies, but that came as a recommendation from the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia.  But that's much, years later.
Story_ID: 4868
Speaker 1: Well at any rate, the--Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] at that time was blossoming and it was, you know, it was really going places.  They were building a new house for the president and so forth.  And one day I got a call--around May--from a Judge Richardson.  And, you know, my secretary buzzed me and told me there was Judge Richardson on the phone.  And I asked her, you know, "well, what is his connection and so forth?"  But she couldn't tell me.  And I said, "well, Roberta, it's probably, you know, some justice of the peace."  I said, "you know, we've got a lot students whose fathers are justices of the peace."  They call themselves judges and so forth.  And I said, "I won't take the call."  I'll, you know, pass it up.  Well, the, Judge Richardson kept calling, and he called one day and said, "this is Judge Richardson on the phone again," said, "don't you want to take this man's call?"  So I picked up the phone, and he said that "I'm Judge Richardson, I'm Scovel Richardson, and I'm Chairman of the Board [of Trustees] of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And, and the Board [of Trustees] has decided that you are going to be the next president of Howard."  And I said, "well, you know, Judge Richardson, I appreciate your calling me and telling me that, but I have no intention of being the president of Howard."  And he said, "well," he said, "listen, we're having a meeting at the New York [New York] Hilton [hotel]," said "the search committee," on a Saturday, sometime--at the--a couple of weeks from then.  And he said, "at least you could come up here and talk to us about black colleges," said, "you're running all around the country talking about the necessity to save black colleges".  And I said, "you know, Judge Richardson, every time I pick up the paper, I see nothing but students at Howard rioting, burning down the campus."  And I said, "you've got nothing but turmoil up there at Howard.  And all I've got down here is tranquility."  And I said," I don't need to, I don't need to come to Howard at all."  And I said, "and I'm not coming and, you know"--and I said, "so far as your meeting is concerned, I can tell you what I think about black colleges, you know, on the phone."  He said, "well, listen, we have thirteen members of the committee, and I think they'd like to hear directly from you what you have to say."  He said, "and it's on a Saturday."  He got real indignant.  He said, "it's on a Saturday, and we're gonna pay your way," and he said, "at least you could come up here and talk to us."
Story_ID: 4869
Speaker 1: So I went, and I walked in that room on the tenth floor of the New York [New York] Hilton [hotel], and standing over in the corner with his back to me, was somebody I recognized.  He had a bald head and had on a turtleneck shirt.  And I said, "that looks like Dr. Spaulding."  Dr. Spaulding was chairman of Shaw's [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] Board of Trustees.  But he also was a Trustee at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And after a few minutes, he, you know, turned around and came over and greeted me and, you know, looking down at the floor.  Well, I talked to them for about four hours.  And Judge [Scovel] Richardson [Chairman of Howard University's Board of Trustees] said, "well, let's have some lunch."  And so they, you know, they set the table for lunch.  There were about thirteen or fifteen members of the board, very distinguished group of people.
Speaker 2: These are board members from Howard?
Speaker 1: These were board members at Howard, who were members of the presidential search committee.  Judge Richardson said this to me, he said, he said, "you know, we have interviewed ninety-some people for this job.  And some we've interviewed more than once," and he said, "everybody we've interviewed is a mechanic.  And we're looking for an engineer."  And he said, you know, "we wanted to talk to you a long time ago, but Dr. Spaulding wouldn't let us."  And he said, "when we finished our last interview, he finally--we kept him up all night, and he called us at three o'clock in the morning and told us to go ahead and give you a call."  And we ate lunch, and I told him, I had to go.  I said, "listen, I've got a speaking engagement in Roanoke, Virginia, and I've got to leave to make that engagement."  I said, "it's been nice talking to you gentlemen."  I said, "and, you know y'all have a nice day."  And Scovel said, "well, listen, we are available, if you are."  I said, "well, you know, Judge, I don't make those kind of decisions without talking to my wife [Celestine Williams Cheek]."  Well, he put on the plane with me Howard Stone Anderson, Minister of First Congregational Church in Washington [D.C.], a church where Howard had had a strong connection.  And he came, you know, went on the plane and talked to me about Howard.  But the thing that really bothered me in that meeting was Herman Wells, the legendary chancellor of the University of Indiana [Bloomington, Indiana], who was a member of Howard's board, had been for a long time, said to me in the meeting, he said, "you know, if I were a thirty-six-year old black educator, with the things that I have read about you and listening to you talk, and I was asked to come to Howard," he said, "they couldn't--nobody could keep me from doing it."  He said "because everything that you are talking about doing at Shaw," said, "you can do at Howard because everything is already there.  And you can do it faster, better, it would be more effective because it would reach more people.  It's in the nation's capital and so forth."  Well, I thought about that, but that didn't, you know, move me at all.  And I went on back home and went--did my speech and went on back home.  And Judge Richardson called me and asked me to come to the campus to meet him on a Tuesday, and I told him, "okay."  I had never seen Howard.  I didn't even know what it looked like, all I knew was the name.  And he got to Howard, got to the--we were supposed to have met at the Washington airport at, you know, that Tuesday morning.  And I didn't--I wasn't there.  And so he called his office to find out, you know, if they'd heard from me, and the secretary said, "I have a letter here from Dr. Cheek," said, "I think it's from him.  It's from the office of the president."  So he said, "open it and read it to me."  And she read it and I had told him that, you know, there was just no way I was going to leave Shaw.  So he called Shaw, called my office, talked to Roberta, my administrative assistant, told her to have me pick him up at the Raleigh [North Carolina] airport at 4:30, that, that he was, you know, arriving in Raleigh at 4:30.  And she came in and told me, and I said, "well, we just have to pick him up then."  So he came in the office, and he, you know, looked all around, went into my conference room, got photographs of the new campus plan and got my literature, you know, I saw him pick all this stuff up, tucking it in his briefcase.  Well, he said, "is there some place we can eat?"  I said, "we're gonna eat at the president's house."  He said, "no, no," said, "isn't there some place we can eat?"  I said, "sure, "I said, I--"I have a restaurant that I, that I enjoy."  And we had just, you know, desegregated the restaurants.  So I made reservations, and we went out there.  He spent the entire evening talking to Mrs. Cheek.  He said, one word to me the whole evening at dinner, talking to Mrs. Cheek about what a great opportunity Howard was and so forth, that he'd done all the talking to me that he felt was necessary.  Well, we put him on the plane the next day and sent him on back to, you know, to Raleigh, without any commitment.
Story_ID: 4870
Speaker 1: I was at my house in Greensboro, North Carolina, upstairs in my bedroom, tying my necktie, getting ready to go deliver the commencement address at Lincoln Junior High School [Greensboro, North Carolina].  And the Today Show [television program on NBC] was on with Frank McGee and Barbara Walters.  And I had my back to the television, but I heard this announcer say, "we interrupt this program to bring you a special announcement.  We have--NBC [National Broadcasting Company] has just learned that the next president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] is thirty-six-year old president of Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina], Dr. James E. Cheek."  You talking about somebody who almost had a stroke.  Well, you know, they had me, they knew that if they leaked that story, it would compromise my staying at Shaw, that people would raise questions about my commitment because they would have to know that Howard couldn't make that statement without having had discussions with me.  And they knew that if I had had discussions, then I, you know, had been contemplating going to Howard.
Speaker 2: But didn't that put you in jeopardy with your Board [of Trustees]?
Speaker 1: At, at Shaw.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm talking about, and that's what they knew.  They knew that that--and that's the reason they did it, because they knew then that I would have no choice, but to come to Howard.  And so there I was.  I, that--when I got to the school where I was to deliver the commencement address, everybody was all excited, you know, because their commencement speaker was not only the president of Shaw, but the next president of Howard, the capstone and all this nonsense.  Well, at any rate, I, you know, I finally resigned from Shaw's board--Shaw's presidency, and went to Howard.  I--and it's a good thing I carried some of my stationery with me because I was sitting in my office, in the office at Howard, when the secretary came in and said, "you know, we have a board meeting coming up next week.  And the chairman just called me to remind me that there's some unfinished business."  And I said, "what is that?"  And they said, "you know, they have to have a letter from you accepting this position."  So I, you know, reached in my briefcase, and gave the stationery to my secretary and I wrote out a letter accepting the job as, you know, very simple.  "I accept the position of president of Howard"--I backdated it and so forth.  So that's how I got there.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) What a story, what a story, Dr. Cheek.
Speaker 1: That's how I got there.  There's more to it than that, but that's the essence of what happened.
Story_ID: 4871
Speaker 1: Were you probably the youngest president at [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: No, I was the same age that Mordecai Johnson [minister, educator] was. And that's a story in itself.
Speaker 1: And he is, who?  Tell us--fill us in.
Speaker 2: He was the first black president of Howard.  And when I got to Howard, I discovered that he had not set foot on Howard's campus for nine years during the time that his successor was president.  And that photograph that I showed you was the photograph that was taken at the first reception I had, a black-tie reception, that I went to Mordecai's house that morning and [Dr. James] Nabrit's [former president of Howard University] house later that day and told them that both of them had to be there.  They had not spoken to each other since he was--since Dr. Nabrit was made president.  Now, that story is not known.  And that's also part of what's in my book too.  But that's a story in itself, that--see, people at Howard don't even know--the people that know about what happened are dead. I can't think of a single person who's now, who is alive who was on the Board [of Trustees] when I became president and who told me what happened when Dr. Johnson retired and the board informed him that they were going to name Dr. Nabrit president.
Speaker 1: What is his full name?
Speaker 2: Dr. James Nabrit. Dr. Nabrit had been dean of the [Howard University] Law School, a very eminent, you know, scholar of the law, pioneer in the Civil Rights Movement.  He wrote the first course in civil rights law that was taught at Howard.  And at the time he was secretary of the University.  And Dr. Johnson, they told me, when he was informed, preached for three hours to the Board [of Trustees], that he got down on his knees--if you knew Dr. Johnson, you can envision, he--Dr. Johnson should have been an actor--he got down on his knees, and laid his head on the table and pretended to cry, and called Dr. Nabrit a womanizer, a gambler, 'cause he played poker, and a drunkard because he liked Scotch [whiskey] and Scotch sours, and that he was not fit to walk in his shoes.  And he wanted Martin Jenkins [educator] who had become president of Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] to be his successor.  Martin had been at Howard.  And, but the board had made a decision that after Mordecai's thirty-four years as president, they wanted an interregnum presidency.  And they didn't know, couldn't know that the students were going to, you know, rebel in the '60s [1960s] the way things happened.
Story_ID: 4872
Speaker 1: Were the students, was the student rebellion generated or perpetrated by the civil rights activity that was going on in our society?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It, that, yes, that's right. It actually, you know, Columbia [University, New York, New York] is given the credit for being the, the generator of student unrest nationally, but that's not true.  Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] students were the ones who first started that.  But Columbia is the school that they point to as the place that, you know, against the war and the whole thing.
Speaker 1: Were there any events in, taking place in Washington, D.C. or around the nation that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: that particularly triggered?
Speaker 2: I should have told you about an important event that occurred at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] that--you see, SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was founded on Shaw's campus.  And I had the idea that, you know, the students were no longer involved in the Civil Rights activity.  And we needed to have a new student organization.  And I got our Student Council together--this was in 1967.  I can date the time when we changed from being Negroes to being black. I told them that we should--that they should sponsor a conference and that we should call together students from all over the United States to convene at Shaw in the spring of 1968 for the purpose of forming a new student organization.  And they formed a committee that worked throughout the summer.  It was to be called the Student--Negro Student something--the Conference of Negro Students or something like that.  And we--they invited students from all over the United States.  And then, it was set for April of 1968.  When the students went home in 1967, they came back in September.  They went home as Negroes, and they came back in September as black.  And then they met with me and they said, "Mr. President," said, "we want to--we're gonna still have our conference," said, "but there are several things that you need to know that has happened." Said "first of all, we can't call it Negro."  And I said, "well, why?"  And then they went through this thing about they weren't Negroes anymore, that they were black.  And I thought that was interesting, but I didn't say anything.  I--they said that we have come up with the name.  We want to call this Congress for the Unity of Black Students, CUBS.  And it denotes youth and this will be the new organization that comes out of this.  And we can't have any white speaker.  And I had already invited the Vice President of the United States, Hubert Humphrey to be the speaker.  And I said, "well, how do you propose I disinvite the Vice President?"  And they said, "that's your problem."  (laughs) But they said, "we would like to have you suggest a young black." and I said, "okay."  And I thought of Julian Bond [civil rights activist, politican].  So we invited Julian Bond to give the keynote address.  It so happened that on April the fourth, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated.  And the conference was to open that following week.  And I'm gonna tell you that the--Shaw's campus, we had students there from all over the country.  One of the things that was, clear--the black students who went to white schools had a totally different attitude from the black students who went to black schools, just as clear, a clear demarcation.  The white students that--the students from the white universities demanded that no white people could attend the conference.  So they put out all of our white professors.  They even put out Ben Bradlee [journalist], who was at that time, worked for 'Newsweek' magazine.  He later became Executive Editor of the 'Washington Post' [newspaper], they even him put him out, put out all white reporters, all, everybody white. I tolerated that stuff for about a day and a half, and I got our Student Council together, and I told them, I said, "listen, you are the host.  The rules are that this conference is open to everybody.  We have white faculty, you know," and I said, "I'm gonna talk to these students."  And I got them together at my house that night, the student leaders, the ones that were the most provocative from the white schools.  And I said, "you know, I don't understand something.  Our students," I said, "we teach our students that they can be pro-black without anti-white.  But you, you have the attitude that in order for you to be pro-nlack, you have to be anti-white."  And I said, "explain that to me."  And they said, "well, Dr. Cheek, at these schools where we are," said, they--"we are there for show.  And they are cutting the rug out from under us and knocking us over the head at the same time."
Story_ID: 4873
Speaker 1: Yes, we--you know, we got the students--our [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] Student Council asserted its authority over the conference [Congress for the Unity of Black Students, CUBS], and admitted, you know, our white professors and the news people that were covering it and everything.  All of them were back in, and, but we could not agree on an agenda for a new student organization.  So CUBS just died aborning.  It, you know, it never--we never created and incorporated, sign--we didn't get that incorporated.  And that was one of the unfortunate parts of my activity at Shaw that we had a vision that didn't come to pass.  We had the conference.  We learned an awful lot about what was happening to black students attending white schools and got a lot of insight into what this new Blackness meant, you know, which was new.  That was the first time that that had been, you know, used and widely circulated.  But, you know, I had gone back to capture that because I felt that was an important part of the, of the Shaw story that I had omitted.
Story_ID: 4874
Speaker 1: But at any rate, I, you know, I got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] principally because--well, first of all, I had developed a national reputation, that's one thing.  They knew that, you know, we didn't have any problems at--student problems at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  The--we had built a new student union building, and I had sent out a notice that, you know, no kind of protest activity against Shaw was to take place on our campus.  And I looked out my window one day and there were these students dragging brand new furniture that we had just bought and put in the university center, dragging it out of the university center, out to the--we had a great big fountain out in the center of the quadrangle.  And so I just had the police, our campus police, to go get every one of them.  And I expelled them right then and there without any hearing or anything.  I told them to go home, that they were no longer students at Shaw.  Some students were literally carried off the campus, limp.
Speaker 2: Dr. Cheek, would you make a transition for us, though, from Shaw, your presence there, over to Howard University?
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was in the process of doing.  You see, they knew that--the word was out that I did not tolerate this kind of activity.  So they [Howard University] just thought that was, you know, the ideal thing to bring to Howard, somebody who was firm with, you know, take care of the student, but also a person who had a reputation of being himself, you know--
Speaker 2: And making things happen.
Speaker 1: A student, being, you know, being able to talk with students and so forth because I, myself, had been expelled from high school and from college.  So they knew my background and so forth, and I had developed this reputation of being an innovator and so forth or what they called an engineer.
Story_ID: 4875
Speaker 1: And so I went, you know, I, you know, I was there [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And you can, you know, if you read my first speeches, you can see what I laid out.  The, the very first thing that, that occurred to me when I got to Howard was the absolute discourtesy on the part of the people who worked there.  I--they didn't know me from Adam.  I walked in the administration building and walked over to where a lady was sitting behind the counter reading a newspaper.  And she didn't even look up, and I finally, you know, got her attention, asked her did she have a map of the campus.  And she said, "well, I've got one around here somewhere."  But she didn't make any move to try to find one.  I went over to the dining hall.  The way they served the food, you know, they just threw it on the plate and so forth.  Well, you know, it--the place was so discourteous that I wanted to burn it down too.  Honest, it, you know, it was just infused with a kind of disdain for people, disrespect.  And I talked about that in my first speeches there.  We finally got folk to understand that it was, you know, a totally different situation at Howard and that discourtesy and that kind of thing would not be tolerated.
Story_ID: 4876
Speaker 1: But tthe other thing that struck me about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was that the Howard University that I had heard so much about wasn't anything.  It was the puniest university that I had ever seen.  You know, it--landlocked.  They had only, you know, seventy-some acres, couldn't expand anywhere.  And I told the Board [of Trustees] at the first or second meeting that it was going to be necessary for us to develop a multi-campus institution.  And we started that program, and then we also started buying up property, bit by bit around the campus that we could.  But it was clear to me that if Howard was going to be the Howard that I thought it was, then we were gonna have to undertake major revolution.  I conducted in 1971 a study that--I selected eleven white universities, private, that were identical with Howard in every respect, in terms of student body population, the--they had to have medical schools that had curriculum just like Howard's.  And I developed about thirty different areas of comparison of resources.  And in every single category, Howard turned out to be last, including the receipt of federal money.  And Howard was the only school that was authorized--that it was in that group--it was authorized by legislation to receive support from the federal government, but Howard was dead last in the amount of federal money that it got.  The first school was Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], the second was [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I published this study--I didn't publish the study, I circulated the study.  I sent a copy to McGeorge Bundy [educator, political advisor] at the Ford Foundation [charity organization].  I sent a copy to the Chairman of our [U.S.] House [of Representatives] Committee and [U.S.] Senate Committee on Appropriations.  McGeorge Bundy, you know, he had me up there and he read the report.  I called it--the name of it is 'The Lingering Legacy of Neglect and Deprivation.'
Speaker 2: McGeorge Bundy, what was his title?
Speaker 1: He was the President of the Ford Foundation.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: He had been, you know, [President] John [F.] Kennedy's National Security Advisor, but he was President of the Ford Foundation.  And he sat on his sofa with his legs, you know, up on his sofa as he read the report.  And when he finished he laid it down on his coffee table, and he said, "Jim, the only explanation for this is race."  I got the same response from the Chairman of our House Committee, [Rep.] Daniel Flood and the Chairman of our Senate Committee on Appropriations, [U.S. Senator Warren G.] Magnuson.  Both of them realized that the only way you could interpret that report or that study was in racial terms, because the only thing that was different between Howard and those eleven institutions, was that we had primarily black students and they had primarily white ones.  And that became the turning point, in '72 [1972] when I distributed that report, that led to the tremendous outpouring of federal money and, you know, the general support that we got.
Story_ID: 4877
Speaker 1: And then, of course, you know, the--I went into office [president of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with [President] Richard Nixon when he was President.  And we got to be very close friends.  I was an advisor to him because he had the unfortunate circumstances [protests resulting in the deaths of four people at Kent State and two people at Jackson State] of Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] and Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi]. And Alex[ander] Heard [educator] became the ambassador from black [sic, white] colleges to the White House [Washington, D.C.], and I became the ambassador from black colleges to the White House.  And we had offices at the White House.  And Alex Heard was getting--was being flooded with mail, got mail, just tons and tons of mail from his white colleagues, and I wasn't getting anything from black college presidents, not even a, you know, a note.  But we'd had students that had been killed at Jackson State.  And I got on the phone and called several of them and told them to--and I have the documents of, you know--to flood my office with mail and so forth.  Nothing happened for about, you know, a week.  So I went to, to John Erlichman [political advisor] and I said, "John, you know, it's inconvenient for me being here in Washington [D.C.] to have my office up here in the White House."  I said, "how about my, you know, having my stuff at my office at Howard."  And I said, "would that be all right?"  And, and he said, "well, yeah," he said, "if you and Alex can work it out."  Well, my whole reason for that, you see, I did not want to be embarrassed by not getting any response from black colleges like Alex was getting from the white ones.  And so they, you ought to, you should have seen the--when the truck pulled up to my office at Howard and unloaded White House stationery, pencils, everything.  I'm telling you, the way this country wastes stuff is beyond belief, but I mean, and stuff I still have which is illegal for me to have it I think, but I still have it.  I'm talking about White House stationery, White House notepad, everything.  But I--and after I moved everything down there, I still didn't get anything from black colleges.  And--
Speaker 2: Why do you think that was?
Speaker 1: That's a whole, that's another whole story in itself, that it would take, you know, several hours to deal with.  But it--just let me say that there is--there was a malaise that was beginning to take over among black college presidents.  If we had had in office people like Bennie Mays [educator] and Al Dent [educator] and folk that I had known at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina], I think it would have been totally different.  But these men had retired and so forth and were being replaced by other kinds of people.  But they just did not respond.  And even today--even today, you--we, we have a similar situation.
Story_ID: 4878
Speaker 1: But at any rate, I set out to make Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] a Category One research university.  Now, my position was that there has to be at least one [historically black] university in the country that has the status of Category One research university.  And we accomplished that.  And, you know, that happened.  It still has that designation today.  I hope and pray it keeps it.
Speaker 2: Can you describe for the listeners, what do you mean exactly by--I'm feeling it from your talking about it.  But what do you mean exactly by Category One?
Speaker 1: All right. There are--the Carnegie Foundation [for the Advancement of Teaching, charitable organization] has classifications of universities based on their research capability.  And Howard had achieved the level of capability of doing research just as was being done at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] or any of the others.  We had a new campus at Beltsville [Maryland] that was, you know, in Astronomy [and Physics].  And we, you know, had a new campus for the Law School, a new campus for the Divinity School.  The Medical School had added several new programs.  We increased the number of schools and colleges.  What I did was, I based--my position was simply this.  "What is it that black people are deficient in, in leadership and capability and expertise and so forth?  And whatever that is, then let us create programs to attract students to produce the deficiency." And we have.
Speaker 2: And did your student enrollment increase?
Speaker 1: Oh yes--oh yes, it was 13,000 at the time I retired.  It's now down to nine [thousand], but that's a different story.
Story_ID: 4879
Speaker 1: Well, I created the first radio station in a black college at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And the [Board of] Trustees [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I had an agreement that everything that we had at Shaw that, you know, that I had, that I was envisioning at Shaw, we would do here [Howard University].  And one of my fields, one of my grave concerns was that black people were being misrepresented and misinterpreted in the media.  And one of the ways to correct that was to produce a School of Communications--was to have a School of Communications--that would graduate students, that would be professional in every respect, but would have a totally different perspective from what the, their white counterparts had, and that we needed to have, as I called them, laboratories, for the training of these students.  And so we got the 'Washington Post' [newspaper] to give us WHUR [radio station, Washington, D.C.].  Now, they didn't know at the time, they gave--Katherine Graham [newspaper publisher] thought she was giving me a toy--
Speaker 2: Which was?
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: Which was?
Speaker 1: Katherine Graham was the Publisher of the 'Washington Post.'
Speaker 2: No, what was the toy?
Speaker 1: Their FM radio station, which for them was simply a, it was a bank of tapes in a closet.  That was what their FM station was, but they had the license.  And they gave us the license.  And we went on the air and WHUR just took off.  I mean it became the, you know, the station to listen to in Washington [D.C.].  And I went through the process of getting television license at several times.  I, you know, I missed the deadline, you know, and I got the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] to--I, well, I petitioned them to, you know, reconsider the deadline and all of that.  Well, we finally, you know, got an opening for a public, a second public educational station in D.C.  And that's how we got this license for what we then called WHMM [Howard University's television station], which meant Howard Mass Media--and because we tried other call letters and everything had been taken, except WHMM.
Story_ID: 4880
Speaker 1: This is my father, Reverend King V[irgil] Cheek.  He always insisted that that was a name and not a title.  And he was an ordained Baptist minister, but his principal activity was in insurance at Winston Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 2: And can you give us some sense of approximately how old he was in this photograph?
Speaker 1: I suppose he must have been in his fifties.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek's Father, King Virgil Cheek at Approximately Age Fifty, ca. 1954 in Greensboro, North Carolina. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph]
Story_ID: 4881
Speaker 1: This is my mother.  Her name is Lee Ella Cheek, Lee Ella Williams Cheek.  She was a public school teacher until she decided to raise a family.  And she had five children, four boys and one girl.  And this was taken probably in her--I suppose early, fifties or late forties.  She became--when we moved to Greensboro [North Carolina], she started her own insurance debit with Winston Mutual [insurance company].  They just gave her a book and she walked all over Greensboro and she built the largest insurance debit of anybody in the entire Winston Mutual insurance business.  And she was really the, the inspirer in our life.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek's Mother, Lee Ella Williams Cheek in Her Late Forties or Early Fifties, ca. 1950, location of photo unknown. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph.]
Story_ID: 4882
Speaker 1: That is a picture of Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek [Cheek's wife] and me.  We were married in 1953.  This was taken, I think at the time I performed one of her sister's weddings.  And I don't remember the year, but obviously, I was quite young. This was at, I think at, either at her home in, in Newton Grove [North Carolina] or in Greensboro [North Carolina].  I'm not, I'm not really certain.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek and His Wife Celestine in North Carolina at Her Sister's Wedding, ca. 1950s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph]
Story_ID: 4883
Speaker 1: That is the photograph of Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek [Cheek's wife], of me and Jimmy and Janet.  That's James Edward [Cheek], Jr. [Cheek's son] and that's Janet Elizabeth [Cheek, Cheek's daughter].  James is now a computer science engineer and Janet is a physician.  And that was taken at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] sometime during the--Janet must have been about four years old or shortly before four.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek with His Family, Wife Celestine, Son James, Jr, and Daughter Janet, ca. 1967 at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph]
Story_ID: 4884
Speaker 1: This is the office at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] which was located in the president's house.  And that is me at my desk.  And this was taken in 1964.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek Sits at his Desk in the Office of the President at Shaw University in Raleigh, North Carolina in 1964. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph]
Story_ID: 4885
Speaker 1: Now, that is Mrs. [Celestine Williams] Cheek [Cheek's wife] and me.  This was taken at a reception, one of the numerous, numerous receptions we had at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  I can't exactly tell you the year, but it was kind of early in, in my career there.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek with His Wife Celestine Williams Cheek at a Reception at Howard University in Washington, D.C., ca. 1970s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph]
Story_ID: 4886
Speaker 1: Now, this is--this is taken at Shaw University [North Carolina], and I'm looking out of the window of my office at the construction of the university center that is being built.  And across the street in that whole area is where we have a quadrangle of totally new buildings.  And the city lowered the street so that we built a bridge across from one part of the campus to the other part.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek Observes the Construction of the New University Center at Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina While He is President in the 1960s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph]
Story_ID: 4887
Speaker 1: This photograph is the photograph of Dr. [Mordecai] Johnson [educator], Dr. [James] Nabrit [educator] and of me.  It is the first reception I had at which I was able to get the three of them--the two of them--to come together for the first time.  And we had this photograph taken.  There are several photographs of us at that same affair.  This is the one that I like the most.  At an affair at my house one evening, where I had this photograph in a frame, a lady came up to me and said, "Dr. Cheek, I want to ask you something about this photograph."  She said, "this is a picture of the first three black presidents of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], is that correct?"  I said, "that's correct."  She said, "the first gentleman here is, his name is, is Mordecai, Mordecai something."  I said, "that's Dr. Mordecai Johnson."  And she said, "the second person, is that--that's Dr. Nabrit, you say?"  I said, "yes, that's Dr. James Nabrit," and she said, "and this is you."  I said, "yes, that is."  She says, "well, I tell you what."  She said, "after a while Shaw--I mean Howard--will sure enough have a black president."  You can see the gradations in hue as you go from Mordecai to me.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek (center) with Dr. Mordecai Johnson (left) and Dr. James Nabrit (center) at a Reception at Howard University in Washington, D.C., ca. 1970s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph].
Story_ID: 4888
Speaker 1: Taken in, this was on the occasion of my delivering the convocation address at Shaw University's [Raleigh, North Carolina] Founder's Day in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek (left) Delivers the Convocation Address at Founder's Day of his Alma Mater, Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina, in 2000. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Photo courtesy of James Cheek]
Story_ID: 4889
Speaker 1: That is Mrs. Cheek and me.  We were on a cruise through the Panama Canal and this was one of the formal nights, and you can tell that that's a recent photograph by the girth of both of us.
Speaker 2: [James Cheek and his Wife, Celestine Williams Cheek, on a Cruise in Panama, ca. 2000s. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b&w photograph]
Story_ID: 4890
Speaker 1: Dr. Cheek, what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community at this point.
Speaker 2: Well, one of my concerns, of course, is the continued disparity between the vast majority of American blacks and the majority population.  We still have tremendous areas in which the disparity is so great that it's going to take, you know, generations to catch up.  And my hope is that, that we can the kind of leadership that understands that we do not have to get rid of black organizations and black institutions and black associations in order to be a part of America because that's what America is.
Story_ID: 4891
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done already that you would like to have done differently, any regrets?
Speaker 2: Well, I regret that we didn't create, you know, the student conference [Congress for the Unity of Black Students, CUBS] that we had [at Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  I think there are a lot of things would have happened had we done that--that didn't happen.  I think that here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--one of the programs that I would have liked to have seen developed was a program in public health.  I think that that is an area of tremendous concern among black Americans, where the emphasis is on prevention rather than, you know, trying to treat disease and problems after they occur.  I think that that's an area that the university, you know, should have, while I was president, should have addressed and did not.  There are things here, of course, that I would like to see developed beyond what they are now.  I'll just mention one that might seem incongruous to somebody, but I frankly felt we had the capability of having a truly outstanding intercollegiate athletic program.  I do not believe that being excellent in intercollegiate athletics is mutually exclusive to be excellent in scholarship.  In many ways, if we had become superb in intercollegiate athletics as I had envisioned it, we might have gotten a lot of things that we didn't get.  It just a reality in America that sports occupies an important part of the American culture.
Story_ID: 4892
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you would still like to do?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had planned to--when I started out, when I was doing my Ph.D., I had not planned to go into administration.  My plan was to--I was going to write a book a year for thirty years, and I was going to produce a corpus of thirty volumes.  And I had the grand notion that nobody could claim to be educated who did not understand Cheek.  And so that's one thing that I had planned to do in the early years of my youth, but that's beyond--I don't have thirty years ahead of me.  What I need to do is at least write my memoirs.
Story_ID: 4893
Speaker 1: And what do you most want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, for what I tried to do in education.
Speaker 1: What do you think that your legacy--or what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: in the sense of--.
Speaker 2: I'll go back to what has been a guiding force in my life from my high school days, which is inscribed under the photograph in my high school and my college yearbook, "I would rather fail in a cause that will ultimately succeed, than succeed in a cause that will ultimately fail."
