Story_ID: 28885
Speaker 1: You know, the Emancipation Proclamation, where there was a woman who had been a slave who was about a hundred years old.  This was like in 1950, 1948, '49 [1949], '50 [1950], '51 [1951], '52 [1952].  You know, she didn't die until I was like eleven or twelve years old, but she used to come and talk about being a slave, so I saw some of that first-hand.
Speaker 2: Oh.  See that's good.  You're lucky.  Well, that's great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we're going to get started and we start out by slating it.
Speaker 2: By what?
Speaker 1: Slating.  We slate all of them (unclear).  Well there's this initial part.  So there's two parts of this, don't worry, then we'll get into the interview.  But the first part of this we slate it so I just need you to state your name and spell it for us.  Give us your birth date and today's date and I'll go into the rest of the slating.
Speaker 2: Spell my first and last name, too?
Speaker 1: And if you have a middle name.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So now I have to get serious. (Clears throat)  Shall I saw, I'm George Campbell?
Speaker 1: Just--Don't worry.  This is more for archival purposes.
Speaker 2: I'm George Campbell, Jr., G-E-O-R-G-E, last name Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L, Jr.  And I was born December 2nd, 1945.  Today is May 17th, 2001.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me, I'd just like to have your profession and the location where we are right now.
Speaker 2: I am a university president, President of the Cooper union for the Advancement of Science and Art and the East Village in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're actually at Seven East 7th Street?
Speaker 2: Well we're at--there's several addresses.  Seven East 7th Street, New York [City], New York 10003 or Coopers Square.
Speaker 1: And your profession sir?
Speaker 2: University president.  Or I'm a physicist by training.
Story_ID: 28886
Speaker 1: Okay.  There are five questions.  These are somewhat "People Magazine"-ish and then we'll move into the interview.
Speaker 2: You should have given me those in advance.  I could have rounded them up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: One of my problems is I don't have a favorite food.  I like everything.  But I suppose I could stretch and say that seafood is what I like most.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite color either.  I mean it depends on what it is.  If we're talking about a suit it's probably navy blue.  If you're talking about a car it's probably some light color.  If it's a sports car, it's British racing green, you know.  Shoes, black (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I don't have one of those either actually.  I tell you what I, you know I spent two years in Zambia, teaching in Zambia and when I first got there it was--the climate was just absolutely magnificent, pure, blue, clear skies, never a cloud.  And it was that way for nine months.  And I think I really got tired of sunshine and clear blue skies there and I was just you know delighted when the rains came. And so I like a diversity of climate. I like to ski in the winter and swim in the summer, hang out in the parks you know. I like it all.  (Unclear, language).
Speaker 1: All seasons.  And then your favorite vacation destination, do you have one of those?
Speaker 2: Winter, I like to ski.  I like skiing in the west and you know a lot of good places. I go to Aspen [Colorado].  I go to Montana, Big Sky.  I go to Vale [Colorado].  I go to, now this year for the first time Sun Valley [Idaho] because the chairman of my board has a place in Sun Valley so I now go there.  And we go every to Park City Deer Valley [Utah], 'cause that's where the Sundance Film Festival is, so I ski there.
Speaker 1: And your favorite--
Speaker 2: But my summer place, I like Amelia Island which is off the coast off Florida.  It's kind of a spa, athletic facilities and lovely beach.  It's never crowded.  So--
Speaker 1: It's called Amelia--?
Speaker 2: Amelia.  Amelia Island.  Amelia Plantation is what it used to be.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying, not that I can think of.  You'll probably have to ask somebody else what I say most.
Speaker 1: Neither do I, but a lot of people do (laughter).  (unclear) off the top of their head.  Okay we are gonna get started and I want to ask you, you know we like to--
Speaker 2: So that was just to relax me, is that what that--?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I see, ice-breaker.
Story_ID: 28887
Speaker 1: Some people think they're ready (unclear) ask these questions.  Anyway, I want to ask about your mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] and her family.  She was born in Goochland, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Goochland, Virginia yes.
Speaker 1: And I'd like you to tell me what you know about her family and her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the family I know most because my parents were divorced when I was very young and so I spent most of my family life with my mother's family.  My mother was the, I don't know, about the sixth of fourteen children that her parents had and she was born in 1922.  My grandparents [Matthew D. and Lucy D. Britt] got married in 1910 and so they had a child about every two years I think.  And so she was either the fifth or the sixth child.  And I happened to have been the first grandchild of her parents and I was the only grandchild for about five years.  And so I got to be kind of a child of the family.  And I got you know -- though I lived with my mother and father early on, I used to spend time in Virginia where most of her brothers and sisters and my grandparents were.  And in fact throughout until I was out of high school I spent most of my summers in Virginia and my grandfather's farm to get me off the streets of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New York [City, New York] and it was a wonderful experience.  My wife [Mary Campbell] says that I was kind of the prince of the family.  And to some extent I think it was a tremendous, of tremendous value to me on many different levels because my--you know a lot of my family's hopes and dreams were placed on this first grandchild who was the new generation.  And the expectation that opportunities might begin to emerge for black people.  And so being passed around among my aunts and uncles who all adored me as the first grandchild I think did a great deal in terms of boosting my own sort of sense of self and my own sense of culture and heritage and self confidence.  So that's one level.  Another level was that it was a real farm, I mean the sense that you know my grandparents were very poor but we had about a 120-acre farm.  They had no money.  Jobs weren't available, but my grandfather knew how to work a farm.  We grew food.  We grew, you know we grew corn and all kinds of other vegetables and plants and tobacco for a while even.  We raised pigs and cows and all of that.  And a farm is a tough business and one of the things that I think I developed was an enormous work ethic.  My grandfather not only had a tremendous work ethic but he had an enormous capacity for work.  He was a, probably a slender, I mean a rather slender person.  He was like 6'1" maybe.  My grandmother was six feet tall.  I don't know what happened to me.  But he was slender but extremely strong and powerful.  And he could, lifting four hundred pounds was an easy thing for him.  So he was--he not only had this work ethic on the farm but he had a tremendous capacity and I think that that influenced me enormously and I think that's where I got the work ethic that I have now.  But it was an important part of my growing up experience being with my, with that part of the family.  And in Goochland County [Virginia] you know the Brit family--my Grandmother was a Jackson.  My Grandfather was a Brit.  Those two families were two of the three or four largest families in the county.  And so everywhere I went I was in the midst of relatives.  And it was a very--as I think back on it, it was a very important experience that a lot of young people don't have the opportunity to experience.
Story_ID: 28888
Speaker 1: Now he, your grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.], he wasn't a sharecropper in a sense, he actually owned the farm?
Speaker 2: He owned the farm.  His father Matthew D. Brit Sr., I guess, was the owner of the farm and I guess his father.  So my grandfather's grandfather was a white man who owned the farm originally and he passed it down to his son and his son--I guess my grandfather's grandfather was married to an Indian woman.  And so my grandfather's father was part white-part Indian and he married a black woman.  And so my grandfather was you know that mixture of all the three.  But you know, in that generation obviously if anything was owned it had, it was a white person in the background somewhere because it was only two generations from slavery.
Speaker 1: Now do you know of what tribe in the Indian, I mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Cherokee, okay.  Now was there any other things--did your grandfather ever talk about growing up, his growing up or anything like that, things that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't really remember those--much about that.
Speaker 1: Now what about--?
Speaker 2: I will say, I mean it's--if I think about it I probably will remember more.  I remember him talking about being--you know I know that he worked on the railroad for example.  And he did travel through the North.  He worked in northern New York some place working on the railroads for some years.  And I even have copies of love letters he wrote to his grandmother, to my grandmother [Lucy D. Britt] who became his wife during turn of the century early nineteenth, early 1900s.  And so that's the one thing I do remember about, him talking about.
Story_ID: 28889
Speaker 1: You know, one thing Paul, what is this right here?  That (unclear) Okay thanks, Paul.  What about your mother?  Did she share things about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] was a beautiful young girl.  And I think most of my aunts and uncles were but she was probably the upper crust.  Anyway I had a number of my grandmother's brothers came to New York [City, New York] in the early 1900s, three of them.  And one of them was childless, lived in Harlem, 137th Street.  137 West 137th Street, lived there for seventy-five years.  I came and visited him there many times.  Anyway, he--you know and my grandparents with these fourteen children and very poor and you know the men of course helped on the farms.  The girls were kind of useless.  He--so my uncle provided opportunities for some of the--some of my grandparents' kids to come to New York and spend time here and go to school.  And my mother and one of her brothers took that opportunity, came to New York when they were young and lived with this uncle, my mother's-my grandmother's brother and his wife in Harlem.  He was a longshoreman.  And so she grew up mostly in New York and--although she did go back to Virginia for a year or two here and there, you know during the course of growing up.  And so she was mostly a New Yorker though, more than a Virginia person.  She loved the country and loved going to Virginia but she was a city--she was a, very much a city person and she married my father [George W. Campbell] here in New York.  And then when I was about four or five, five I guess, maybe five or six, she left him a couple of times.  And I guess she left him for good when I was about six or seven and they got divorced.  And she moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with my brother [Robert P. Campbell] and me and--because we had other relatives in Philadelphia and so from seven on, I was in Philadelphia although we came to New York quite a bit because she had so many friends and relatives here.  So this was kind of--you know I kind of had three homes, Virginia, Philadelphia and New York.
Story_ID: 28890
Speaker 1: Now your father what do you know about him?
Speaker 2: I don't know a whole lot about him [George W. Campbell].  He, you know he was a, kind of an entrepreneur to the extent that black people could be entrepreneurs in those days.  He worked at a butcher shop initially.  Then I think he opened his own store in New York [New York City, New York] once and it didn't last very long.  And you know he had a taxi cab for a while, I know, but he didn't, he never really had a job working for somebody else. He just wasn't a person that was inclined to do that.  So--but that's about the extent of it.  I know that--the lore is that he was not a nice person.  And you know he was physically abusive with my mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] which is why she left him.  And you know I have had--I had some interactions with him you know as I grew up.  I guess when I was in high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] he came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to see me and so I talked to him.  I spent--I even went to visit him.  He was in Detroit [Michigan] and spent a couple of weeks there.  He had--he owned a store in Detroit then and spent a couple of weeks out there.  And you know, he was nice enough to me, but you know my mother was home.  So--
Story_ID: 28891
Speaker 1: And your grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.] was really more of a surrogate father?
Speaker 2: He was, yes.  My grandfather was--he only had about a third grade education but he really was a brilliant man.  He--I can remember you know, when I was in junior high school taking, you know going to visit him and doing home work and things like algebra and you know he would kind of flip through that stuff and understand it almost instantly and I--it used to amaze me.  He used to do the books.  He was very sort of mathematically inclined.  He used to do the books for the local stores, the churches and things.  Everybody knew he was--you know he was called "Boss Brit."  And the reason I think he was recognized as being a very bright man but you know in those days you didn't call black people "Mr." or anything.  At least, you know white people didn't call black people with honorifics and so they gave him the title "Boss."
Speaker 1: Well the fact that he had that many acres of land spoke (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28892
Speaker 1: Anyway, what are some of your earliest memories of growing up?  Do you have an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I have what--in what (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't matter (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well I can, I--you know my brother [Robert P. Campbell] was not born until I was six [years old] I guess.
Speaker 1: So you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  I'm the oldest.  I was the oldest grandchild, remember.
Speaker 1: Right. Right.
Speaker 2: And I--and there was--I had one cousin who was born when I was about five and a half and then my brother was born soon after that.  So he was kind of the third oldest grandchild I think.  But I can remember being when I was still an only child and being in Virginia and being in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I can remember having a pretty active imagination.  I mean I can remember playing in the country and having elaborate you know scenarios and imaginary friends and you know and the animals were all part of it.  And you know there were horses that I could ride and we had dogs and cats and pigs and all that stuff.  And, you know, I can remember sometimes when I was in school being--kind of feeling like I can't wait to get home to get with my friends and play these games that I had worked out for myself.  And, you know, it was all--and I think about whether I was totally sane then or not but I seemed to have been.  But you know--and I have lots of fond memories of being on the farm and walking the farm with my grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.] and my grandmother [Lucy D. Britt].  My grandmother actually became an invalid when I was pretty young, about I don't know seven or eight maybe and she wasn't able to walk after that.  And I used to push her around in the wheelchair around the farm and things like that and she was a terrific cook.  She was, I think--the word is that she was the first black woman to win first prize at the State Fair in Virginia.  They just didn't give those prizes to black people but they just couldn't deny her it was so good.  And she was, I mean she was a spectacular cook and some of my uncles inherited that. I had an uncle who died not too long ago, a few years ago who--I mean I have been all over the world and I've never tasted better desserts than he used to make, apple pies, just spectacular.  My brother used to say my uncle makes the best apple pie you ever can imagine tasting and he doesn't even necessarily take the peelings off the apples (laughter).  Sometimes he did, sometimes he didn't but it was always good. And so I used to gain weight when I went to Virginia and lose it back when I came back to the city.
Story_ID: 28893
Speaker 1: Now you said you started living with your grandparents [Lucy D. and Matthew D. Britt] when--?
Speaker 2: I didn't start living with them I used to just used to spend summers.
Speaker 1: Summers, the summers okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your life was really--but you lived in New York for how--?
Speaker 2: Lived in New York [City, New York] till I was six or seven.
Speaker 1: And then moved to--?
Speaker 2: Then moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  But you know but then until I was you know finished high school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] almost.  For one or two summers I stayed in the city but most summers I spent at least a month or six weeks in Virginia on the farm.
Speaker 1: Now what was--do you know your address in New York and your address--I mean I'm sure your address in Philadelphia, but do you know your address, what your address in New York was?
Speaker 2: Then?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: It was somewhere in Harlem.  It was around--it wasn't--you know as I said my grand--my uncle, my great uncle where my mother lived was at, I know that address, 137--137 West 137th Street and I think they lived right around the corner from 135th Street or somewhere around there.  But I don't know the exact address.
Speaker 1: And then in Philadelphia, where did you live?
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia we lived a lot of different places.  We lived in North Philadelphia first on 18th [Street] and Susquehanna [Avenue] and then we lived at 35th [Street] and Cumberland Street in North Philadelphia.  Then we moved to West Philadelphia, Southwest Philadelphia.  We lived in several different places in Southwest Philadelphia.  The last place was at 40th and Locust which is now part of the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and its expansion.
Story_ID: 28894
Speaker 1: And your brother's name is Robert?
Speaker 2: Robert.
Speaker 1: And he is how many, he's let's see how many--?
Speaker 2: He was about seven years younger than me and he, yeah he was born when I was almost seven.  I was six when he was born.  And my mother [Lillian Brit Campbell] was pregnant when she left my father [George W. Campbell] and she--I think she was back with him for a little bit after he was born but then she--soon after that she split all together.
Speaker 1: So she raised you as a single parent?
Speaker 2: Single parent with two kids, yes.
Speaker 1: And did she work outside the home or she was basically at home?
Speaker 2: She did housework, you know stuff that many black women did in those days, domestic.
Speaker 1: But she had--were your, were her brothers and sisters--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE: Watch your hands.)
Speaker 1: Oh.  Were your brothers and sisters were they helping in the care--I mean I'm just trying to understand the family environment.
Speaker 2: Well you know in--you mean financially?
Speaker 1: No, not financially.  I'm just talking about what the home environment was like, you know?
Speaker 2: No, it was just the three of us in Philadelphia and--until the summers.  And my brother and I used to go--in one, I spent one year, a whole year.  I guess it was when my mother finally left my father, that first year I was in second grade I guess, I spent a year in Virginia.  And then my brother came down to Virginia.  And I guess when I was, I don't know how old, when I was in high school, my brother stayed in Virginia and started going to school there and he went through high school in Virginia when I was in college I guess.
Speaker 1: Now you--okay so the block, the area that you grew up in, was it, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], was it mainly black or was it a mixed area?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s] (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well there are some areas that people grew up (unclear) they were mixed areas.
Speaker 2: It was definitely segregated, so yeah.
Story_ID: 28895
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Walton Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which is around 17th, 16th [Street] and Susquehanna [Avenue] and I spent a year going to a school called Central Elementary School in Goochland, Virginia.  And then I went to Walton Elementary School which is at 27th [Street] and Huntington in Philadelphia.  Then I went to Junior High School at Roosevelt Junior High School in Germantown [Maryland].  I took the bus and subway from North Philadelphia.  I was living in North Philadelphia.  And then I went to Central High School which is at--was a, you know, an all academic, selective high school in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Now what was--I know you had an active imagination but I want to know what the young George Campbell was, you know, like.  Were you mischievous, were you well-behaved?  Were you spoiled because you, you know had all the, you know the adoration of your uncles and aunts?
Speaker 2: No.  I was you know I--I don't know how you would describe it.  I guess I was--my mother [Lillian Brit Campbell] had a theory.  I'll tell you what her theory was.  I guess its probably the most accurate.  You know I did well in school academically.  I did you know, I aced all the standardized tests and all that stuff, and so people identified me as a smart kid.  And you know in those days black smart kids weren't all that well-received by everybody and so I had a lot of clashes in elementary school and junior high school too with teachers.  And you know and I grew up in a tough neighborhood in North Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I mean, it was probably the toughest neighborhood in Philadelphia when I was growing up, in a neighborhood called The Village.  And it was--you know so you got into fights I mean and stuff.  It was part of the culture.  And so in junior high school [Roosevelt Junior High School, Germantown, Maryland] I you know, I was, you know got into trouble a few times.  In fact, I got suspended three times and there was a rule in Philadelphia that said if you get suspended three times you get put into this school for wayward kids called Boone.  And so there was an attempt to send me to that school and my mother you know took some days off of work which means we didn't eat very much because she got paid when she worked.  And fought this thing or did whatever she had to do.  She went to the Board of Education and she argued that you know that I was getting into these problems because I was not being challenged and was in the wrong school and this and that.  And that's when I, you know, wound up going to Central [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and there were teachers that actually wrote letters to try and keep me out of Central.  And--
Story_ID: 28896
Speaker 1: --because you know my whole--you know this thing is, success I really believe that these, it's been very interesting doing these interviews because I--you know it says a lot about what makes people successful.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'd like for you to talk about your mother and what role she played.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know what was her messaging, too.
Speaker 2: Well I mean my mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] always had enormously high expectations of both of her sons [George Campbell and Robert Campbell].  And one of the things I said in my inaugural address [as president of Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, 2000]--did you get a copy of that?  I'll give it to you.  But my--one of the things I said is that my mother had a tough life, you know.  She was a single mother with two children in the inner city.  She didn't have you know, good jobs.  She was you know reasonably well educated.  She had a high school education.  She took lots of other courses and things.  She went to some school, I don't know, some, one of these professional schools here, not a college but proprietary school I guess to study one thing and another.  And so, and she was a very bright woman, but the opportunities just weren't there.  And so she wound up dedicating much of her life to making sure that her unruly sons, I said in my inaugural address, making sure that they had opportunities to get to places that she couldn't get to, and so she was very much an activist.  She took us to museums and to, you know, make sure that we got exposed to a lot of the things that she didn't have opportunities to see when she was growing up.  We used to go to Radio City Music Hall [New York City, New York].  We used to go to Broadway plays.  Despite our poverty, she would manage to somehow squirrel things away.  I mean she was a tremendously effective money manager, I'm convinced of that, because we did things that people with her level of earnings would--just didn't have a chance to do.  And finally I said in my inauguration, I didn't go to that level of detail, I just said that one of the things she did was she dedicated herself to making her two unruly sons successful.  And one of things--she died in 1986, but before she died she made a promise to a number of her friends and that was that at least one of her sons would one day be president.  And so here I am (laughter).  She wasn't, maybe not, maybe she wasn't talking about Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] but--
Story_ID: 28897
Speaker 1: You know besides the exposure that she [Campbell's mother, Lillian Britt Campbell] gave you, what other messaging did she provide?  I mean was church an essential part?  Was she, you know how was she keeping you off the streets?  I mean you know, I--
Speaker 2: Well you know, there was--I don't know that she did keep me off the streets.  I think you know she worked long hours.  She you know commuted out to the suburbs to these peoples' houses where she worked and you know and I spent a lot of time on the streets then because I--you know the kind of--I didn't, I usually finished my homework before I got home and so I had lots of time on my hands and I did hang out a lot on the streets, and I know when I was fairly young she would pay somebody to babysit.  I never went there after school.  I'd come home and--I had my own key, I went home and then went out in the streets and did what I wanted to do.  And so, you know, but I think, you know I firmly believe that your value systems are established fairly early.  And you know church was not a big part of our lives.  I did dabble with a church for a while.  I even sung on the choir for a little bit.  But she was deeply religious.  My grandparents [Lucy D. and Matthew D. Britt] were both deeply religious.  They went to church a lot and I guess when I was in Virginia, I did go to church.  But in the country in those days, church was once a month and so it wasn't a big deal.  They were certainly religious but more than sort of religious there was a certain--I mean I knew right from wrong and I knew in a very intense way what was right and what was wrong.  I mean I can tell you stories about that.  My grandfather you know I remember going to the store when I was about six or seven walking this mile to the store and buying stuff and then you know coming home and knowing that I had gotten more change back than I should have and I was all happy about that.  And he made me walk back to the store to give the person the change back because that was dishonest.  And so I learned very early you know what were essentially Judeo-Christian values and so I think that was probably more important than some fundamentalist religion that is not uncommon in the black community.  But nevertheless I was a, you know, I was kind of a "Street kid." And you know I wasn't you know formal, serious member of the gang like you know the Cripps and so on today [2001], but I was in gang fights and all those kinds of things.  You know we didn't, in those days we didn't have you know high powered weapons like they have now.  I mean we had things like top guns where you know you take a board and you have rubber bands and you flatten out bottle caps and you shoot people with them.  We had stuff like that as weapons and so--which could hurt people but you know not kill them like we tend to do now.  So you know I had, I learned a lot of stuff on the streets that I think also served me well.  And quite frankly, I was lucky.  I mean, I think there are plenty of times in the course of my career when I could have gone in a variety of different directions.  I could have, you know, gotten into some things that I shouldn't have and was very fortunate that--one might say that I had, you know, was given certain gifts, the confluence of fortunate events took place in the course of my life which allowed me to have the kind of opportunities that I've had.
Story_ID: 28898
Speaker 1: You know what I find amazing, I see you in your bow tie and you know and I was thinking of this, you--this interview was reminding me of Dr. [Alvin] Poussaint's [interview with The HistoryMakers, March 25, 2001] in some respects because he grew up on the streets of East Harlem [New York] and you know and was exposed to gangs and drugs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know you look and you're thinking like, you know how, my God--what people can become.  And you know it's, you know it would be good for other young people to see what can happen.  The other--
Speaker 2: Well it still happens.  I mean I--my oldest son [Garikai Campbell], when he was in seventh or eighth grade, he was put into a math class that was a very low level math class and the name of the class was Math I which is a reasonable name for an 8th grade math class.  And then I looked at his homework and it turns out he was doing trivial arithmetic and I said what is this?  This is not what you should be doing in eighth grade.  So I went to the school and I, you know, asked for the curriculum and said what is, you know why is he in this math class doing this?  And they said well we thought he wasn't quite mature enough to take the, you know, the advanced math class.  And fortunately, I was in a position to understand what mathematics a student his age should be doing and so I quickly changed the situation, said, no he's going to get into--you know he graduated with honors in mathematics.  He got, he graduated from Swarthmore College [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] at nineteen [years old] with a degree in mathematics.  He's now a mathematics professor at Swarthmore and so--with a Ph.D.  And so you know if I hadn't you know scoped that, picked up on that in eighth grade, where would he be now?  And so it's a challenge for parents.  You have to be diligent even today to make sure that your kids don't get channeled in directions that they shouldn't.
Story_ID: 28899
Speaker 1: Now what--tell me, were you always good in the sort of math and science?  When did that interest--you know, were you--would people say I always knew you know he was going to be this.  He was always fiddling or he was always good with numbers?  You know that he got that off his grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Well you know I actually had very broad interests.  It wasn't just in math and science.  I mean I was an in fact an inspiring painter at one time and for--very seriously and up as late as when I was in graduate school.  And you know and I had interests in literature and poetry.  And I suppose that my greatest interest has always been in mathematics though.  And, but it wasn't like that was the, you know a total fixation.  It was just the thing that was very easy for me.  That was the case for sure.  But I guess in high school I had a very intense curriculum at Central High School in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was an extraordinary group.  We had a number of professors or teachers who were, who had Ph.D.s and so on.  You know it was sort of Philadelphia's answer to Stuyvesant [High School] here in New York [City, New York] or [The] Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York].  And although the focus was not on science, it was a very broad academic curriculum, but we had, certainly had great math and science teachers.  And you know one of the things that's really stimulated my interests is that every year, once a year we had a science--Philadelphia is not too far from where Bell Laboratories [Murray Hill, New Jersey] is.  And you know in those days Bell Labs was the lead, premiere research enterprise in the world and many Nobel Laureates and so on.  And they--because Central was such a high profile, academic school, Bell Labs used to send one of its physicists to, once a year to give a "gee whiz" talk on all the latest developments and technologies that were emerging from Bell Labs and that was not too long after the transistor [1947] had been invented, the first satellites had been launched by Bell Labs [1962], the laser had been invented there [1958] and so on and solar cells [1954].  And so we had this spectacular performance really by a physicist once a year who came and showed off all of his you know solar cells mounted on little cars.  He predicted that by 1975, all cars would be powered by solar cells and so his predictions didn't all come true but it was a wonderful talk and it certainly piqued my interest about this fascinating field of physics.  And it's probably where I began to develop an interest in physics.  But when I went to college [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I really didn't have a clue what I really wanted to do with my career.  You know did I want to be a doctor?  Did I want to be a lawyer, a painter, a writer, a scientist, an engineer, mathematician?  I really you know for me college was a time to explore all of these things and that's what I did.  I mean I took courses kind of all over the map until I settled on--in a physics course, a modern physics course and got exposed to you know Einstein's theory of relativity for the first time and atomic physics and quantum theory and it was just so fascinating and amazing to me that I was sort of hooked after that.
Story_ID: 28900
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to go back a little bit and that is how you got to Central [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in the first place.  Because--was that a school that you had to test into, I mean test into or whatever?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, right.
Speaker 1: And so--and you're, you know what you're describing to me is that you were growing up, I don't know what neighborhood you were living in at the time but it was still--
Speaker 2: North Philadelphia, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's primarily black.  So how did you get to, you know what was the process that got you to Central?
Speaker 2: Well it was a--you know my mother [Lillian Britt Campbell]--it was really after I had gotten in all this trouble in junior high school [Roosevelt Junior High School, Germantown, Maryland] and you know and I had done so extraordinarily well throughout my career and these standardized tests that they give you and IQ tests and all that.  And so she petitioned the Board of Education singularly petitioned the Board of Education.  She, I guess, had found out about Central.  In fact one of my distant cousins who lived in Philadelphia had gone to Central and she had learned about Central from him.  It was an all boys' school and he had told her that maybe she should think about trying to get me into Central.  And so she went to the Board and petitioned and I didn't have to--you know they do give a test to get into Central but I didn't even have to take that test because of my standardized scores were all high enough to get me in you know without that.  And so they admitted me and as I mentioned earlier there were at least two teachers who I know wrote letters saying that I should not be admitted to the school because I was a disciplinary problem and the school should be a reward for students who are good kids and not for kids like me.  And--but they admitted me anyway.  And in fact I lost, totally lost my disciplinary problems when I got there because it was a really stimulating and exciting place.  The teachers were really interested in teaching what they were teaching.  We started in ninth grade with Shakespeare and with Jonathan Swift and with the Odyssey and the Iliad and I mean it was just a really stimulating environment.  Everybody was into studying.  I mean in my graduating class about six or seven kids got all 800s on their college boards, and I wasn't one of them, but, you know, it was that kind of an environment.  And so you know, and I, I mean I did well there.  I mean I graduated with an "A" average from Central.  And so I really got in--that's when I discovered my love of learning and the exciting adventures you know inside those books.
Story_ID: 28901
Speaker 1: Now what--but that was a, it had to be a different experience.  It was--you had you said grown up in a, you know primarily a poor, black neighborhood [North Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you're off to this school [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and it's what percentage black?
Speaker 2: Oh it was let's see, we had I think nine or ten black students in a class of 320 or so, very small percentage.
Speaker 1: So was that a different experience for you?  And I mean did you, you know, because we all come at things with you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it was a different world so I was just wondering if you could sort of recount that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I was growing up even though I lived in a black neighborhood, the schools were more integrated then than they are now.  I mean in my elementary school you know I would say it was probably 40 percent white.  It was, the neighborhood was--you know, there was this side of Lehigh Avenue was black and that side was white but the school had people from both sides.  And so, you know, and the teachers were I would say half and half, black and white.  And so it wasn't quite as--none of my school experience was quite that segregated, you know, as they are today.  So it wasn't that big of a change to go to that.  And in fact it was a, you know, it was a much healthier environment.  I didn't get as much--I didn't feel the racial tensions nearly as much in Central as I felt in other places.  You know, people there celebrated academic achievement and so I was one of the celebrated people and got awards and things because of the academic achievement and I didn't feel the kind of resentment from teachers that I had felt as a younger person in elementary and junior high school where the white teachers seemed to resent black kids who were high achievers.  I mean these were--I mean and that's you know to some extent that's true in general.  People who are themselves accomplished don't generally harbor the same level of anxiety and tension about other people of other races and ethnicities who are also achievers.
Speaker 1: Now were there people at Central you know teachers that served as role models or had an impact on you during those you know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well that's the one thing that wasn't integrated.  We didn't have a single black--I never had a black teacher at Central there.  When I was a senior the first black teacher came to Central in the history of Central or history teacher but I didn't happen to have him, but I met him.  But I was a senior by then.  And so there weren't black teachers but yeah, they were certainly teachers that I had a great deal of respect for.  There was an English teacher, I don't remember his first name, Mr. Phillips who was one of the--who was a very tough teacher.  There was another teacher, interestingly English teachers that I had found as role models, a guy by the name of Mr. Kidney who was very serious, very sort of nerdy kind of guy but very serious about learning and pedagogy and was just terrific.  I had a physics teacher who was a great, math teachers.  I got a lot of support from teachers when I was at Central.  But you know I think probably the strongest role model in my whole life was my grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.].  I mean who was a person who had such enormous strength and power on so many levels.  I mean he was just a, he was a quite person but had such a strong sense of values and so clear, such clarity of thinking and vision and very high expectations of me.  And, you know, very important person in my life, very strong male role model and image.
Story_ID: 28902
Speaker 1: Now, when you--so you're saying that you were as good a writer as you were in math and science, is that--so you were this renaissance person?
Speaker 2: Well I wouldn't go that far.
Speaker 1: Right brain, left brain, however you want to say it.
Speaker 2: I don't believe in that stuff.  I mean--
Speaker 1: You don't believe in right brain/left brain?
Speaker 2: No, no I think it's all a myth.
Speaker 1: Oh that's--there's (unclear).
Speaker 2: I mean there, I think it has a lot to do with, you know, how you--you know there may be something to the left brain/right brain but it's not about inherent capabilities.  It has more to do with how you're nurtured and developed I think more than sort of innate genetic capabilities.  But yeah, I mean and I still had broad interests that's why Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] is such a wonderful place for me.  It's, you know, it's about science and art and the confluence of those things.  And so it's a spectacular I mean it's the ideal--
Speaker 1: I can understand that because when I was reading about it, I'm like science and art, that doesn't even seem to work together, you know (laughter).  But I mean it's an interesting--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --combination that you don't see much.
Story_ID: 28903
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--I want to know your, it's time for you to go you know to graduate at this point and so is there, is it assumed that you're, you know by yourself that you're automatically going to college and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now that's an interesting question because yeah you know at Central [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] it was, you know, everybody was assumed to be going to college.  Now my mother made $2,300 in my senior year in high school.  I know this 'cause it even shocked me.  It was 1963, but even there, that's pretty poor even at that time.  And I know because when she filled out financial aid, that's what came out.  And I was, you know--it didn't occur to me that I wasn't going to go to college because that's what--I was one of the best students there and everybody, even the worst students there were going to college.  So I assumed I would, but had no clue about where the money was coming from and didn't you know at seventeen [years old] didn't think much about it.  Just went ahead and applied to college.  I know my mother didn't have a whole lot of money and even the fifteen dollar application fee was tough.  So I only applied to two colleges and-Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Carnegie [Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and, you know, I got accepted at both of them.  And Drexel offered me a little better money.  It wouldn't have been enough for me to go to college, to go there.  And fortunately the--I had, I also applied for this Guggenheim Scholarship and I got that.  So without that I don't know what I would have done, it didn't occur to me.  And that was, I guess I was told that I had gotten that before the end of my first semester senior year so I knew by December that I had the money to go to college.  And so it sort of worked out.  It's another one of those fortunate circumstances--I was--that came my way.
Speaker 1: Now was this--how did you even find about the Guggenheim?
Speaker 2: It was the high school.  Central--it was one of the things that you applied for at Central.  And so--
Speaker 1: So here you--
Speaker 2: So that school was really a big turning point for me.
Speaker 1: You're right.  It was.
Story_ID: 28904
Speaker 1: So Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], now it was--so you said when you went in, you weren't even sure what you were going to major in?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so were you living at home or were you at school?
Speaker 2: I was living at home and that's one of the reasons I went to Drexel instead of Carnegie [Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] because I could live at home and you know I could afford to do that.  And so I--in fact we lived, then we had moved to Southwest Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I was actually walking distance from there so I didn't even have to pay money to take the bus.  So--
Speaker 1: And how, I mean I know that you said you know the person was coming over from Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey] and that sort of opened up a whole world.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what year were you at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh every year, ninth grade through twelfth this person came to give an assembly.
Speaker 1: Oh that was at Central [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: High school, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sorry, okay.  Oh!
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: But I thought you said when you first went to college you weren't even--?
Speaker 2: No, I, no.  I still wasn't sure, no, but I had--that's what I think began to open my eyes about maybe a, this is an interesting area.  But then you know when I went to college I still wasn't sure and I sort of took courses you know all across the board and it wasn't 'til my junior year in college--you know it was a five year program so it was really the third year that I took this modern physics course and that's when it really solidified for me that this is--but I suspect that in the back of my mind I already had some inkling toward physics even though I hadn't sort of consciously decided because of those kinds of early experiences.  And it made a nice story for the, for PR [public relations] at Bell Labs because, you know, I did wind up after my Ph.D. going to work at Bell Labs.  So it was kind of you know I started getting influenced you know black kid in a black neighborhood in Philadelphia having this influence from a Bell Lab scientist and then wind up actually being there.
Speaker 1: So you said it was in your freshman year or your sophomore--?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: You took the--
Speaker 2: No that--it was my third year.
Speaker 1: Your third year?
Speaker 2: I was in a five year program.
Speaker 1: Okay, third year, okay.
Speaker 2: But also one of the reasons I also wanted to go to Drexel was because it had a co-op program which allowed you to work in the summers and, you know, that's why it was a five year program.  You got to work, you know, in the summers it was a quarter system.  So you got to work two quarters, after the freshman year which was a whole year then you worked two quarters a year for three years and then a whole year for your senior year.  And so, I got to have some really serious in depth work experiences in the discipline.  And so that was a big help also to figure out what I wanted to do.  I mean, I started off actually majoring in engineering and then I discovered in working and taking courses that, you know, I really wanted to do more fundamental science.  And so both the academic part and the work experience kind of helped me define what I wanted to do with my career.
Speaker 1: And so what were some of these co-op jobs you had?
Speaker 2: I worked at a company that is now defunct, International Harvester Company in Chicago [Illinois].  You know International Harvester.  And I worked at the Hinsdale Research Center in Hinsdale, Illinois and for one or two summers I worked in the Melrose Park [Illinois].  There's an engineering research division that was then there.  And so that's where I got my work experience.
Speaker 1: And so when you decided that that wasn't, the engineering wasn't you know there, did you have another work experience (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I, that's when I, I mean I was working in the sort of more development engineering design areas initially in the first year and the second year.  And then I switched to physics and that's when I moved to the research, the basic research division and did more basic research. And it wasn't sort of you know quantum physics or anything like that but it was a basic, it was more basic research and optical theory and using optical theory to do stress analysis and things like that on automotive parts.  So it was physics but it wasn't the kind of physics that I was interested in, which is why I left International Harvester.  You know when I went to graduate school [Yale University, New Haven Connecticut] they tried to persuade me to remain connected with them but you know they just weren't doing the kind of you know modern physics that I was interested in doing.  So--
Story_ID: 28905
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--okay where I was at was you graduated [from Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] but I also--you were saying during the break that your grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.] came to your wedding.  So he met your wife [Mary Schmidt Campbell] then?
Speaker 2: I met my wife in high school when she was thirteen [years old], I was fifteen.  Central High has, had a sister school, Girls' High which was right across the street and it was also you know an academic selective school and so I met her when she was in ninth grade there and we became friends.  You know we weren't, you know, boyfriend and girlfriend or going out together or anything in those days.  I guess we started--but we became very good friends.  And we used to, you know, I would be going out with girls.  She would be going out to the extent that you go out at that age you know there were high school dances and things and I'd see her and she'd see me.  And we'd see each other at parties.  But we became very good friends fairly early.  I mean within you know a year of knowing her we were good friends.  We used to call each other a lot on the phone.  She would call me and ask me advice.  I'd ask, call her.  We would read poetry to each other and things like that.  I can--if I were reading interesting things I can remember reading [Lord Alfred] Tennyson I guess in tenth grade and a lot of stuff that I liked and I used to called her, call her and read her passages from Tennyson and from you know, and also from the renaissance poetry that we were reading.  There's a series of books, Penguin [Group] series on poetry, there was modern, there was renaissance, Victorian, something else.  And so I used to you know when I used to come across things I liked and you know I was, there was also outside of class we, you know cause they weren't teaching you know Langston Hughes and things like that in those days.  So we discovered these African American poets and shared them with each other and so we developed into a real strong friendship.  And I guess when I started college [Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at some point it occurred to us that you know we really liked each other.  The reality is and she admits this is that she was in love with me she says from very early back when she was in tenth grade or something.  But--and I guess I was too--not smart enough to realize that and I you know or to see the handwriting on the wall until I was a, I guess a freshman in college is when we started to get serious with each other.  And so she was about sixteen or seventeen [years old] then.  And we got married when she was twenty and so yeah it was thirty-two years ago, thirty-three years ago almost [1969].
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  Now what is her name?
Speaker 2: Mary Schmidt Campbell and she actually came from--we had a lot of sort of cultural classes because she came from a much more middle class family.  Her father [Harvey Schmidt] was a judge.  He was a lawyer then, became a judge.  Her mother was an elementary school teacher and so you know she came from a very middle class family and I was a poor kid.  And so--but in some ways we were kind of both outcasts because you know Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had, and the black community had this kind of bourgeois structure and I was kind of not part of that because I was poor and you know grew up in the poor neighborhoods.  And even though you know some of the school--you know Central [High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] there were a few of those kind of people from the black bourgeoisie and she wasn't a good fit because you know there was also the sort of color thing in the black community.  And so, you know, she was darker than most of the black bourgeoisie and so she didn't fit with them either even though she came from a middle class family.  And so I don't know how much that played into our relationship but we did have culture clashes in those days because you know I didn't have money and she did.  But it worked out.
Story_ID: 28906
Speaker 1: What did her [Mary Schmidt Campbell, Campbell's wife] parents think of you?
Speaker 2: You know I think her father [Harvey Schmidt]--the first time I met her father I was with a bunch of my friends and we were kind of rapping and talking and you know black people, black men in particular have two languages you know.  You, there's one language you speak on the street and even you know black intellectuals you have one language you speak on the street and then when you're in a different venue you have a different language.  And he happened to have come across me initially when I was in the street venue and so he didn't think much of me initially.  But, you know, I think--but very quickly, you know, we developed a very special relationship.  I mean I personally had a lot of respect for him.  He was actually a well known person in Philadelphia as a civil rights activist as well.  He was court-martialed during the war [World War II] for protesting segregated barber shops.  He did one of the original sit-ins in 1942.  He sat-in, he went to a barber shop that said--he's a very meticulous man, said--enlisted men.  He said I'm an enlisted man, I want a haircut.  They said no we don't cut black, you know, colored's hair here.  He said well I'm an enlisted man and I'm going to sit here until you cut my hair.  He wouldn't cut his hair.  So he got a court martial, they sent him to Alaska but he came back, he became head of the community legal services in Philadelphia.  And there was a very famous case, Rizzo, Frank Rizzo [later mayor of Philadelphia from 1972 to 1980] was the chief of police [from 1967 to 1971].  There was a policeman killed in North Philadelphia and Frank Rizzo sent out this net and they covered I don't know like a twenty square block area.  The instructions of the police was that they were to arrest every black male between eighteen and thirty for questioning about this thing and he filed a class action suit against the police department and took five or six years but he won that case.  Anyway he went on to become a judge here.  In fact everyone in his law firm became a judge.  Judge [A.] Leon Higginbotham, became a famous federal court judge, was his partner there.  And in fact he started with Raymond Pace Alexander who was also another famous black lawyer and judge.  And so was a prominent, he was a prominent person and I had tremendous respect for--he stayed, he lived in the, you know heart of the black community and was a man who would, with incredible dignity.  And so he was another important back role model for me.  He's still alive.  He's eighty-four, eighty-five years old in Philadelphia.  And he had a--he was an extraordinarily dignified man and very sort of formal and which is why he didn't relate well to me initially with my street language and, cause--and he was very meticulous about, you know, grammar and language and eating properly and all of those things.  And, you know, I had just enormous respect for him as a black man standing up to the power structure as he did because he was, I mean he was vilified for many of the things that he did to stand up for rights of people.  In his courtroom, I used to go and see him in his courtroom.  You know the white lawyers would come in and they would say you know John hears this and John, and he would say in my courtroom, this man is not guilty.  Call him Mr. Johnson.  And you know he you know made people respect each other and you know he was an important figure.  And I--and so we came to really like each other a lot and you know he got to know me and realize that I was not just a you know a screw up, you know, running after his daughter.  But I really did have ambition and goals in life and so on.
Speaker 1: What is his name, sir?
Speaker 2: Harvey Schmidt.
Speaker 1: Even the name, it sounds like a Jewish name.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 28907
Speaker 1: Okay.  But--okay, now so you're graduating [from Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at this you know point and you get married you said two weeks after you graduate?
Speaker 2: A few weeks, yeah it was in August so I say a couple, or I guess it was a couple of months actually, so yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what are your thoughts at this point?  You know you're newly married. I mean even when you're graduating, is it assumed that you're going right after graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  I had you know following my senior year I had been accepted to graduate school already and so I was off to graduate school except that in the spring of that year, you know, it was during the Vietnam War and, you know, I had been a, an ambition of being a civil rights, involved in the civil rights movement and marching and all that.  I was also an anti-war activist and a member of the War Resisters League and all that.  But in March of that year they decided to eliminate graduate school deferments [Military Selective Service Act of 1967].  Graduate, students in graduate school had been deferred up until 1968 automatically.  They eliminated graduate school deferments and so I was 1-A, right for the draft and I immediately applied for conscientious objective status which you know was kind of a hard battle for someone who didn't have you know intense, religious connections.  I didn't and so I applied on the basis of ethical and moral grounds, and I went through the hearings and I won and I got conscientious objective status, and I was still drafted but I had to do alternative service.  And so the law said that if you're drafted as a conscientious objector you simply had to take a job that was more than fifty miles from home and you had to be doing something in service to humanity or something like that.  They tried to force you to take some of the jobs that were on their list.  You know mostly hospital orderly jobs and things like that, but you had no obligation to do that.  I applied for jobs teaching in Africa, which is why I wound up going to Zambia to teach physics.  And so I spent two years in Zambia teaching physics before going to graduate school.
Story_ID: 28908
Speaker 1: That's, okay now that's amazing.  But I want to go back because I had started to ask you if you were involved in the Civil Rights Movement but I didn't, I wasn't sure--I thought you were just really on the academic track (unclear).  But you were--what things were you--?
Speaker 2: Well I mean I was still black and living in America and so--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) black living in America (unclear) I'm just saying.
Speaker 2: Well Drexel [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was a pretty activist place and it was in the city of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and so on and so I you know, I was involved in the usual protests and you know we had South Africans come.  And I mean one of the reasons why I was very interested in going to South Africa is that, southern part of Africa was because you know I had to come to appreciate and realize that the movement for equality of people of color was more of an international issue.  It wasn't just an issue of America and slavery and so on but there was you know the whole continent of Africa had been colonized.  And I had gotten, developed some friendships with several South Africans here in the United States and at--you know my wife was at Swarthmore College [Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and I met some there and we became friends.  And so I--that was really my interest in going to Africa.  We taught at a college that was established for Southern African refugees.  These were, you know, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, South Africa, all were still under colonial rule and there were wars going on to free people from colonial rule and people were escaping colonial rule.  And this college [Nkumbi International College] was 75 percent refugees from colonized war zones in Southern Africa.  By government mandate 25 percent of the students were Zambian and so--but it was really a refugee school.  And so we sort of got involved in the movement on an international level.
Story_ID: 28909
Speaker 1: You know, but that's interesting in and of itself, I'll talk--I mean I'll tell you why.  I mean I myself personally have always been, you know had interactions with Africans but there are two sets of African Americans, those who had no interaction at all and those that did.  But the other thing I'm curious about with your wife [Mary Schmidt Campbell] being younger too, she went--did she take--
Speaker 2: Just two years younger.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.  Two years younger, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, oh that's--okay.  But when you got married, was she--she wasn't finished school yet.
Speaker 2: Almost, yeah.  She had a year to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah so I delayed my going to Africa.  I got drafted immediately like in this, right after we got married but you know there was the matter of finding a job and getting the job approved and that sort of took until I don't know, March [1969] or April and the job didn't start until June so we had time for her to finish.
Speaker 1: So when you finish, you immediately ship off to Zambia?
Speaker 2: When she finished her degree after certain--weeks after she got her degree, we went off to Zambia.
Speaker 1: So what are her parents thinking?  What are your parents thinking (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was--
Speaker 1: I'm just saying this is 19 what, 19--?
Speaker 2: This is 1970 now, yeah sixty, no '69 [1969], 1969 yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so yeah, no they were anxious but they thought it was exciting.  It was a big party and you know they thought it was exciting.  I mean people didn't, black people didn't travel overseas unless they were in the [United States] Army in those days and so it was kind of an exciting thing that we were going off to teach in Africa.  And you know we had active correspondence and sent pictures.  I was sort of an amateur photographer and we had dark rooms at the school and I used to develop my own pictures and sent in pictures weekly back and so we kept them informed.  My--our--her mother and my mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] when we were I guess six months after we had, they, we had a--this school was actually funded by the state department, the U.S. State Department.  And we had you know pretty good vacations and they--we had R&R [Rest and Relaxation] we called it.  And so we spent all of our money traveling while we were there.  And so we went to Europe at the end of six months and my mother and her mother met us there and so we got to see them.  So that was, so that worked out.  That was all right.
Speaker 1: That was wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28910
Speaker 1: So, what was that growth experience?  What, how did that open your world?  I mean I could see you and your wife's [Mary Schmidt Campbell], but I mean what--because that's a whole, you know it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a, I think a very important experience for me also and I recommend that to young people to spend some serious amount of time in a different culture.  And I mean it's becoming harder and harder to do that because, you know, the cultures are becoming more and more homogenized with the world becoming smaller and smaller.  But still I think it's an enormously valuable experience to spend time in a very different culture.  You learn so much about yourself.  You know, the--and that was a, you know, was a very different culture being not only, you know, in Zambia in a place where the language is different, where the, you know, the culture was different, the food was different, everything was different sort of the way of life was different, the economy was different.  It was you know immensely valuable.  I've already talked about the weather but there were things that were you know--I'm hesitating because there were things that were common too.  I mean one of the interesting things that we learned, you know, getting--we first stopped in Nairobi [Kenya] and seeing people dance and the rhythms.  They were like hey this is like--they dance like we do.  And one of the things that was interesting was that there were two people who were tremendous heroes on the African continent.  One was James Brown [African American singer] and the other was Muhammad Ali [African American boxer].  They were enormous heroes.  And everywhere we went people wanted to know about James Brown and Muhammad Ali.  And we were there, we were in Africa when Muhammad Ali lost that fight to Joe Frazier [1971] and I mean it was like we were--the campus became like a funeral.  I mean people were depressed and saddened and just deeply hurt by the fact that he had lost that fight because he was such an incredible hero and you know because this was after he had stood up to the American government and so on.  And James Brown actually came to Zambia when I was there and it was like a pilgrimage I mean to Osaka [Zambia].  People all the roads were carrying goods and you know enough stuff that they could make the trip walking to Osaka, a hundred miles, two hundred miles to get there to get a glimpse of James Brown.  And he gave a concert and you know which was attended by people who could afford it, mostly white people and he you know decided after that concert that this, he came to Africa, this was not the total audience he wanted.  And he decided to give a free concert in the stadium [1970].  And I mean it was, it was just an incredible thing.  It really touched the hearts and minds of people in Zambia and it was a spectacular conference--you know concert.  And, but he was heroic before that but that really solidified it.  So I guess the point is that there were a lot of common elements between the African experience and there were a lot of things that we sort of saw in ourselves there.  And I mean we saw people who looked like people we knew in the United States and things like that.
Story_ID: 28911
Speaker 1: And so there were cultural similarities and also vast differences and there were--you know one of my most extraordinary experiences was having a child there [Garikai Campbell].  I mean you know children--they didn't have this sort of hierarchy in Zambia that we have here.  Kids of all ages played together.  They interacted with each other.  Here it's not like--if you're, you know five-years-olds play with five-year-olds and eight-year-olds with eight-year-olds.  There it was more of a community of children and the children when they were born they were felt to be the responsibility of the village.  I mean this is--a child born in the village is a child of the village and it's the responsibility of the entire village not just the nuclear family to ensure the welfare of that child.  And so the concept of babysitting was just not you know not really understood there.  I mean you, you know you did hire people, you know we hired someone who was a nanny or something like that.  But when you're dealing with friends you know the concept, the people who were part of the community babysitting and paying people for that just didn't exist.  I mean, you know, and they--you know, the way it worked was you know you had your child.  People left you alone for a couple of months, you know, you raise the child from infancy.  But then, you know, people expected the child to be part of the community so you know people would come and knock on the door.  Yes?  Well we've come for the baby (laughter).  So, you know, and so okay.  So we'd come out and so they'd play with the kid and they'd say well we're going to go down, we're going to go someplace else and take the baby.  And you know it was kind of skittish at first but you know it was, in the end it was really quite a warming experience to have this and you, you know, you really didn't have to worry about that the kid was not going to be taken care of because children were celebrated and really you know--they were disciplined but they were also sort of worshiped as, you know, the future.  And it was quite an experience.  It's not like anything we have here.
Speaker 2: Now were there things that--were you of the mindset you know that we're going to our homeland in some respects?
Speaker 1: Oh sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This was the place where our ancestors came from and there was this you know inequity that existed there that we felt we had some kinship to the inequities that exist in the United States.  We wanted to understand that better and maybe contribute something, yeah.
Story_ID: 28912
Speaker 1: Now what about teaching, what was that like [in Zambia]?  What was the academic system like and--?
Speaker 2: It was very, you know it was the British system.  It was Zambian so, and they took education very seriously.  You know you walk into a room, the teacher walked into a room, the students stood and it was that level of formality and respect.  And so I think--and it was, you know, the students were very good students.  I mean they were very serious about education.  Education didn't come to everybody so we're privileged to get an education and so they were very serious, very hard working students.  It was a very--very high academic standards and so it was a good teaching experience for us.
Speaker 1: And your wife during that time was she raising your--?
Speaker 2: She taught English literature and she can tell you more fascinating stories than I can because you know she was teaching [William] Shakespeare, William Golding and you know, and I think she even taught some African American writers that she slipped in at point of the curriculum.  But you know it was really English literature, [William] Wordsworth you know and all of that.  And it's--at one, you know what she likes to talk about is that you know students very much related to Shakespeare despite the archaic language.  They were--there was a sort of a, I don't know a cultural relationship between Zambia and the Shakespearian perspective.  I mean there were--you know Shakespeare has a lot of supernatural stuff for example and you know the witches and all of that.  And I guess the sort of--the cultural element is that in Shakespeare evil is something, in many of the Shakespearian plays, evil is something that sort of resides outside of the human condition.  It's not really internal to humanity whereas with Golding for example which is why I cited him you know evil was an inherent part of human beings and you know the "Lord of the Flies" [1954] you know it sort of comes out when you have that opportunity.  Whereas with Shakespeare it was you know evil was something brought in by the, by witches or by the, by external forces.  And so they were much more--they liked Shakespeare much more than they, and related to Shakespeare much more effectively than they related to modern literature you know and the French writers like [Jean-Paul Chrles Aymard] Sartre and [Albert] Camus and so on.  This sort of intensely individualistic perspective was not really sort of culturally in consonance with their belief structures.
Story_ID: 28913
Speaker 1: Now this--okay, I find a lot of this interesting.  Now you--so it's time to come back.  You've been there two years and it's time to come back.  Now have your parents [Robert P. Campbell and Lillian Britt Campbell] seen your--their grandson [Garikai Campbell]?
Speaker 2: Well my mother had--I said that my mother and her mother--
Speaker 1: Came over.
Speaker 2: --came over.  Now it was not--it was in fact it was a year.  It was not the first six months, it was the December of the next year so it was a--after we had been there a year and a half because the baby was with us.  He was six months old so they--my--our two mothers had seen the baby.  They saw him in Europe.  But my wife's father [Harvey Schmidt] had not seen the baby 'til we got home.
Speaker 1: So you got, came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and you come back to a bunch of welcoming arms?
Speaker 2: Right, oh yeah we had, they had a big party.  A lot of our old friends and relatives were there and so on.  And--
Speaker 1: So how did you feel that you had changed in many ways cause this you know you had been living in a foreign--for two years--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know.  I lived abroad for one year but you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was, I mean it was interesting.  I mean I changed in a lot of dimensions.  I mean we had a son, we were parents now you know and had worked for two years and you know felt you know we had matured a great deal.  And you have to change the tape right?
Story_ID: 28914
Speaker 1: And there was a whole infrastructure around the draft.  We went to the Friends Committee--you know Swarthmore was a Friends, a Quaker college and was originated by the Quakers and so there was an active Friends Committee [The Religious Society of Friends], anti-war friends committee.  And they had compiled a database of all jobs that had ever been accepted as, and all kinds of jobs that had been accepted as you know alternative service jobs.  And we [George Campbell and his wife, Mary Schmidt Campbell] simply only applied for jobs in Africa.  We applied to several jobs in Africa, all of them.  So you know if they hadn't accepted one, the only alternatives they would have had would have been other jobs in Africa.  So--
Story_ID: 28915
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.  Okay so you come back, but then you ship off to Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] pretty quickly.
Speaker 2: Right, I came back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then immediately moved back to Syracuse, moved up to Syracuse and did our--went to graduate, both of us [George Campbell and his wife, Mary Schmidt Campbell] went to graduate school at Syracuse.  So--
Speaker 1: And your wife was studying what?
Speaker 2: Art history.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So she got her Ph.D. in art history.  I got mine in physics, theoretical physics.
Speaker 1: And they were at the same time frame?  You were there the same time--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: For how many years, to get your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I finished about five years. Let's see when I--I was actually finished in '76 [1976] but--and Mary wasn't quite finished so I hung around and delayed my defense until the fall, spring of '77 [1977].  Spring of '77 [1977] I defended and got my degree then. And then I, and so I taught basically you know in a non-tenured fill-in teaching job in the physics department there for that year.
Story_ID: 28916
Speaker 1: Now what was your dissertation on or I mean your--?
Speaker 2: It was in theoretical high energy physics.
Speaker 1: What is that?  (Laughter)  Sorry, okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Quantum particles?)
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--you know high energy physics has to do with the fundamental particles of nature, the fundamental building blocks and the interactions of those fundamental building blocks of nature.  In those days we called them fundamental particles and now of course it's not clear what the fundamental elements are.  I mean you know there's string theory, there's quark theory.  Quark theory was just, was--had already been you know explicated by then but you know the number of quarks was proliferating with, as the energy levels in our experimental physics arena increased new, more and more particles were being discovered.  And so the objective was to try and understand the relationship of these particles--the assumption being that there are a limited number of fundamental elements--building blocks--that comprise all of the materials that exist in nature or that one can create by various means.  And I mean you know at one time it was thought that the atom was the fundamental building block and there were different kinds of atoms and the different atoms were elements.  Then we discovered that the atom in fact had protons and neutrons and electrons and so they were believed to be the fundamental building blocks.  And then we discovered that in fact if you smash protons together that you found other particles.  And so the number of particles kept proliferating and the question was how do we organize these?  What are the fundamental blocks?  What are the forces that exist?  I mean we know that there's electrical forces, there's gravitational forces and there are these strong forces that hold the nucleus together.  There are weak interactions that take place that you see have consequences for, in stars for example.  And so the question was what are the forces and what are the particles that mediate these forces and how does it all fit together to yield the incredibly rich array of materials and interactions that we actually see and observe in the microscopic world.  And so that was the, that's the field of theoretical physics.  And I was not very much about doing experiments and I was much more interested in theory and calculations and--than I was in doing experiments.
Story_ID: 28917
Speaker 1: Now you--were your thoughts teaching at that point or were your thoughts getting a job?  That's what I'm just want--you know--
Speaker 2: You think teaching is not a job is that what you--? (Laughter)
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I--(laughter)--I know the way that sounded--I didn't mean it that way.
Speaker 2: No, but no.  Basically theoretical physics was primarily an academic enterprise.  I mean it's not a, you know, not something an industry is interested in except, you know, places like Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey].  And there were very few places like Bell Labs in those days.  Bell Labs, you know AT&T were--the Bell system was a monopoly and it was through the existence of the monopoly that Bell Labs existed.  It was funded by the monopoly telephone company which allowed them to do basic research in a whole array of areas, not necessarily related to products or industrial you know revenue generating kinds of things.  And so, you know, they did, you know, basic research in astrophysics as well as things that were purely academic.  I mean it was very much an academic enterprise, parts of Bell Labs in those days.  But basically there were very few other places to do theoretical physics except the academic world.  And so yeah my expectation in doing theoretical physics that I would remain in academia and go on to teach at a university.  I wasn't even thinking about Bell Labs as a matter of fact when I was in graduate school [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  It wasn't until I was basically recruited by the labs that I gave it any consideration.  And it was kind of, I don't know, another one of those confluence of events that took me to Bell Labs.  When my wife [Mary Schmidt Campbell] and I left, you know when we were finishing up, we both applied for jobs all over the country.  I applied for mostly academic jobs and then when Bell Labs recruited me I did say I would take a look at Bell Labs.  But you know I had job offers at several universities and I probably would have taken one of those but my wife had a job offer here in New York and she was you know an art historian.  And while she was in graduate school she did a lot of work, you know she sort of invested very wisely in her career.  She--there was a museum in Syracuse called the Everson Museum [of Art], the museum of the city and they had never done any shows of African American art and so on.  So she went to them and she proposed doing a show of Romare Bearden's [African American artist and writer] work.  And you know Romare Bearden was somebody she had done a lot of research on.  It was her dissertation.  And so they accepted the idea and she guest curated that for free.  She curated the show, brought his works, published a catalog, you know it was one of her first significant publications.  She did that all for free.  She volunteered, wasn't quite a volunteer.  She worked for the "Syracuse New Times" [Syracuse, New York] which was an alternative newspaper.  It was a good new--it was like "The Village Voice" [New York City, New York].  It was a free paper and she would--became the guest art critic, or the--not guest but the art critic for the "Syracuse New Times."  She got paid five dollars a week, you know one column a week she wrote, you know, on a critique of the local shows.  But when she finished graduate school she had, and she did a--and then she actually got a paying job at the Everson Museum.  After that show as so well received she became a part-time curator there and she did several other shows.  And by the time she left graduate school she had a whole portfolio of published works, critiques and journals and all these "Syracuse New Times" things and catalogs.  And so when she left graduate school she was offered a job here in New York as director of The Studio Museum in Harlem, which was a small African American Museum in those days and it was a fabulous job for someone just coming out of graduate school and you know there were only a half dozen black people with Ph.D.s in art history in those days.  And so it was a great opportunity for her.  So it would have been ridiculous for me to take a job in Indiana some place or in the outskirts of--in Western Pennsylvania at a university when she had a fabulous opportunity here in New York [City, New York].  And also Bell Labs had offered me a job and you know Bell Labs being a premiere research you know laboratory in the world, it would have been selfish for me to turn that down when you know--and force her to come someplace where there was no real significant art history activity going on.  So it was kind of a compromise.  He went to the Studio Museum and I went to Bell Labs and it worked out.
Speaker 1: That's not a bad compromise (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, right.  No, Bell Labs was a great place.  It was a great place to work.
Story_ID: 28918
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your career there [Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey] and the things that--you were there for how long?
Speaker 2: I was there for--two ways to answer that.  I was physically there for twelve years but I, when I left they didn't, really didn't want me to leave and so they offered me a leave of absence for a few years in case I wanted to come back.  And I took a leave of absence and so technically I was still associated with them for another four years.  So sixteen years officially, twelve years physically I was at Bell Labs.
Speaker 1: And let's talk about some of the things that were--some projects that you've worked on that were very important and I was just wondering if you could sort of talk about that experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--when I first went to Bell Labs, I mean it was a compromise in a sense that I left doing basic high energy particle physics because that was not an area that Bell Labs had any research in.  They did, they were interested however in magnetospheric physics and the reason they were interested, magnetospheric physics had to do with physics of the magnetosphere outside of the earth's atmosphere.  The reason they were interested is that Bell Labs had developed you know the first telecommunication satellites [1962] and had gotten into the satellite communications arena providing basic communication services over satellite.  And there were a lot of anomalies about the magnetosphere.  People didn't really know in those days what was going on at the altitudes where satellites were namely twenty three thousand miles up. And the reason why satellites were twenty three thousand miles up is that the natural orbital period for satellites at twenty three thousand miles is twenty-four hours.  And so the advantage of that is that the satellite would remain effectively stationary over a point on the earth's surface which was also rotating in a twenty four hour period.  So you wanted to have the satellite at twenty three thousand miles up because then your antenna could be fixed on the satellite.  And we didn't really know much about what was going on at twenty three thousand miles up, and there was--we know that the Van Allen radiation belts had been discovered and so we knew there was radiation there.  We knew that funny things happen to satellites at twenty three thousand miles up that electronics components got damaged, that satellites blew up or they underwent catastrophic failure.  And speculation was that there was charging going on and discharges and electrical phenomena that were causing these kinds of problems.  And so AT&T [Inc.] was interested and Bell Labs was interested in finding out what was going on and what kind of radiation was there, what the radiation spectrum was that is what the various energy levels of the particles, these radiation particles were and what effects those radiation, those particles had that radiation had on the sensitive electronics components on satellites.  And so that was one of the first things I did was to investigate that whole arena working with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], collecting data from experimental satellites that NASA had launched and what kind of particles they were, modeling those.  It was still doing some sort of theory in that, you know, we looked at the data and tried to develop simulations and models for the radiation environment.  And then handing that off to people in laboratories who could then try and actually physically simulate that and test things and look at what happened to solar cells, look at what happened to CMOS [Complimentary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor] devices and other kinds of electronics devices.  And then to figure out how to protect those devices so that when you launch satellites they would be protected against the radiation environment.  And so I started out doing this analysis of magnetospheric phenomena and analyzing electronics components and then ultimately went into the area of figuring out how to model and design some of the key systems on satellites like the power system which had you know which is the most vulnerable because the solar rays are the things that you want to face the sun where a lot of the radiation emanates from.  And so I got involved in designing, developing a new generation solar cells, power systems for satellites.  And then you know after, and then you know I got into management.  After five years I was promoted into management at Bell Labs and then I got into you know just a wide array of interesting problems in technology, some in satellites and international satellites communications, under-sea optical fiber, digital imaging systems and all kinds of things.
Story_ID: 28919
Speaker 1: Now this is just, this is an off-based question.  But was Hughes Aircraft [Company] involved in [Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey]--did you met--were they--?
Speaker 2: We, well Bell Labs, you know AT&T [Inc.] did not manufacture satellites.  We--Bell Labs designed, did technology development analysis and modeling, but we didn't actually build satellites.  Western Electric [Company] which was the manufacturing arm of AT&T didn't build satellites.  We went to--when AT&T wanted to develop the new generation of satellites, we had to go to the industry, the people that manufactured them to--and asked them to make satellites t our specifications.  And so you know Hughes was of course-- and being in the satellite manufacturing business there was Ford Aerospace [and Communications Corp.].  There was TRW [Thompson Ramo Wooldrige, Inc.], Lockheed [Martin] and a few others.  And as it turns out, Telstar 3 [satellites Telstar 301, Telstar 302, and Telstar 303, launched 1983-1985] which is what I was involved in--ultimately Hughes Aircraft got the contract to build those satellites.  And so I was involved during the period when they were actually developing and constructing those satellites for us.  And so I spent a lot of time commuting back and forth to the West Coast.  I had an apartment in Marina Del Rey [California], courtesy of Bell Labs and so it was not a terrible commute.  I'd spend a week there and two weeks at home and a week back there and I didn't have to bother with hotels and things.  I had the apartment so I could leave clothes there.  So I just had to get on a plane with my briefcase and go out there.  I had a car out there so it was not a--it was a--it turns out that it was more burdensome than I thought because when I stopped I realized that it had been taking its toll cause it was like wow, this is what it's like not to have to commute to the West Coast.  I did that for about two or three years, two and a half years.
Speaker 1: So was that during the years 1985 to '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: Um-um, that was more, that was like '79 [1979] to '83 [1983], yeah.
Story_ID: 28920
Speaker 1: Now when this whole thing--
Speaker 2: By then--oh go ahead.
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: No, I was going to say in the--by '84 [1984] I was--1984 I became head of a, an international research and development operation.  AT&T was given permission to offer advanced telecommunication services internationally by the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  And I think in 1983, we formed a new activity at Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey] to do research and development for AT&T looking at what kinds of telecommunications capabilities we needed to develop for the international arena.  And so I was working in that time frame, '84 [1984] to '87 [1987] or '88 [1988], we were working on a major project with the Japanese, KDD of Japan, Kokusai Denshin Denwa [Corporation] of Japan and British Telecom International.  So the idea was to connect the three major population centers of the world with telecommunications capabilities, undersea optical fiber satellites, the whole works.  And so I headed a Bell Labs delegation and that, involved in that project.  It was a terrific experience.
Speaker 1: Must be pretty exciting to see all those things--
Speaker 2: It was very exciting.
Speaker 1: I mean even that it's coming to fruition.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of this so this was sort of amazing.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely yes.  Yeah, it was an exciting activity.  And then you know, there again I got involved with different cultures and I think the experience I had had in Zambia was very helpful.  I had some exposure to the British during those two years and so it was very I think helpful in that project.  So, but that was also, that took its toll because I did a lot of international traveling.  And, you know, it sounds exotic and, you know, to people who don't have to do it, it sounds like it's, you know, it's very--that's a, you know, such a wonderful thing to be doing.  But it's, you know, it's burdensome.
Story_ID: 28921
Speaker 1: I understand 'cause I--now when you--so that, I'm just trying to--how was that environment?  Are you, I mean who is African American I mean or black at that time you know at Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey]?  Were you like one of the few or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it was interesting.  Bell Labs, I mean just about you know every enterprise that I worked with over my years had some history and maybe it's true of--I know race is such a thing in America, anyway.  But Bell Labs had a very strong history of support and you know being at the cutting edge with respect to African Americans.  It, some of the early--it's one of the companies that provided first opportunities for African Americans as real scientists.  [Walter Lincoln] "Link" Hawkins who was one of my mentors at Bell Labs became a good friend.  His, you know he was the first African American scientist at Bell Labs.  He was given a job in 1942 and he ultimately became a director.  He developed--he was a chemist.  He developed the polymer material that really permitted the, you know--made it possible to have undersea cable.  It was the polymer coating on those materials and his patents are estimated at, I don't know a couple of billion dollars in value to AT&T [Inc.] and ultimately he had about 150 patents.  He was awarded the [National] Medal of Technology in 1992 I believe.  He died in about 1995 I believe, '94 [1994] [sic, 1992].  But he was--so he was a real pioneer at AT&T.  The, there was one, you know while I was at Bell Labs, there was at one time we had probably 15 to 20 percent of all of the African American physicists in the country, Ph.D. physicists in the country were at Bell Labs, this one company.  You know it was all about excellence and people who they felt had gotten there--were hired.  You know it's not to say there wasn't you know racial tension and discrimination and all those things that you see in a larger society.  They were all there.  But it was probably one of the best places you could be as an African American scientist.  Now all of us were spread around.  I mean I was, you know, when I first came to Bell Labs I was the only African American in my department and my laboratory.  There was one other African American in the division.  I--who became--when I became a manager I was the only African American manager in the division that I was in.  And so yeah, any black scientist of my generation or older you know were generally, you know was generally the first or the only or something like that.  And so it's really more a statement about the history of our society than about you know any of us as individuals.  But you know that's the way it was.  If you were a scientist or an engineer you know you had to, that was a burden you had to bear.
Story_ID: 28922
Speaker 1: But on the other hand, there was a community of African American scientists that you could have lunch with and get together periodically [at Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey].  We had, we established in the early 80s [1980s] something called the Black Technical Managers Group at Bell Labs, not a group it was just Black Technical Managers.  It was an organization where we got all the black technical managers, you know, scientist and engineering managers together.  It was about fifteen of us when that first was formed.  When I left Bell Labs [1989] it was like ninety people and we used to meet.  We used to have serious meetings.  We met for, you know after a couple of years we were meeting for three days, had three day meetings in which we would cover a spectrum of things, you know issues of race and hiring and promotions.  We'd talk about technical issues, have you know major scientific presentations about people who were, you know who were part of the group and we would always have a session where we invited some key executives from AT&T or Bell Labs to talk to them seriously about what we thought were reasonable things that they could do to improve the environment, to improve the hiring, improve the promotions. And you know they were always well thought out, rational presentations that would be hard to say no to.  I mean, you know, we had a meeting in Columbus, Ohio which had no black managers and, you know, they--I think they only had one black person who was in, you know, in the professional scientific ranks and we showed them the number of graduates from Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], the number of graduates from area places and said you know we would like to see a five year plan where you would hire roughly this many people.  And it was not an unreasonable "demand".  I mean we were people who had just as much stake in the company as anybody else.  We were serious employees.  We had serious management responsibilities.  We had stock in the company.  We wanted to see the company succeed.  We weren't about tearing the company down.  We were about saying, how can we improve this company so that we can take advantage of the talent pool that's out there and make sure that we were getting the best scientific, you know, skill that's available.  And it was an enormously valuable I think entity to the company and certainly valuable to us as individuals.  I mean it was very you know--after dealing with frankly you know the, a lot of the tensions and stresses around dealing with people, all people from other ethnic groups all the time, there was a need periodically to get together with people who had the same kinds of issues, the same problems that they were struggling against and also who were you know kinsmen in the scientific arena.  So--and to share and you know purge and to commiserate and all of those things.  So I think it was a valuable, tremendous benefit to the company and they saw it.  The company supported that activity you know and gave us the three days to do it and paid for the trips and all the rest.  And so, I think it was and probably is still valuable.  I think the organization still exists.
Story_ID: 28923
Speaker 1: Asking you (unclear) that you feel like you're in a hurry.  You're not, okay.
Speaker 2: Why didn't I stay at Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I'll tell you, I mean let me just tell you one valuable lesson that I got from there that is relevant to the conversation we just had during the break.  After one year at Bell Labs, you know we don't have a tenure system at the labs but it's kind of an unwritten thing that people expect to see some serious accomplishment after you're there a year or two.  And they, you know people look at what you're doing.  And so after a year in my division at least there was a practice at least of having the, having you go before a you know, a group, panel of people, vice presidents and so on who would just look at what work you're doing, what contributions are you making.  And so you get a chance to give a seminar and talk about your work.  And before that you know generally your boss or your boss' boss would like to get a previous of what you're going to say, what you're going to talk about and learn something themselves about what you've been doing.  And so I went through this with my director, department head, giving them an overview of the work that I had been doing.  And my director kept saying to me, you know, you got to talk more about you George, your contribution and your--the valuable stuff that you did personally, your breakthroughs, your creativity.  And I said well you know my mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] taught me to be modest and not to you know toot my own horn too much.  So it's kind of you know against my grain.  And he said, well look, let me tell you something, this is Bell Laboratories and this is a-quote, unquote--I'll never forget his words--he said at Bell Laboratories it is virtually impossible to exceed the bounds of propriety in self-promotion.  (Laughter).  And so, you know, you were--the culture there was to be assertive and almost arrogant and aggressive about--with your ideas.  You couldn't survive there if you weren't.  And so, hence it wouldn't have been satisfying to think of yourself as one of thousands.  But anyway (laughter) why I didn't, why did I not stay at Bell Labs is an interesting question.  I, you know I guess I was, I had crossed the forty-year, of age, boundary.  And, you know, and I had, I was--there's something called the--
Speaker 1: Hold on just one second.
Speaker 2: (Brief Interruption)
Speaker 1: There was something called the [Bell Labs] Leadership Continuity Program which, where executives select a handful of sort of mid-level managers and target them for you know, as high-potential people who had the potential to exceed to leadership of the company and I happened to have been selected into this program.  And it was a great, sort of a fast track to higher level positions and lots of opportunities for training.  I mean I--they sent me to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] for, business school to, you know get, go through the School of Management there and get you know all the business skills that are needed--
Speaker 2: We have to stop, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 28924
Speaker 1: So the idea was to go and get all of the business skills I need and go through a variety of job experiences to move up in the company [Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey].  So I was pretty much assured of getting to a pretty, reasonably high level in the company.  But you know it was going to take time and you know, at that time it wasn't clear to me that Bell Labs or any other major company in America was ready for a black president or a black CEO and so it was a question of, do I put in my twenty, thirty years here and finally get to be a vice president, and still have three or four people to report to and kind of be one of thousands?  And--or is there something else that I could do with my life and be more in charge and do something that I would be more gratified by?  I mean there was, it was very personally gratifying to do the science that I was doing to lead major teams that were doing incredibly important things and making money for AT&T stockholders.  But you know at forty [years old] you say you know when I get to be, it's not that much more time left.  When I get to be sixty, do I want to look back over my life and say that I was responsible for "X" billion dollars of AT&T in AT&T shareholders' pockets and that I did all these interesting things?  Is there something that I can do to have a more lasting impact and the more, you know, influence on humanity that I can be proud of?  And, you know, so I started just having those kinds of thoughts.  You know, what do I want to be when I grow up at forty years old?  And, you know, and I was involved in a lot of things.  I was involved in higher education giving lectures.  I had started a program for kids in junior high school with a group of Bell Lab scientists.  We were working on Saturdays getting kids exposure to science and engineering and this kind of thing.
Story_ID: 28925
Speaker 1: And this NACME [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] job came along.  Turns out that [Morris] "Morry" Tanenbaum who was a vice president--no chairman, he was the vice chairman of AT&T, number two guy at AT&T, who had started his career at Bell Labs and was a very prominent physicist and inventor of the LED [Light-Emitting Diode] and so on and had moved up to the number two position of the company, was on the Board of Directors of NACME, the National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering. And the president of NACME [Richard F. Neblett] was retiring and so he sent a note around saying, asking you know if we knew anybody who might be interested in this NACME job.  And I didn't know much about NACME cause I was a physicist and this was mostly engineering although science was a little bit a part of what they did.  And so I looked at it, it looked like a very intriguing announcement.  And so I didn't get on the web [Internet] 'cause we didn't have it then.  I called up and asked them to send me some materials about NACME and they did, annual report, this and that, very interesting organization.  They're doing it all wrong but they have the right idea.  And so I mean the idea about NACME it was, NACME was an organization that had been created under the auspices of the National Academy of Engineering in the early 1970s to provide access and opportunities for minorities, African Americans, Latinos and American Indians to engineering, primarily engineering.  And you know in the, in the--in 1974 when it was formed, less than 1 percent of the work force in this country were African Americans, Latinos and American Indians.  And you know they were significantly larger part of the population and clearly, you know, there is historical factors that limited access, financial factors and so on.  And you know this was something that I had been involved with all along. At Bell Labs I was involved in the scholarship programs that they had there, involved in outreach programs to encourage minority kids, African Americans to think about scientific careers.  And so it looked like a very interesting thing to be doing plus it was an opportunity to run a company today.  And even though the company it was only a $4 million company, you know, and I was, I already had a much bigger budget than that at Bell Labs and so it would have been a step down in that sense.  But on the other hand it would have been running a whole company all by yourself and that was very exciting to me as a possibility.  And it had an incredible cadre of support.  I mean Bell Lab--I mean NACME as I said had been created under the auspices of the National Academy of Engineering, the most prestigious, you know, professional organization in the country and it was supported by an enormous array of Fortune 100 companies.  And the Board of Directors were mostly CEOs of those kinds of companies.  The president of IBM [International Business Machines] was on the board, the chairman of DuPont [E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company], the chairman of Amoco [Corporation], the vice chairman of AT&T [Inc.], the chairman of Goodyear [Tire and Rubber Company].  You know so it was a really fascinating board and the opportunity to run a company and to run a company and interface with people at this level was a very exciting possibility for me.  And then I decided that I was going to apply for the job and my executive vice president [of Bell Laboratories] called me and he said look, you know, we've got a lot invested in you and you're on this leadership continuity program, we don't want to lose you.  And what can we do to make life happier for you?  And by then I had made up my mind that if I got this job I was going to do it.  And I did get the job and so he offered me the opportunity to take a leave of absence 'cause I would get tired of running this little company after a while and want to come back.  I said okay I'll take the leave.  And so I did, I took the leave of absence and I came to NACME and I did some--and that you know that's why I left.
Story_ID: 28926
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your experience at NACME [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] because it was eleven year-experience as well.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And tell us you know what are the things that you--you said they were doing big, they had the right mission, they were just approaching it all the wrong ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm just wondering you know what were your hallmarks and what were the things that you learned in the process?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well NACME was essentially a scholarship organization although historically when it was created it was initially started as a research activity within the National Academy of Engineering to try and understand what the issues were, what are the impediments to access to engineering, what are the--how do you solve this problem of getting more African Americans and Latinos into the engineering profession.  And you there was a committee that did research, but it had--and they had an outreach program and they published a lot of materials, gee-whiz engineering, think about career, counseling kinds of materials.  But it had been, the bulk of the resources were in scholarships.  And the program they had was they identified universities, gave them block grants, established sort of rules and criteria for awarding scholarships but the universities awarded the scholarships.  And basically a lot of the money was being squandered.  I mean the retention rate of students was like 35 percent, which means 65 percent of the money was going to waste.  And the universities argued, it's not going to waste.  These kids have gotten some education.  Even if they didn't finish in engineering maybe some of them went to other areas.  Some of them dropped out but they were more educated than they would have been if they didn't have this opportunity.  Well my goal--and then, and most of those who were graduating were graduating barely by the skin of their teeth and so it was no support infrastructure and so on.  It was just really money being given out, throwing money at the problem.  And I wanted to, number one, I wanted to produce engineers who were going to be successful, who were going to be high achievers, who were going to be competing for the jobs that my board of directors had.  And you know and the reality was the amount of money was small.  I mean you know $4 million, by the time you looked at other things they were doing it was really more like $3 million being given out.  And it was being given out to like three thousand kids you know.  So you're talking about you know thousand dollar grants and less.  And it wasn't enough to really make a huge difference to a student.  Yeah it helped a few kids get over the hump, but it wasn't a make-or-break situation.  It was just in my view a wrong approach.  My idea was to spend the money on fewer students and provide the kind of infrastructure necessary to make them truly successful, top-notch engineers.  And that was a real battle.  I had to go head-to-head with my board on that.  I had many board members who felt that that was a mistake.  We didn't really want to--we wanted to reach as many kids as we could reach.  We didn't, first of all, know how to produce kids who could be successful engineers, leave that in the hands of the universities.  And this is a scholarship effort and the scholarships are very important to providing access.  So it was a big battle, but I, in the end I won the battle.  We started a program and I started it small.  It was a pilot program [Engineering Vanguard Program] and I grew it, and it became so successful it just swallowed up everything else.
Story_ID: 28927
Speaker 1: We [NACME, National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] started a program called the Vanguard Program, the Engineering Vanguard Program.  And the idea was, that the premise was that in the high schools in inner city communities in America, there are brilliant kids, kids who have enormous scientific capabilities and mathematical skills.  Much of it undiscovered, undeveloped because they're in environments where you know I mean the statistics are stark.  Today even in the inner city, high schools in America, an African American child taking an advanced calculus, an advanced math course or physics course has about a 30 percent chance of getting a teacher who is qualified to teach that course.  And so we have kids who are brilliant but un-stimulated, unengaged and so the question was with limited resources, what could we do to one, identify which kids had the level of motivation and the analytical skill as late as the eleventh grade that would allow us to go in and provide intense academic experience to fill in the gaps in their background and get them up to speed so that they could be effective in an engineering program?  They could do well in an engineering program and a high level engineering program.  And so the first task was to figure out how to evaluate, assess these students' skills and motivation because you know the standardized tests were really in my view, irrelevant for kids in that environment because they were, many of them were you know just un-stimulated and wouldn't do well in those kinds of tests.  And so we developed a process over a year or two of evaluating students by putting them through workshops, observing their behavior, giving them interesting and challenging problems to work on, giving them resources to work with including you know our faculty.  We hired about fifteen young Ph.D.s during the summer and to work part time during the year, Saturdays to work with these students in these workshops to identify the, quote-unquote, "talent."  And it was not really identifying sort of innate talent but identifying those kids who had at least the level of intellectual development through whatever courses they had, but who also had the motivation to really work very hard for a year so that they could get up to speed.  Because the other premise was that it's a mistake to bring kids who are not really prepared into a high level engineering program and then tutor them, things like that, which a lot of people were doing.  I think you have to be ready day one to compete at an engineering school.
Story_ID: 28928
Speaker 1: And so we [NACME, National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] figured out we thought it was a good way of measuring and assessing these students that had the capabilities and then the next step was to figure out what kind of curriculum to provide to ensure that they got the background they needed to be able to compete.  We got a couple of universities to take a risk with us.  We went to Rice [University, Houston, Texas] and Lehigh [University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania], two very good engineering schools, schools that had very few minorities and were looking hard trying to figure out how they could get minorities in.  And we said we have a deal for you.  We'll give you some top notch minorities but they're going to be kids who don't look like your other students in terms of their paperwork.  They're not going to have high SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] scores.  They're not going to have high grades even maybe.  And they won't do well on standardized tests but we're going to put them through a training program that will guarantee that they will be up to speed and will be able to compete.  And you know they didn't quite believe it but they were willing to take the risk.  They desperately wanted to get more minority students and they didn't have much of a way of doing it themselves.  And they took the risk with us and it was successful.  I mean at first we took--we sent ten kids to those schools the first year and we didn't--into the first year we didn't lose a single one of those kids and a few of them were in the 3.8, 3.9 grade point average at the end of that year.  There were--the second year it was even more successful.  We had a kid who had an 830 combined SAT score, combined and Rice, the average is like 1450 for engineering.  And six hundred points below their average.  And the faculty missions committee was dead-set against bringing this kid in.  But we had worked with this kid over a summer and a whole year, and it was clear that he was just brilliant.  And you know, he just hadn't, didn't have the background.  And they accepted him eventually and he wound up graduating with a 3.9 grade point average from Rice.  And it was just, it became an enormously successful program.  We were in about sixteen colleges and universities when I left [NACME, 2000].  Each of them had you know ten students almost--you know it wasn't always ten. It was eight sometimes, fifteen sometimes, but an average of about ten students per class, per university.  And we gave those kids--by the way these were all kids from very, some of the worst high schools, the poorest communities in the country.  We gave them all full scholarships so it was a very expensive program.  I mean we were spending twenty, twenty-five thousand dollars a year per kid as opposed to that one thousand dollars.  But we had also grown the budget.  When I left NACME it was twenty million dollars.  And so it, you know we were supporting fewer students even with the higher budget, we were supporting fewer students than the three thousand, but they were all graduating and they were all graduating with high grades.  And so I was very proud of that program.  It was a--I think it's something that really did change kids' lives.  And it was, it would change kids' lives in a lot of ways.  You know you met my vice president for external affairs at NACME.  She was--when we first started this program we had all these kids in a room from all these cities, all these inner city schools and we started out in New York [City, New York] and Boston [Massachusetts]--in New York and Houston [Texas] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], now it's grown to many other places.  But you know she made the comment that you know if my mother got on a subway with these kids, she would have gotten off and headed for the stairs you know 'cause these were hard-headed kids from the inner city, you know dressed like inner city kids and, you know, some even had gold teeth and you know, I mean they were deep in the hat kids.  And, but to see them transform from that to top world class engineers was just an amazing, gratifying experience for us.
Speaker 2: That's fabulous.
Story_ID: 28929
Speaker 1: --what point did you start in the lifecycle of your time there?
Speaker 2: Let's see, when did we start that?  We probably started that [Engineering Vanguard Program] around 1993 or so, three years after I got there.  I mean we had, you know we had been thinking about it--what we could do to create a more effective program and we had made some minor modifications of the existing programs but it wasn't really enough and so we were trying to look for a major breakthrough.  And so we started talking about how we could reach down and get kids earlier and get them prepared and that's what came out of it.  And I think we had the first class going to college in '90 [1990], yeah '93 [1993], '94 [1994] I believe.  And--
Speaker 1: And you worked with them a year before?  Is this--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you identified--
Speaker 2: Yeah, identify them yeah, a year before they were going to college.  And had a year, a summer--much of the work was done during the summer though.  The intense part of the program is the summer but we had workshops in, during the course of the year as well.  But, so these kids I mean obviously they had to be kids with very high motivation.  They had to work very hard to catch up 'cause they were way behind.
Speaker 1: How did you do the screening, though?  How did you know that you had--I mean I'm just saying 'cause--
Speaker 2: That, you know in some sense it's not all that hard because the fact is that there are so many kids in those environments.  I mean look, we looked at thirty, twenty-five, thirty thousand kids and would only pick three hundred you know in those early years.  And so it wasn't easy.  It wasn't--I mean it wasn't hard to pick brilliant kids when you have that huge pool.  I mean the shame of it is that there are so many kids that are also very bright that we couldn't pick and give those full scholarships to and do that development.  I mean the fact is if our education systems were doing what they should do, we'd have far more black and Latino kids doing very well in college.
Speaker 1: But still, what were your parameters for selection because you said no standardized tests--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean these were not traditional parameters so what were you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well we had, as I said we hired about fifteen young scientists, engineers, mathematicians you know and they--from around the country and we brought them together and we simply observed.  We gave these young people--first we gave them some sort of, some stimulus you know we talked to them about engineering and science and the opportunities that are available, you know.  The fact that engineer's net salary on average is about the same as a medical doctor's net salary.  The fact that there are two hundred thousand new jobs in engineering every year, the fact that you know only ten new jobs in the NBA [National Basketball Association] every year and we gave them some videotapes.  We showed them some videotapes.  We showed them some of the exciting kinds of things that engineers work on.  And then we gave them so, and we gave them some problems to work on.  And at the end they knew that if they got through that they would get a full scholarship to a top university.  And so you know I'm sure that there were some bright kids who didn't care about that, that we didn't get.  And--but we twisted arms to get certain kids.  I mean we did not have any screening--we didn't eliminate anybody up front.  We would invite--go to speak at schools and invite anybody who was ending their junior year to come and take advantage of this opportunity.  I don't care what your test scores are, what your grades are, if this stuff interests you, come and spend a few days with us.  And if you get through this you'll get a full scholarship to a top university.  And we would you know, we would talk to teachers, we built relationships with the teachers, with the counselors and we knew you know who they thought were bright and underachieving, people who we respected.  I mean some of the counselors, you know, you can dismiss cause they--you know, but that's another story.  But we would find--we would identify kids and twist their arms and say look you need to come to this, you know.  No, I'm not into the engineering.  Hey, yeah but you need to come to this meeting, man.  This is going to be something you won't want to miss.  And, you know, get their friends to help twist their arms.  So we did some recruiting in our own ways, too, to get kids in.  But it wasn't that hard.  You give, you--these kids despite their laid back attitude, some of them were really like, yeah I'm not into this, I'm just here because somebody said come and then despite themselves you'd find them really getting caught up in what we were doing and they'd be challenged and interested and excited about the problems.  And you'd--and they'd performed.  I mean they would perform.  They wouldn't, you know it wasn't the same kind of environment where you had your pencils and you're all sitting in a row and you answer these little, fill in these little boxes on these tests.  It was about doing things and working on projects and we just observed them over a period of time and said, this kid has got the right stuff.  And you know and I, you know, I don't know that, I'm not a sociologist or a, you know a social scientist or an educational psychologist, so I--we had some of those working with us and their--they could tell you better than I can what the right attributes were.  But, you know--so but the process seems to have worked.
Story_ID: 28930
Speaker 1: --test that you give somebody from an inner city high school, George Washington and say oh this kid scored one hundred points better therefore he's more qualified than this kid, that's absurd.  I mean these kids have totally different educational experiences.  And to say that this person ought to on the basis of merit have the opportunity to go to college and this kid shouldn't, makes no sense.  You know, if they had all had the same curriculum, the same opportunities, then yes, you can say let's give them the same test and compare them.  But that's not a valid mechanism you know.  And I mean it's a problem that we have here.  I mean you know we do depend on the standardized things to a great extent at Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York].  You know the average SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] score here is 1440 or so and you know on the other hand we've had a very successful outreach program at Cooper Union here too I'll--which I can talk to you about.
Story_ID: 28931
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to "Access denied" (unclear), but can you tell how that whole thing developed?  I was really struck by the preface, the first--you know the story of Bouchet.
Speaker 2: Yes, Edward Bouchet [1852 - 1918, first African American to earn his Ph.D. degree from an American university].
Speaker 1: Edward Bouchet and, you know, sort of that story because I thought it was a sweet way to sort of begin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we could.  I--yeah we decided to you know--one of the other things I did at NACME [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] was I significantly expanded our research effort because I thought that was important to understand what we were doing, to document what we were doing, why we're doing it and to understand what the underlying issues were to deal with, you know, as things emerged like this anti-affirmative action effort that emerged from various organizations around the country and legal issues and legal challenges were being brought that we needed to have a research underpinning to ensure that we could maintain the success of our ventures.  And, so one of the things that we did in that context, was to host a research conference on issues around access for minorities to science and engineering careers.  And so we invited, you know, sixty-five leading researchers from around the country who were working in this area, social scientists, social psychologists, educational psychologists, who were working in this area figuring out how to improve access for minorities.  And at each level, you know, grade school through graduate school and in the professions.  And you know we held a three day conference and we decided to publish--and this was not really a proceedings of the conference.  It was more sort of a digestion of the research that came out of that.  And we actually commissioned a number of research papers from leading social scientists around the country.  Before we held the conference we got funding I guess from the [Alfred P.] Sloan Foundation to do that and we had the money to commission research papers on various topics.  And so the conference--the headliners for the conference were those papers that we had commissioned.  And then we had other researchers to comment on the papers and to respond.  And then we put all that together and decided to publish the book, which Oxford [University Press] agreed to do.
Speaker 1: And that laid out, you basically in that--it was actually an extension of the [Engineering] Vanguard Program.  I mean in some respects it was a quantitative approach of why you know there should be a different approach to this whole issue, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we--you know the piece that I wrote for the book in addition to editing the book, I wrote sort of the introductory chapter which gave some of the historical perspectives and some of the compelling data on what the situation was.  I mean the fact that African Americans, Latinos and American Indians constitute 30 percent of the college age population, but are only producing you know 10 percent of the bachelor's degrees in engineering and the scientific field and only 3 percent, 2 or 3 percent of the doctorates in these fields is absurd.  I mean it meant that you know if you look out into future and the way demographics are changing as it's reflected in the latest census report, it would, the nation can't survive into the future without taking advantage of the entire talent pool.  And so, part of the impetus of the book was to raise the visibility and the consciousness level of people around this issue of underrepresentation.  And also to document those programs like the Vanguard Program that were successful and that actually work so that you know people who wanted to do things would have some basis in fact, some, and some quantitative information and some analysis and some programmatic direction.  So--
Story_ID: 28932
Speaker 1: Now, then okay, it was eleven years there and then this opportunity [President of Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York]comes up or are you restless?  Are you at another mid-life crisis (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That's a good question.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, you know higher education is the business that I was in.  I mean NACME [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] was very much about higher education in providing access.  And you know and I had been engaged throughout my career in higher education, at Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey] involved in a variety of things.  And you know I was a trustee at Rensselaer [Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York] since 1990.  I was a trustee at Polytechnic [Institute of New York] University [New York City, New York] so I was very much involved in the governance of universities.  I had worked with a number of university presidents while I was at NACME, several university presidents on my board.  And I had been actually recruited several times by search firms looking for university presidents and I guess I had made a decision that I didn't think I wanted to do that.  And in fact when the folks called me about Cooper Union I turned them down. I said, I don't think I'm interested in being a university president.  I'm very happy doing what I'm doing.  It's very important work and we're successful.  We're--our budget is growing and so to start a whole new career, I don't think I want to do that.  But then you know, but there is I think a--you know, a number of gurus in the management world believe that there are limits to leadership in terms of time.  And I guess I had come to, as you put it, be a little bit restless because I sensed that, you know, I was nearing the limit, you know.  And, you know, and no matter how good you are, when you're the head of an institution, an organization or a company, you know, if you're doing anything significant you're also making enemies along with making friends.  Decisions you make are tough decisions and there's also a kind of jadedness if there is such a word that takes place.  I mean you can, you're preaching your philosophy, your vision, your perspectives, and you know after people have heard that vision so many times it becomes less and less effective and a new person can come in with a different way of articulating the same vision and get a lot more impact out of it.  And I think it's healthy for organizations to get a fresh view, a fresh perspective and a new level of energy periodically.  And I think you know the sort of ten, you know, seven to fifteen years if you want to be really flexible is a kind of range of the limit of leadership in major kinds of enterprises.  And I think that's true of universities.  Now there are exceptions to every rule.  There are people who have extraordinary leadership, of institutions for twenty-five years.  I mean these things happen.  But I think by and large there is a you know ten to fifteen year limit that is a reasonable limit and I was getting to that point. And so I probably was a little more inclined, ripe for recruitment than I would have been otherwise.
Story_ID: 28933
Speaker 1: But the other thing is that Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] has such an incredible history and in many ways its mission was very much at least in continence with NACME's [National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering] mission.  It was all about providing an environment of excellence and access to higher education.  You know access to higher education of the first rank for those students who might not otherwise have opportunities. We have for 143 years Cooper Union has provided a high quality education, education of the first rank at no cost to the student.  Every student who gets accepted here gets a full tuition scholarship.  And so, independent of their means, these students if they have the academic credentials, they can come here and that's an exciting and compelling mission and again very much in line with NACME.  It's about access.  And you know we don't have a large minority population here.  We have about, you know, 7 or 8 percent African American, about 7 or 8 percent Latino and although, you know, for the kind of school we are, it's a higher percentage than you find nationally.  You know, we're in New York City where the, you know, 80 percent if the high school population are African  Americans and Latinos so I think we can do better than we're doing and we're working on that.  But, you know, we have had a history.  The school from 1859, the school's mission was radical.  I mean this school explicitly prohibited discrimination on basis of race, gender or religion in 1859.  That's when slavery still existed.  And so as a consequence some rather significant African Americans, albeit not very many but some have gone here.  Palmer Hayden graduated in 1919 and became an extraordinary and prominent African American painter.  Augusta Savage [sculptor] went here.  Roy DeCarava [photographer] went to school at Cooper Union.  Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe [photographer, HistoryMakers interviewee, 2007] graduated from here.  So you know the school does have a history of providing access to African Americans before it was fashionable.  And you know it's the school where Abraham Lincoln gave his, one of his most famous speeches, the "Right Makes Might" speech [1860].  It was a, probably the most powerful anti-slavery speech he ever gave because when he, after he became president [1861] he tempered that somewhat in the interest of trying to save the Union and to deflate the political game.  But it was a very powerful speech and it was a speech that really catapulted him from a little known Illinois lawyer to the national stage because New York where was the action was in 1859.  And the school--when Peter Cooper, the founder, established the school, he established it not only as a premiere academic institution but as an institution that would provide a forum for intellectual discourse and particularly to debate and discuss critical social issues.  So it was the home of Susan B. Anthony, Victoria Woodhull.  They had offices here during the women's suffrage movement.  It's the home, it's where the [American] Red Cross was organized, where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had its first organizational meeting.  And so it's had a long history of social activism and engagement in critical issues of importance to humanity.  It, so it's--all of that was a very compelling and intriguing, you know, reason for me to think about this as a next step for me.
Story_ID: 28934
Speaker 1: The other thing that I find interesting, there are two things I find interesting.  One is that this--how many universities allow people to go on full scholarships?  I mean how many, are there many like this [like the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well there are the military academies and there are, there's one other college that I know about.  It's a small school that used to be a military college, Webb [Institute, Glen Cove, New York], which offers degrees.  It's a small place there, about seventy students.  And there is going to be a competitor, [Franklin W.] Olin College [Needham, Massachusetts] is in the works [Olid reduces its financial scholarhips by 50 percent beginning in 2010].  They are going to open their doors next fall [2002].  It is a large foundation, large grant-endowment from the Olin Foundation and it's been patterned very much after Cooper Union.  They studied Cooper Union and they're creating a school that is going to offer admissions to the top students in the country, full tuition scholarship.  It's only going to be engineering though and--you know, which is another thing about Cooper Union that is so intriguing and inviting, it was so inviting for me is that it was, you know, the name of the institution is the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art. And I've always had an enormous interest in art and it's something we didn't talk about earlier.  But I had, I was at one time an aspiring painter, really very much interested and seriously considered being an artist, pursuing art as a career.  And I decided at one point in graduate school that I had to make a decision.  I couldn't do both of these things so I gave up art but I'm married to an art historian [Mary Schmidt Campbell] and we collect art.  And so I--the idea of coming to a school, a university that offered degrees only in the sciences and the arts was a fascinating opportunity.  We offer degrees in engineering and architecture and fine arts.  And so it allows me to sort of satisfy many of my own sort of personal and intellectual interests.
Story_ID: 28935
Speaker 1: Now you got to my second question by that 'cause I said oh this, all this merging.  Now what do you want to accomplish here, Dr. Campbell?
Speaker 2: Well you know Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] has some major challenges.  I mean it is very, very difficult now to provide a free education of the highest quality to--in these fields.  Art, architecture and engineering are among the most expensive disciplines in which to educate undergraduates because of all the laboratory requirements and the computing infrastructure that's needed and graphics, graphic arts is very important here and motion graphics.  All this stuff is very expensive.  And so we have to, we have some significant financial problems that we have to solve.  We have to--you know just this whole area of the East Village [Manhattan, New York] is one of the hottest areas in New York now.  It's one of the great centers of you know art culture and intellectual discourse, the crossroads of several universities and the rents are very high here.  And so to attract the best faculty, the kind of faculty that this school has historically housed you know is very difficult and expensive.  And to house the students is very difficult and expensive.  And so the first major challenge I have is to address our financial challenges and make sure that we have the resources to continue to offer in the words of Peter Cooper [founder of Cooper Union in 1859], "Education in the first rank that is as free as air and water." Fortunately the school has an array of real estate assets that can be restructured to yield higher revenues and so that's my first order of business.  We have a parking lot across the street that yields a couple of hundred thousand dollars a year in revenue.  It is probably Manhattan's most significant un-developed real estate property.  And so we have formed a partnership with Ian Schrager who is one of the leading hoteliers in the world and he has brought in two of the hottest architects in the world, Rem Koolhaas and Jacques Herzog , the last two winners of the Pritzker prize [Herzog, 2001; Koolhaas, 2000], the highest award, prize in architecture.  They have designed a hotel [Astor Place, New York City, New York] which is a spectacular design and that's going to yield significantly new revenues for the school to support our academic programs.  We're going--we have a two-story block long building here that is obviously underutilization of that space, that real estate, we're going to take that down and build a nine-story building, a new academic building.  And then take the current engineering building which is on a very large site and it's a small building.  We're going to take that building down and build a much larger building that will be for mixed academic and commercial use which will help fund the development of this building and also provide revenues for the school.  All of that will double the revenues that we have, that we currently get from the real estate.  We also own the Chrysler Building which generates a significant amount of funding for the school.  But when all is said and done we'll have about twice the real estate revenues as we have today.  That still won't close the gap that we need.  We'll have to raise more money.
Story_ID: 28936
Speaker 1: I've put in place a professional fundraising infrastructure that I think will go a long way to raising the level of funding that we get from philanthropic sources.  You know the school [Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] does not have a history of fundraising because Peter Cooper's [founder of Cooper Union in 1859] endowment satisfied the needs for 130 years.  But in recent years it hasn't and so the school has to undergo somewhat of a culture change and get into the mode of fundraising like most other universities are in.  And so that's the, that's one of the challenges.  But the other thing is that you know the full tuition scholarship is no longer sufficient to attract, you know, the--alone to attract the quality of students that Cooper Union has traditionally attracted.  I mean we are the third most selective institution of higher education in the country and that includes all kinds of institutions from research universities to the elite liberal arts colleges.  The two ahead of us are Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, but to maintain that, full tuition scholarship is not enough because anybody who can get into Cooper Union can also get into MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Cal Arts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California] or any other, you know virtually any other institution.  And these other schools offer, for students who have real need, they can offer them a full scholarship, traveling expenses, books, living expenses and so on, even stipends.  And so they can get a better financial aid package if they are the kind of student that can get into here.  The only way that we can continue to attract the kind of student body that we have, sort of an unequaled, you know, talent among our students--the only way that we can maintain that level of a quality of a student body is to ensure that our academic programs are as--remain at the cutting edge.  And so we have to constantly you know move our programs ahead and ensure that we're offering the kinds of intense academic experience that these students can get nowhere else.  And we offer that now.  We have you know one thing that MIT can't offer is the class sizes that we have with seven or eight students in a class and the opportunities the students have to work with world class faculty.  I mean, if you look at our school of architecture, widely regarded as one of the finest--as the finest undergraduate architecture school in the world.  The students have the opportunity to work singly, one-on-one with some of the top architects in the world.  You know if you at, if you make a list of the twenty you know most significant architects in the world today you'll find a significant number of those are on our faculty.  And for the students to be able to work one on one is an experience, in Manhattan is an experience that they can't get at any place else.  And so we have to maintain the quality of the academic programs and that's a constant effort.  We're going through a strategic planning process right now to--with the goal of identifying what it is that we have to do as an institution to ensure that we remain preeminent in these fields as we look to the future.  And another thing that I want to do is to bring together you know our name is The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art.  But the reality is that the science departments and the engineering departments are in fact quite separate and distinct from the art school and the architecture school.  And although there are certainly collaborations, the students--you know we have a humanities and social sciences faculty the students take the liberal arts courses together and they do projects collaboratively.  But, you know, the school isn't really an integrated school of science and art.  And I would like to see more interdisciplinary activities across those boundaries and that's one of the things that I'm trying to achieve here.
Speaker 2: It's exciting.  It's an exciting time. It really is.
Speaker 1: Very exciting.
Story_ID: 28937
Speaker 1: Now I just have a few more questions to ask.  And one of them is what do you think your grandfather [Matthew D. Britt, Jr.] would think if he could see you now?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think certainly he'd be very proud.  But I also think that he wouldn't be surprised.  I think, I mean, he's one of the reasons I'm here because he had that level of confidence.  He exuded that level of confidence.  I mean he always led me to believe that he thought I was going to do something important.  And so I think it would just, it would be what he would have expected.
Speaker 1: And are there--you're still, you know, pretty young in career terms and age terms.  I mean we interview a lot of people in their eighties.  And so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I got some mountains to climb.
Speaker 1: You got some mountains, okay.
Speaker 2: Somebody told me the other day that you know well, you know you've really been successful.  You should be very proud.  And I say well I got some mountains yet to climb.
Speaker 1: So what things do you think you would like to do that you haven't done?  I mean I know you have, you know you have a big opportunity here--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right now so maybe that's an unfair question.  But are there other things?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the other things you know I'd like to see my sons you know be successful.  I still have a ten-year old [Britt Campbell], you know.  I have kids from my oldest son [Garikai Campbell] is thirty-two and-thirty-one and my youngest is ten.  And so I still have a kid to raise.  I've got three grandchildren now.  My oldest son has two and his wife is pregnant.  And my middle son [Sekou Campbell] has one child so I'll have four grandchildren.  And so, you know, I'd like to do what I can to, especially my own ten year old, I'm not finished raising him yet.  And it's--I have a lot of fun with him.  I mean he keeps me young.  We ski together.  He--I just was in Aspen [Colorado] with him for a week in April and we did these giant slalom races together and, I mean, he beats the pants off me every time and it's amazing.  But, you know, I have a lot to do with him yet to get him on the path I'd like to see him on and I'm proud of my older two sons.  They seem to be doing well with their careers so far.  But they also occupy my time.  I, you know, I thought when I was at some point that after my kids became grown, they'd be done.  You know, they'd be--you know, I wouldn't have--I don't know what I expected.  But they occupy just as much of my time as the ten-year-old and it's fun.  I mean, it's enjoyable.  I appreciate that they have, that they come back to me, and so I have those things that are a whole other part of my life to worry about.
Story_ID: 28938
Speaker 1: And do you have any wants or hopes of--for the African American community yourself?  You know do you have any wants or hopes or fears (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, I mean we've--the African American community still has a very long way to go.  We still haven't achieved equity.  We still, the statistics are still pretty horrible.  You know the comparative statistics, whatever you look at, wealth, earnings, all of that.  And so you know I think you know one of the things I'm going to hope to do here at Cooper Union [for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York City, New York] is to provide greater access 'cause I think education is the real ticket.  I mean education is the single most significant path to upward mobility and I think I'm committed to doing my part to help in that arena.
Story_ID: 28939
Speaker 1: So she's [Mary Schmidt Campbell, Campbell's wife] been very helpful and you know NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] is, has the number one film school and Tisch [School of the Arts, New York City, New York] has the number one film school in the country.  And, you know, she's got a, quite an array of alums herself, Spike Lee and Martin Scorsese and Alec Baldwin and you know on and on, Oliver Stone.  But she was--before that she was commissioner of cultural affairs in the [Edward I.] Koch Administration here [New York City, 1978-1989].  And so she, she was head of The Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York City, New York] for ten years, then she came to the Koch Administration and now at Tisch.  So she's had--you know we both have had these three major jobs, I guess and so it's been interesting.
Speaker 2: Now would you think it proud--see I want to do your wife and I want to do your father-in-law but no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: You can do her if you want [Mary Schmidt Campbell, HistoryMakers interviewee, 2002].
Speaker 2: (Unclear) That would not be acceptable (unclear).
Speaker 1: I would recommend her.  No it would be fine.  I think she deserves it.  I mean she is, she's certainly as accomplished as I am.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: No, we've often done things, I mean we both won the--you know she won the Arents Pioneer Medal in Art History [George Arents Pioneer Award for Excellence in Art, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York, 1993] and I won the Arents Pioneer Medal in Physics [1993].  And so we've done, we've had lots of co-awards.
Speaker 2: You know that's a wonderful thing in and of itself really.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have one last question.  Let's go on.  It's nice to see that support and all that and a true partnership.  You don't see that an awful lot--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --successfully.  But--and you were like childhood sweethearts basically.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: That's so sweet.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's nice.  Okay, wholesome, very wholesome.
Story_ID: 28940
Speaker 1: Anyway, I'd like to just ask my last question, that is, what do you want your legacy to be, Dr. Campbell?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Well, you know, I don't know.  I don't have a plan for that.  I mean I think I kind of do the best that I can do where I am.  And I'll let that, I'll let you folks or historians worry about the legacies and things.  I--you know I--just an analogy, I can remember being at Bell Labs [Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey] and managing people and people asking people what they wanted you know what their career interests were.  People would say you know how do I get promoted?  I want to get promoted.  And, you know, my answer was always well, you know, what do you want to do with what you're doing now?  Because the way you get promoted is you do what you do well.  And it's hard to focus on, you know, manipulating things to, you know, sort of falsely to get to someplace else.  I think that my focus is on accomplishing what I need to accomplish to be successful here and to make this institution what I want it to become.  And to--and it's not that I have to, I mean one of the nice things here is that I don't have to start from scratch.  I mean there's--has always been one of the nation's most preeminent, most distinguished institutions.  And the question is, you know, well that doesn't guarantee it's going to be tomorrow.  What we've got to do is figure out what we have to do today to ensure that it maintains that.  And actually our charter explicitly requires that we offer an undergraduate education second to none.  I mean it says that explicitly.  So if we don't do this then the trustees and me, if we don't do that, I think the charter says that we should be removed.  So, you know, I just, I think my legacy should just be what it is, what you folks think it ought to be.
Speaker 1: Anything else you want to say?  Okay we're done.
