Story_ID: 5806
Speaker 1: My name is Allan Rohan Crite and that's spelled A-l-l-a-n  R-o-h-a-n  C-r-i-t-e.
Speaker 2: Okay, and give me your date of birth.
Speaker 1: Date of birth?  Okay.  The Dromedary Date [brand of bread mix], 20th of March 1910.
Speaker 2: And, today is February 12th, 2001.  And, we're, we're--we're-- where are we?  We're in Boston Mass--
Speaker 1: Massachusetts.
Speaker 2: Right. What's the address?
Speaker 1: Oh, 410 Columbus Avenue.
Speaker 2: Okay.  At the home of Allan Crite.
Story_ID: 5807
Speaker 1: Rohan, where did that name come from?
Speaker 2: From one of my grandparents, but I can't remember which.
Speaker 1: Now I want you to tell me who your father was. If you can give his name and can you tell us a little bit about him?
Speaker 2: Oh.  My father's name was Oscar William Crite.  And, he was an engineer.  He was born in North Carolina I think in Jackson County. I'm not sure where that is.  And he came to Plainfield [New Jersey] fairly early.  He was born around 1875, and he, and he went to the Cornell College [Ithaca, New York] for a while and took up medicine. And then he met my mother and went to the University of Vermont [Burlington, Vermont], I think.  And, then they settled in Boston [Massachusetts].  I guess around 1911 or-- somewheres around there.  And he took up engineering and he got a first class engineer's license.  Got that around 1923.  And, it's rather impressive in once sense because--it's hard to get an engineer's license  in the state of Massachusetts, and for a black person to get one it really meant something.  So, he may have been one of among the first black people to get that kind of a license.  They gave him the ability to operate any steam plant in the count-- in the state. So he sort of switched from studying medicine to become an engineer.
Story_ID: 5808
Speaker 1: Now did, did he ever talk much about his family?  You know, his father? Or do you now much about that?
Speaker 2: Very little.  The only thing I know it was a lot of 'em, relatively speaking. He had about four or five brothers and one sister.  May, may, maybe two sisters.  And, uh, they lived in the south.  Then they sort of migrated to Plainfield, New Jersey and stayed more or less there.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they, why they went to Plainfield, or what led them to Plainfield?  Don't know?
Speaker 2: I haven't the foggiest idea. Probably the general migration that took place around the turn of the century from the South to the North. So maybe it was part of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he-- do you know where the name Crite came from?  Do you know what it's origins are?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think the original name would be C-R-I-T-Z. And it probably-- might have been a slave owner's name or something like that. I'm not sure.  But the 'Z' for some reason became anglicized and turned into 'E'.  So they got it C-R-I-T-E.
Story_ID: 5809
Speaker 1: Now what about your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: What was her name and--
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Palmer.  Her name was Annamae Palmer.
Speaker 1: And where was she from originally?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So can you--
Speaker 2: That's in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Can, can you talk about her?  What do you know about her and her family?
Speaker 2: Oh she was much younger than my father.  She was born in 1891.  And, the two sisters, she and Elizabeth Palmer.  And, they lived in Philly [Philadelphia.]  And, my mother was sort of independent in a way, and she was very young when she married my father. And she didn't have a-- I don't think she had a high school education.  But, when she came to Boston [Massachusetts] around 1910 or thereabouts, she found out about these-- extension school courses given by Harvard  University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And I swear, she took every course they had.  So by the time she got through, she had the equivalent of a first class college education.  Her-- her zeal was education on one hand and also from the Episcopal church and so she passed that on to me.  She took me by the ear and got me confirmed. And then she insisted I get an education.  So I painfully got an education by going to Harvard University Extension School. After I got through,  a museum school mostly on scholarships.  Then went to Harvard University and, and the extension school there.  So I got a degree from Harvard.
Story_ID: 5810
Speaker 1: Now how did your, how did your parents meet though?  Do you know? I know that there was a
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: How did they meet? You know how they me-
Speaker 2: How'd they meet? I wasn't there at the time.
Speaker 1: (Laughing).  Okay. Now, did you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  I had one sister, she died when she was about two years old.  The other children, there  might have been four of 'em.  They all died at childbirth.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So you were raised an only child.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  spoiled brat.
Story_ID: 5811
Speaker 1: Now so your parents moved here [Boston, Massachusetts].  Your father-- he's, he's already tried going to medical school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When he was here.  They met where?  Did they meet here or did they--
Speaker 2: No, they met in Phila-, in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so they, they meet. You are already born at this point where they-- when they come to Boston?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I brought 'em to Boston screaming and hollering.  You know, parents are so hard to raise.
Story_ID: 5812
Speaker 1: So tell me about your-- some of your earliest memories as a child.  Do you, do you--
Speaker 2: Earliest memories?
Speaker 1: Yeah, as a child.
Speaker 2: I don't have very many.
Speaker 1: But the ones you have,  why don't you share some of them.
Speaker 2: Well, I was interested in drawing.  My mother [Annamae Palmer Crite] got me started doing that 'cause she wanted to write poetry.  And every time she would sit down and write poetry she had this six year-old brat who wanted to write too.  My mother had some skills in drawing.  She taught me how to draw.  She got me started so she'd have piece of mind.  So I could do my scribbling and she could do her writing.  And then when I was-- I went to grammar school.  The school is right down the corner from here as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: George Bancroft School [Boston, Massachusetts].  There are two schools.  The Bancroft School that takes brats from  kindergarten to four.  Then the Rice School, which is right next door that takes them from-- [grades] five through eight. So I went there. Of course I went earlier to another school, very early,  Lafayette School or something like that. And I was there for about a year or so, or maybe less.  And-- one of the teachers thought that there was something wrong with my head. I didn't talk much of they wanted to put me in a special class  for mental retarded or something like that 'cause I wouldn't talk very much.
Speaker 1: Now why weren't--  Why wouldn't you talk much at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I can't-
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Well about five or six or seven.  Something like that.  But any rate, the teacher thought it was something wrong with me and wanted to put me in special classes for retarded people.  And my mother had a dim view of that, naturally.  And-- so at that time we were living in Roxbury [neighborhood] right near where the school was, up near Lafayette School.  And-- so, we moved down to downtown, relatively downtown to 401 Summit Avenue.  It's about five or six blocks from here.  And I went to the grammar school.  And then George Bancroft School and across the way, this little yard and the other, the other Rice School that went from grades five through eighth.  And a teacher there, my fifth grade teacher Miss Brady, bless her-- she had a different, different view about my being retarded.  She didn't have that  idea at all.  But she saw I could do some drawing.  So she called my mother and she said she saw I had some talent and suggested I go to Children's Art Center [Boston, Massachusetts]. And to show you the contrast in two teachers.  One thought I was retarded, the other thought I had some ability.  And, so I went to, to the Children's Art Center, The Fine Arts Museum for Children.  It's on Rutland Street.  And then-- I went to children's art classes at the Museum of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts].  And then later on I went into the high school vocational art class also in a museum. And when I got through with that, I had about five years 'cause I was still dumb in school.  And in high school it took me five years to get out of that.  I had difficulty in trying to learn languages like Spanish or-- no, this was French.  And I think-- I didn't get Spanish until I got into college.
Story_ID: 5813
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what was Boston like back then?
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: What was Boston [Massachusetts] like? Did, did--did the schools that you go to were they all black?  Or were they integrated?
Speaker 2: Oh no. Some may have been mostly black depending where you lived.  But where I lived, I mean there were a few blacks in the, in the class. As a matter of fact I have a class picture.  I don't know whether it's down here or upstairs.  But I think it's over here some place.  You can see the class with about four or five blacks in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there were four or five blacks in your class?
Speaker 2: And in the class were thirty-four people.  So--
Speaker 1: So what was it like growing up in Boston at that time?  What was it-- What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was fairly normal.  I mean the-- Of course we lived in the-- It wasn't segregated in the way except by geography and the way people lived together.  But we lived in the down-- 401 Summit Avenue, and that was a mixed area.  and so I was used to white people and so forth.  My friends were sort of a mixture of, of whites and maybe-- Chinese and blacks and so forth.  It was not an unusual mixture.
Speaker 1: So the community you grew up was mixed here in Boston.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I started, I didn't get into a predominanty black population 'til I came up-- moved up-- started staying up in the Roxbury [neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts] area.
Speaker 1: Was Roxbury-- What was the mixture-- was it mainly African Americans then?  Was it mainly black?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah. It was a mixture of that and people from the, from the Islands and others and so forth.
Story_ID: 5814
Speaker 1: Now, so your mother [Annamae Palmer Crite] got you involved-- You, you said your mother was a, you know, liked to draw herself.  And she taught you to draw.
Speaker 2: She did a little bit of drawing.  But she used to always write poetry mostly.  I'm sorry I don't have any of it around.  But she had some skills in drawing.  She started me to drawing out of self defense.  'Cause when I saw her sitting down to write, of course, I wanted to write too.  Now, of course, I can't remember any of this stuff.  'Cause after all, I'm trying to recall something that took place around eighty-four years ago. I'm lucky if I can remember what happened last week, to say nothing of eighty-four years.
Story_ID: 5815
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything?  Any other memories like friends or family life or anything else,  you know, growing up?
Speaker 2: The only-- most of the time life was my mother and father.  And so-- and of course, there were-- I did have some uncles.  My mother had a sister and there was uncle James who's my-- the husband of my-- of, of my mother's sister.  And then, of course, dad had quite a, a fairly large family.  But they mostly were in the-- around in Plainfield, New Jersey.  His brother John worked in Hartford [Connecticut] as a chef there. And so people got together not very often.  They were sort of scattered in a sense.  We did have a fun get-together one time and most of the family were around.  And that was quite a momentous occasion.  But it wasn't repeated.
Story_ID: 5816
Speaker 1: Your mother [Annamae Palmer Crite] -- that's what I was asking.  She got you-- she encouraged your drawing.
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: She encouraged you drawing, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She got me started drawing.  She had a little bit of skills in drawing herself. I figure if she went to an art school and so forth, she could have been-- could have developed into a first class artist in her own right, but--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  And your father [Oscar], you had said that he-- what did your father think of your drawing?  Did he encourage it as well?
Speaker 2: Well, he was neutral.  He said I couldn't make a living at it, (chuckle).  But, he didn't discourage it or anything. But he didn't see what I could do with it.
Speaker 1: Did you- okay, so when did, when did you start going to the-- is it-- was it the junior school or the art-- the--
Speaker 2: You mean the Children's Art Center [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Yes, Children's Art Center.
Speaker 2: Oh I went there when I was in fifth grade, sixth or seventh grade. Around there.
Speaker 1: And tell me what that  experience was like.
Speaker 2: Well the Children's Art Center is a fine arts museum for children.  It's one of the few in the country.  It's founded by-- Charles Herbert Woodbury, a marine artist [1864-1940, known for marine landscapes] and Elizabeth Ward Perkins [known for seascapes and landscapes].  And they sort of got it going, things like that.  Of course, the people nowadays the people that run the school today don't know anything about them, 'cause they're more social service people.  And they took over the Art Center very, very late.  So they don't know nothing of what happened before.  That's--
Speaker 1: Well, that's sort of sad.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Right. So-- so what was your favorite class that you took when you were taking art classes?
Speaker 2: All of them.  The design and then the drawing from casts, models and so forth.  And, of course, I did sort of imaginative the things of the art center.  Then I went to the Museum.  I went to the Museum  for--they had Catholic children there.  So I went there to enter the archives of the Museum of Fine Arts.  And so I'd, I'd draw with casts, models and-- textiles and stuff like that and things.
Speaker 1: So, so  you, you didn't have-- you didn't like painting versus something else?  Or water colors?
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: I mean you didn't have a favorite?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't start oil painting until much later when I was in high--  I think the oil painting started when I went to the Museum School [School of the Museum of Fine Arts Boston]. And so it worked out pretty well.  I haven't doesn't any-- Of course, I haven't done any oil paints for almost forty years.  I feel sometimes I should get back to it, but I haven't.
Speaker 1: And so-- okay, so when you-- let's see.  So you took-- it says that through an arrangement with the public school system you took vocational art classes.
Speaker 2: Well, they had vocational art classes in the Museum.  And that was a part of-- they were connected with the public school system.  So I got credit there, and went on toward  my high school diploma.  I don't know if they still have those classes now or not.  'Cause you're talking about some oh, oh gee!  Oh gosh, whew!  That's almost sixty years ago, come to think of it.
Speaker 1: So then you-- you, you took also classes at the Museum of Fine Arts, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had children's classes and then also high school classes at the Museum of Fine Arts.  And once they're doing high school period.  Then at the end of the high school period, I got a scholarship into the Museum School [School of the Museum of Fine Arts Boston].  That's through the courses I did at the, in the vocational art classes.  And I hung around the Museum School for about six or seven years mostly on scholarships.
Story_ID: 5817
Speaker 1: Now when you were taking these classes, were there other black people in the classes?
Speaker 2: Very few.  That was at the Museum [of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts].  Now there were a few, but very, very few.  Of course, now remember that the black population in the city of Boston [Massachusetts] compared to the whole was relatively small.  I think there was only about 100,000 of blacks in the city.  Maybe about 200,000, but not much more than that.  That's out of a population of about 2 million if you take in the greater Boston area.
Speaker 1: Now okay,  so you--  Okay, so when were your works-- It says that you studied at the School of Museum of Fine Arts [Boston, Massachusetts] from '29 to '35 [1929-1935].
Speaker 2: Yeah, around there.
Speaker 1: Now why did it take so long?
Speaker 2: Why'd it take so long?  Well, I took quite a few courses.  I wanted a course in design and so forth.  And that was life drawing and so forth.  So, I actually completed two, two complete courses.  So I hung around.
Story_ID: 5818
Speaker 1: Now you were interested in design from what standpoint?  Were you interested in actually being an architect at one-- some point or--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's the whole business was architectural art, life drawing and so forth.  The whole bit.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So when you're at-- you're in-- you're finishing.  Are you finding your step as an artist at this point?  Are you finding, you know, what you want to do?  Or--
Speaker 2: Ha?
Speaker 1: Are you-- you know, when you're taking these classes in your-- you know, you are taking classes at the [School of the] Museum [of Fine Arts, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's like until 1935 I think you were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you like the experience there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Sure I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: What did you learn?
Speaker 2: How to draw-- and composition and so forth and so on.  And then of course something about history a lot and things like that.  Of course, I did have a little bit of preparation 'cause my mother took me to a museum when I was very young.  That's the Museum of Fine Arts,  I practically lived in the place in a way.  So one of the things that I noticed when I went to the museum.  Of course, I imagine you've been there quite a lot.  And, there was a lot of non-European works there.  At first  wasn't too much interest in that stuff.  I said to myself, "Now listen, bud, a third of the museum is devoted to non-Western art.  So you better take a look at it if you got any brains."  So I did.  And it's, it's certainly good.  Because I didn't know it at the time.  My trip to China began then,  'cause I started looking at Asian art and so forth.  And what little African art they had which was, which was called Egyptian art. Because as far as I'm concerned African art takes an aura of Africa.  And East Africa happened to be Egyptian, West Africa happened to be all the other things and so forth.  But it's all African art as far as I'm concerned.  I did do that.  And as I said before, I mean I wondered around in the museum.  And I know so much about the-- so much to North Western art, it so opened my eyes.  So as a result of that, I have a multi-global aspect,  global recognition of art.  So it isn't enough to just be European.  I take in the whole thing.  And it did me some good.  Because it, it broadened my point of view.  So I'm a firm believer in heritage.  And so as far as I'm concerned my heritage-- actually our heritage takes in all the things that man has done since the beginning.  And, so therefore it's global.  And we're part of that global picture.
Story_ID: 5819
Speaker 1: So, when did you have your first exhibit?
Speaker 2: Well, I had them in school.  Sometime school exhibits.  And--  But my I suppose what you'd see in an exhibition galleries, my first official one you might say around the '30's [1930s].  There's a society called the Boston Society of Independent Artists. And what they did is they had an annual exhibition.  And the idea of independent artists is to invite artists by which you, by which you may not have had a chance to show publicly before.  So I got in on one of those. Then the, then the gallery took me over.  And so I exhibited on Newberry Street [Boston, Massachusetts].  Probably one of the first African-American artists to exhibit on a regular basis on Newberry Street.  I wouldn't say I was the first artist.  But I think that I was probably one of the first.
Story_ID: 5820
Speaker 1: When you had the exhibit, what did people say about your work?
Speaker 2: Oh, they found it interesting.  And it might have been slightly revolutionary in a way I suppose 'cause I was showing black people as ordinary human beings.  That's one of my objectives.  Of course I did a lot of black and white brush drawings.  So I had about two, two-- three books published by [Harvard] University Press.
Speaker 1: Now those books, they were-- Wasn't that 'Were You There When They Crucified My Lord?'
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And 'Three Spirituals [from Earth to Heaven].'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 5821
Speaker 1: How did those books come about?  That's what I want to know.  Like first of all, 'Were You There When They Crucified My Lord?'
Speaker 2: Well those are spirituals.  My mother used to sing spirituals now and then, taught me about them.  And so I became interested.  And, of course, I am an Episcopalian.  There was a young friend of mine wanted to convert me to the true religion which meaning the Roman Catholic church.  And I-- thought it over because a great deal of-- between the Episcopal church and the Roman Catholic church are very much alike.  In my own church, the Episcopal liturgy is more say, general translation of Latin mass.  I didn't go over to Rome [Italy],  but I learned a whole lot about the church and things like that, and a great deal about Catholic liturgy and so forth.  And I use the term "catholic" in a broader sense.  Not  Roman, but it takes in Rome,  it takes in the Episcopal and it takes in the Orthodox churches, 'cause I went to a few Orthodox liturgies and so forth.
Story_ID: 5822
Speaker 1: But my question here is how did this even-- how did you end up doing these series of, of illustrations?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother sort of sang some spirituals, and then I decided to try to illustrate them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Of course I used a-- since I'm sort of a Catholic tradition and so forth, I used that as-- the Catholic tradition as a way of doing it, interpreting them.
Speaker 1: But now the thing that was not traditional about this was that you're-- you have black face.
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: You have people-- you have black people in black face.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Of course,  what's unusual about that.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean because that's not how in the Catholic church things were really portrayed.
Speaker 2: Well I mean the art in the church of quite varied. It should have been more than what you see around here.  If you go down to Ethiopia, you'd find Christ looked like an Ethiopian.  So I used black for (unclear) as a matter of course.  Next to a composition.
Speaker 1: But who saw these?  Someone saw these illustrations.  How did they become-- end up being a book?
Speaker 2: Oh, they got published through a friend of mine.  Having known one of the publishers at Harvard University Press, and he convinced them to publish the books and they did.
Speaker 1: And when they got published, how did you feel Mr. Crite?
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: How did you feel when this book was published?
Speaker 2: I felt pretty good.  The circulation was small and most of the books were sold.  But any how, I had about three books published.
Speaker 1: And this was the first?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 5823
Speaker 1: And when-- Now what was your connection with Harvard University?  You said a friend of yours worked for Harvard University Press?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, my connection as far as Harvard University Press precedes my going to Harvard University extension school.  I mean two separate things.
Story_ID: 5824
Speaker 1: And what was this-- when this book came out, I know you said it had limited distribution.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what-- Did it get reviewed or critiqued in any way during that time?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I can't remember what-- exactly what was said about them off hand.  I'd have to stir through my papers to see if there were any reviews of it.
Story_ID: 5825
Speaker 1: But now you-- would you call yourself an illustrator?  Is that-- You-- I know you say you're a nar-- you know, you're a his- his- historian in how you tell things.  And you have a narrative.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you consider your form an illustrator?
Speaker 2: What I consider them what?
Speaker 1: Will you consider yourself an illustrator?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So a illustrator tells stories.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But these are done-- What was-- What were you using in doing these?  Were you using pe-- charcoal, pencil?
Speaker 2: No, those are brush drawings.
Speaker 1: Brush drawings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And for people who don't know what brush drawing are, what are they?
Speaker 2: It's drawing with a brush.  Of course I know a lot of people are probably thinking, thinking about charcoal and so-- and things like that.  But that's only one of the various media that the-- that artists uses.
Speaker 1: Brush drawings.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 5826
Speaker 1: Now then okay.  So, in 1944 this happens.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you-- But you are-- You're working actually right?
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: Aren't you working at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're working as a
Speaker 2: Nineteen foty-four yeah.  I think I started working in the Navy Yard around the '40's [1940s] or something.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so now you worked at the Navy yard a long time, thirty-eight years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what were you-- They said you were a draftsman.  So what were you actually doing?
Speaker 2: Engines of ships and so forth.  And then they found out I could draw pictures.  So they had me making drawings of-- perspective drawing of the engines and stuff like that.  So when the engineers had an idea, they'd turn to me.  So I made the drawings.  It saved a lot of money.  You had to make a model.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Let's see.  (long pause) No, of course not (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Though you aren't?
Speaker 2: I had quite-- They had about several draftsman over in the Navy yard.
Speaker 1: African, black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, black.  Some were supervisors.
Speaker 1: (pause)  So that was something unusual.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: At least as far as I'm concerned.
Story_ID: 5827
Speaker 1: You did another book that I think was published by the [Harvard University] Press in 1948.  Right?  They were the "Three Spirituals."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was similar to this book.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what was Christianity to you?  What did it represent to you?  Beside I know your mother sang, but why, why did you choose that as your subject matter?  Is  it because that was your life?
Speaker 2: Why did I choose the Episcopal church or what?
Speaker 1: No.  Why did-- yeah, why did you choose Christianity or the depiction of Christianity as your life?
Speaker 2: Well, that's only part of my whole work.  I started making black and white brush drawings illustrating the spirituals just 'cause I want to explain what the spirituals were like.  So that's what I did.  Then of course, I did other things. "Showing the Life of Christ" using black figures and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of course.
Story_ID: 5828
Speaker 1: Now then in the '50's [1950s] it says you traveled to Mexico and to Puerto Rico.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how did those trips come about?
Speaker 2: I can't quite remember off hand. That's so long ago.  (chuckle)  Of course, I did become interested--  the church did have some work amongst Spanish speaking people. It still does as a matter of fact.  That started my interest in Spanish.  And I decided to go down to Puerto Rico to see what the people are like down there, so I went down there.  Now I knew another friend of my was a priest, I can't remember his name off hand. He was working in Mexico,  so I had a chance to go down to Mexico to look around and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now what were those?  Because you had never been outside the country before that
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I'd been to Canada.
Speaker 1: Right.  But that's different.
Speaker 2: And I think in terms of time, I, I've been to Europe a couple of times.  And I've been to China a couple of times. So you might say in my trip to Mexico right in the middle of the whole thing I mean from the standpoint of time.
Speaker 1: So now did you find anything about-- How long were you in Mexico?
Speaker 2: Oh, not very long.  Maybe three or four weeks or something like that.
Speaker 1: And the same thing in Puerto Rico?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were you doing when you were there?
Speaker 2: Mostly visiting around and making a few drawing and so forth.  And I had a friend of mine down there.  He was a priest.  And he had a  -- so I had a chance to stay down in Acapulco in Mexico.  And so I wondered around a bit and things like that.  And, of course, I was interested in some of the aspect of Mexican culture like the-- rather you might say the Indian culture like the Aztecs and the Mayans and so forth.  I've been  in Mexico. And then down in-- no the Incas were-- The Incas would be in South America.  And the Mayans in  Central America and the Aztecs would be I Mexico.  The word Mexico is sort of a kind of derivative of Aztec.
Story_ID: 5829
Speaker 1: And--then-- when did you start using gold leaf in your picture?
Speaker 2: Ha?  Gold leaf?
Speaker 1: Yes (Simultaneously)  Gold leaf.  Yes, like I'm looking at one right now.  When did you start using that?
Speaker 2: Around the '50's,  1950.
Speaker 1: And why did you-- Why did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, it just was a background and so forth.  A lot of  (unclear) things have gold as a background.  So I did the same thing.
Speaker 1: But did you like working with it as a medium or?  You-- because it was not your brush drawings any more.
Speaker 2: No, it's just one of the various mediums which I used. I use any medium which I can use to do what I want to do.  I mean, I don't have any particular preference.  It's just a medium as far as I'm concerned.
Story_ID: 5830
Speaker 1: Now you were working full time.  So when were you doing your art work?  In the evenings, weekends?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I was working in the shipyard.  Yeah, I just did that.
Speaker 1: Now tell me more then about after that, about your progress.  You know, from the '50's [1950s.]  Tell me, tell me more about you know, what you were doing.  And--
Speaker 2: Well that's what I was doing.  During the '50's [1950s],  I did work in the shipyard for a while about thirty years and so forth.  And I also did work elsewhere.  Of course, in my work in the shipyard in was too sparse,  one time I was laid off.  And during the time I was laid off, I had time to work down in New York around the Rambush Decorating Company [Jersey City, New Jersey].  I did a mural in St. Augustine's Church in Brooklyn [New York].  The church was destroyed by fire [in 1972],  so that don't, that doesn't exist anymore.  And I did a few other things while I was with (unclear) company.  And they gave me a commission.  So I did a church out in, in the Midwest. A Station of the Cross and sanctuary painting for the Order and  things of the-- Oh gosh,  I've forgotten the name of the order.  There's a Sulpician [Fathers?][referring to the Sulpician Order, St. Sulpice] (unclear). Oh yeah, Sisters of Providence [Oblate Order],  it's Roman Catholic.  It's mostly blacks and Puerto Ricans I think, in that order. And so I decorated a chapel for them.  That was my job.
Story_ID: 5831
Speaker 1: Why do you think your work appealed to  people?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did people ever tell you why?
Speaker 2: No.  Only people--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  They had to tell you.
Speaker 2: Well people liked the work and so forth.  And it's just like anything else.  I mean I did a way  I hoped they'd like it.  And, and so some do.  And I'm happy.  'Cause that's why I sell pictures.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: You gotta please your customers.
Speaker 1: So you do have to.  And that's a part of being an artist.  Right?
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: Is that a part of being an artist?  Pleasing your customers?
Speaker 2: Well that's not different from any other kind of work, (chuckle).  You're doing your work and you, you please who ever your working for.  So, so I make pictures. And folks like 'em and they buy 'em.
Story_ID: 5832
Speaker 1: So now what-- So you, you would say from day one you were working as an artist and selling your work.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Not as much as I'd like. But I'm still selling the stuff.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Go ahead--
Speaker 1: Now  were you first represented by a gallery here in New York?  I mean in New York or here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh here in Boston.  A guy took me on in Boston.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Was it in the '50's [1950s]?  Was it in the '60's [1960s]?  Was it in the
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah around there, around the '50's [1950s].
Speaker 1: [1950s]  '50's, [1960s] '60's?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who were the people that were buying your work at that time?  Were they black?  Were they white?
Speaker 2: Mostly white.  Once in a while a black person might buy something.  But most people I saw hanging around the gallery were white.
Speaker 1: And what did you think that-- what do you think they appreciated about the black face?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  As far as I'm concerned they were looking at paintings and they liked it and they bought it.
Story_ID: 5833
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Mr. Crite, let's talk about some of the other people that you-- came in contact with.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That you know, you admire either as artists, or you've had good, good-- good relationships with.  Can we just-- I mean I can throw out some names.  Or I'd like you maybe to talk about people who, who have, you know, you've had friendships with, or you admired.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm mostly a loner in a way.  Of course, a black artist when I started, there weren't too many of 'em.  I can't remember hardly any.  Of course there were one or two blacks in the art school, the Museum School [School of the Museum of Fine Arts Boston.]  It may have been more but not too many.  One person I didn't have too much contact with, Lois Jones [Lois Mailou Jones, 1905-2001, Boston-based black artist, fellow student at the School of the Museum of Fine Arts.]  She was a very good painter.  She died recently,  she was about ninety-five when she passed on.
Speaker 1: And did you know Elizabeth Catlett [sculptor, printmaker]?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I met her once.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see-- what about John Biggers [1924-2001, muralist]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met him too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry to here he passed away.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I was surprised to find he was much younger than me.
Speaker 1: (agreeing)
Speaker 2: He was born in, in 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about-- Jacob Lawrence [painter, 1917-2000] ?  Did you come in contact with him?
Speaker 2: Just for a mome--  Just for a brief while.  They had a big reception for him down in New York.  I had to be down there.  So I seen him on that.
Speaker 1: Okay. What about Gordon Parks [photographer, 1912- ]?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Gordon Parks, the photographer.  Did you have any contact with him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm drawing a bl--  Let's see.  Who else, who else would you know?  Are you-- were you-- Who were your contemporaries?  The people that you, you know--you know and they- Who were they?
Speaker 2: The only contemporary I can remember off hand is Don Wilson.  He's still around.  He's much younger than me.
Speaker 1: And would you get together with him from time to time?
Speaker 2: No. As a matter of fact he went to the Museum School [School of the Museum of Fine Arts Boston].  He came after I left. And so I've, I've had very little contact with him, I see him every now and then.  And he's a superb draftsman,  one of the best draftsman I know. And of course I had a little contact with Lois Jones.  She was also at the Museum School.
Story_ID: 5834
Speaker 1: Okay.  And-- do you think Boston was a good place for you in your career?  That it helped being here?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know any other place.  So, (chuckle).  It's my home,  it's been my home for almost ninety years so.
Story_ID: 5835
Speaker 1: So now-- Okay, now let's talk-- So your, your mother [Annamae] had made a lot of sacrifices for you right?  To art school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She did a lot.  When dad [Oscar] died, I mean she, she took on house work and so forth to keep me in school.  She was criticized for it  because people would say, "You ought to take that boy out of school and put him to work." And mother said, "No, I want him to get an education."  So-- that was the story.  Two things she believed in, education and the Episcopal church.
Speaker 1: (pause) So you, you-- with your mother did you-- You, you felt-- you had a great love for your mother right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. (pause)  She ruled with a gentle and iron hand (chuckle).
Speaker 1: And-- did she often comment on the work you did?  Would she
Speaker 2: Hah?
Speaker 1: Would she comment on the work you did?  Would she say, "This is nice?"  Or "I don't like this?" Or--
Speaker 2: Not really. But she appreciated what I was doing. But she didn't make much comment about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your work changed.  When did she die, sir?
Speaker 2: Around '71, 1971 I think.
Speaker 1: Now when she-- when she died your work changed some didn't it?
Speaker 2: Not because of that.  It didn't change-- I don't think it changed hardly much.  It probably had gone to a normal amount of-- direction.  But my mother's death didn't influence the change in my work.
Speaker 1: She, she--she did influence-- Her death did influence?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what, what then influenced a change in your work?  Your subject matter changed.
Speaker 2: The subject matter?  No.
Speaker 1: It didn't?
Speaker 2: No, I still was doing pretty much the same thing I had always been doing.  I was doing sort of street scenes and so forth.  Of course I may have done-- And, of course, I did do a lot of religious work.  I was doing church bulletins and stuff.
Story_ID: 5836
Speaker 1: But what about the work that, -- I was talking to Berry Gaither earlier today.  And he said that you did a body of work based on going to the combat zone and documenting that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah,  I was very interested in the combat zone.  Sort of for studies, you understand.
Speaker 1: So what did you learn when you were down there?
Speaker 2: I learned how people lived in a certain sense.  And I saw a certain amount of commercialism of sexual interests and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: And was there a freedom there that  you found, that you didn't find in the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.  I'll admit I didn't completely participate in the-- activities of the combat zone.  I was there more as an observer. But I wasn't a customer of anybody.
Speaker 1: Now the, the drawings though that, that came out of that period, some people said were more pornographic, almost.
Speaker 2: Yeah,  some people would say that.  Of course that's a point of view.  Sometimes people might say that all draws of the nude  is a pornographic.  But that's just a point of view, but it is life.
Speaker 1: And life-- and you were here to depict-- And life, what about life?  So in your, in your drawing what were you trying to do?
Speaker 2: Just paint scenes as-- draw things as I see them.  Or impressions of things as I see them.
Story_ID: 5837
Speaker 1: But then you started doing a lot of this collage work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With the-- offset prints.
Speaker 2: Well, I just decided to  pronounce it and make life size figures.  So.
Speaker 1: Now this piece here, what is it called?
Speaker 2: That's a mother and child I guess, isn't it? I don't get into-- have any special name for it or any thing.  Of course, when I put on an exhibition I might put on a name so people like to know what to call it, (chuckle).
Story_ID: 5838
Speaker 1: Do you want to say anything else more bout your work?  Anything else about--
Speaker 2: Well I can't think of anything else.  If you have any more questions and so forth.
Speaker 1: There's a large body of work he did--Revelations.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Jacob Lawrence was asked to do Genesis back in 1990.  And Mr. Crite was asked to do Revelations.
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: By the Limited Edition Book Club.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Out of New York.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And he drew eighty-two drawings, uh, to tell the story of Revelations. And the book publisher used fifteen [drwaings] in the book.  That's an interesting piece of work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Do you want to show it to her?
Speaker 1: Well she want to talk-- She wants you to talk about it a little bit.  She can see it before she leaves.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Can you, can you tell me about that? I mean when you were asked to do it, I assume you were happy to be asked.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well they asked me to do it.  And I didn't read the book of Revelations, I got a tape, (chuckle).  So I listened to the tape to save my eyes and so forth.  And then I illustrated it.
Speaker 1: And what was that like?  Because revelations is a, is a part of the Bible that much dis-- It's not even that much discussed actually.
Speaker 2: Ha?
Speaker 1: It's talked about.  Revelations is talked about, but I never heard it much discussed.  Except
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: You know the most part that you hear is really the end of-- you know people disappearing and the end of the world.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well, the Book of Revelations is you might say a description in the allegorical sense of a church service. The first chapter of it is sort of-- is an introduction.  You got a figure of Christ-- I'm assuming that you read the book.  Is my assumption correct?
Speaker 1: Well, I've read parts of it.  But I'm just (laughing) hanged up.  I know that's the wrong answer.  (laughing).  But I thought you could educate me on Revelations more than what I know.
Speaker 2: Well, if you-- It's a des-- As I said before, it's a description of a church service.  I mean that's the format as I see it.  And-- so it starts off with a picture of Christ as a glorified theme and so forth.  And then you have a description of an altar.  And then finally the altar is a pool. And the things has things standing around and stuff like that.  And if you look at it closely, you will find that it's like a setting of a church. And where Christ is sitting, you might say is behind the altar.  If you go in any church-- The church in a certain sense to me is, is a kind of an architectural reflection of the book of Revelations. That is if you go into a Catholic or a Episcopal church.  I don't know if you've been in any churches like that or not.  Have you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well if you notice when you walk in the church, they have the nave where the congregation sits.  Then  you have the choir.  And then behind them beyond, you have the alter and sanctuary.  And the book of Revelations starts off, you might say with that kind of a description.  And then it also has-- after it has the description, you after the throne and so forth.  Then you have the Lamb of God things like that.  You have God on his throne and so forth with an alter behind him.  And you had a sort of choir in front of him as it were.  And then there's a place where they say the book is brought in and laid on a lectern, you might say.  And people say, "Whose gonna be able to read that lesson out of the book?"  And the Lamb of God comes and does that.  And of course, in the service in the church or the synagogue or in the church, you have somebody carrying the Gospel, you might say, to the lectern.  That's where you read the things.  And the deacon sends out the lesson. Or if your in a synagogue [a Jewish temple], they have somebody taking the lesson out of the Torah, you might say.  Out of the tabernacle and kind of to the reading stand.  And then a person who is appointed to read the lessons, comes forward and reads the lesson out of theTorah,  which you might say is the--first five books of the Bible, as we know it.  So that's the setting of the book of Revelations.  Now you have the Lamb of God who reads the lessons. And the rest of the book, you might say, is devoted to  an illustration of what the Lamb of God is reading.  And you have all the, all the different plagues and all that other stuff.  It's just more or less the story which is being read out of that book.
Story_ID: 5839
Speaker 1: You've helped a lot of other artists with their careers.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I've talked with a few artists, yeah.
Speaker 1: And why did you think that, that was important?
Speaker 2: Well, you like to talk to your friends, (chuckle).  So I have a few, we talk now and then and so forth.  And they do have a-- there was a group, it's still around, of younger people.  We called several collectors, about eight or nine Afro-American artists.  And they told me it's sort of like a patriarch.  Sort of kind of a loose conglomerate, you might say. And  we all sit around and talk and so forth and things.  But it's sort of scattered around.  It's still in the city, we never had any formal meetings on a general scale or anything like that.  It's very informal.  So, they're all very good people, good art.
Speaker 1: And what kin--
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: Like Paul Goodnight and (Arcrum Burton Mohammed?), and Susan Thompson, and Napoleon Jones Henderson and Lucy (Maduna?).  Used to be Dandrige (unclear).  It might be one or two more,  I can't remember off hand. All of them made their marks and most of them have traveled.  One time a group of us went over to China and we had a group show in China. That may be one of the few times African American artists had an exhibition in China.  I think it was in Canton if I remember right.  Then we had a return visit of Chinese artists coming to Boston [Massachusetts] and New York.  And we tried  to match the hospitality they gave us in China.  That experience in China was quite something, I have a feeling we got there just in the right time.  When China seemed to open up a little.  So-- But when I hear about Tiananmen Square  [referring to the violent pro-democracy demonstrations in 1989] it means a lot to me 'cause I was there.  I had a chance to talk with Chinese and I had a chance to see quite a few things. Tiananmen Square is an area if you take Boston Commons and the Public Gardens [ in Boston, Massachusetts] and extend down to maybe almost to Massachusetts Avenue, it will give you some idea of the size of that square.  You can easily fit a million people in there. And one side is the government houses, you might say.  That's the one side.  And at one end is Mao Tse-tung's tomb.  And the other end is the grounds of the imperial palaces.  And then on the other side, of course, is part of the city itself.  It's a huge, huge square.  It's really sort of oblong, but they use the term square.  It's quite a thing.  You've been to China haven't you?
Speaker 1: No I haven't sir.  I've never been.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I just heard about it.  But I've never been.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Now you don't-- I want to ask you-- back on your conversations with your fellow art--
Speaker 2: The conversations that you had with your fellow artists?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What do you guys really talk about?
Speaker 1: Well, we didn't talk about very much.  It just the things that we're doing and so forth.  We didn't talk too much about art.
Speaker 2: It's just that we were friends. We just wanted a conversation, something like we're having now maybe. But we didn't sit down and talk about styles of art or anything like that.  It wasn't that kind of discussion.
Story_ID: 5840
Speaker 1: And are you-- have you as an African American artist, have you ever felt any frustration as an artist?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And what are-- In what-- In what way? Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: It's frustrating not being able to do what I'd like to do, (chuckle)  My work is always growing.  I'm always learning and so forth.  And so I find things that I have difficulty in doing.  And it's frustrating until I find out how to get around it.  Problems with drawing and stuff like that, and so forth.
Speaker 1: But do you-- have you felt-- Were you ever wanting to wish that you were a white artists as opposed to a black artist?  Did you ever--
Speaker 2: Not really, that would be a waste of time.  I can't be white, (chuckle). And if I were a white artist, I'd have the same frustrations  'cause in a certain sense I'd deal with a lot more people. So that-- (pause) I don't have any wish to be anything else but what I am. I mean it's a waste of time wishing to be something else.
Story_ID: 5841
Speaker 1: You're gonna be ninety-one.  So let's say you've dedicated at least eighty-something years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to being an artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering, do you know what you would have done had you not chosen art?
Speaker 2: I haven't the foggiest idea.  I don't know anything else.  Except making love maybe.  (pause) Strike that.
Speaker 1: (laughter)
Story_ID: 5842
Speaker 1: Mr. Crite, let me ask you this.  Do you-- if you-- What, what you define as being an artist?
Speaker 2: What is, what is an artist?
Speaker 1: An artist is a person that makes drawing or paintings or writings or music or anything else.  And tells a story in one of those various media.  You're a storyteller.
Speaker 2: And,, why do you think the arts is important to society?  Why do you think it's important?
Speaker 1: Well because we live by pictures of visual people, and hearing people.  And so the arts tell the story of what goes on as far as community is concerned and so forth and so on.  That's been going on for mi-- almost a million years.  Artists made a painting of  mammals or something or other several thousand years ago. And they made drawings of cave paintings and things like that.
Speaker 2: So
Speaker 1: It's all recording history.
Story_ID: 5843
Speaker 1: Why is the recording of history important?
Speaker 2: I don't know how to answer that question.  The only thing I know is that we just do it all the time. And we're the only creatures that do it.  In a way of course, animals do make records and so forth.  Like a bee for example if they find a certain place that's a good source of nectar and so forth,  they come around and do a sort of dance which tells the hive where this place is and so forth and so on.  So they can--  That's means they're communicating so all the bees know where to go. And other animals do  their kinds of signs and so forth.  It's a means of communication.  And man communicates by using signs and symbols and so forth.  Other words sticks us together, (pause) and also helps our memory.  So we remember the past so we know-- and plan for the future as to the moment of the present.
Speaker 1: And-- okay, so that's the important [importance] of history.
Story_ID: 5844
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Let me, let me ask you this. What is important to you,  for the-- Or what are your hopes for the African American community going forward?  Do you have any hopes or desires or wishes or?  Or don't you really care?
Speaker 1: (Chuckle).  Well as far as the African American community is concerned, I hope it goes along and grows and improves and stuff like that.  But I don't have a sense of pontificating on what the African American community should do.  I tell a certain story in a sense, I mean the African community is all reflected in what I do.  And so it's one form of seeing itself. They may like what they see or they may not.  But I give out certain information and people see it and observe and so forth.  But I don't set myself up to pontificate or, or to be 'ex cathedra' [literally "from the chair", a theological term which signifies authoritative teaching.] That is speaking from the authority of the throne of the Bishop and so forth as far as the Afro-American community is concerned.  I don't assign that role for myself,  and if I did, I don't think I would be accepted. People don't like to be dictated to.  And the first person would say, "Who is he to tell us what to do and so forth, and so on etc.?"
Story_ID: 5845
Speaker 1: But before I-- I just have a few more questions for you.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: One is, I want to know of the pieces that you have done.
Speaker 2: (repeating) Of the art work that you have done, or the series of art work that you've done, which, which-- Do you have a favorite piece?
Speaker 1: I'll put it this way.  I've only one piece of work in my whole life.  It started when I was six years old and I'm still doing it.  (long pause).  In other words, I don't have "a" favorite piece.  It's all one piece as far as I'm concerned.  Some parts of it I which I could do better and so forth and so on.  But that's-- that's how it is.
Speaker 2: So you see life and your work as a continuum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that it begins-- it began at six and will, will end with--your death.  That's basically it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 5846
Speaker 1: Well these questions are very, very simple. They're not-- They have no relevance to anything.
Speaker 2: Oh?
Speaker 1: One is I ask people what their favorite color is.
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  All colors.  I don't have any favorite color. We can't  make a favorite color when we do a painting.  Got to use all the colors when you make a painting.
Speaker 1: How about your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (repeating) Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Tools?
Speaker 2: Food, food!
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Remember yeah.  You're gonna be eating soon.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 1: Oh, anything I can eat without throwing up.
Speaker 2: Okay. What's your--  do-- have you--  You don't-- haven't taken vacations much. Do  you have a favorite place to go to vacation?
Speaker 1: No.  I don't have any favorite place to go to vacation  'cause I'm taking a vacation all the time.
Speaker 2: What about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Spring, fall, summer?
Speaker 1: When it isn't too much snow around I don't mind.  But of course I don't like snow because or ice 'cause it's a little slippery.  And I have a dim view of sitting hard on a pavement in a fall.  And since I'm ninety years old, I mean falls are a little bit more dangerous.  So, I'm not too happy in the winter time. The rest of the time I don't mind.
Speaker 2: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  A favorite saying that you-- anything?
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: Nope?
Speaker 1: A favorite saying?
Speaker 2: No, of course not.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite memory Mr. Crite?
Speaker 2: No, I only have one memory.  That starts when I was about six years old and is still going on.  I suppose you mean do I have a favorite occasion? I have a good meal, but that goes on all the time.
Speaker 1: Now if your father could see the success that you have, have achieved.  What do you think he would say?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He had a chance to see  some of it before he got sick.  But I guess he probably would, would appreciate it in a way.  I don't know.  Of course he-- his idea was that he didn't think I'd make any money doing art-- and make a living at it.  He had a practical engineer's mind about it.  In a certain sense I'm being supported by work I did do in engineering.  My pension comes out of that. I worked in the government as an engineering draftsman and an illustrator of technical equipment and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 5847
Speaker 1: No.  If it's not-- If you don't believe in art for making money, what is art for?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well, I won't say I don't believe in making art for money. I wouldn't say that.  After all it is a profession, and I do paintings.  And I do painting and drawings and so forth for sale.  It's one way of making a living.  So it might have some social ramifications just like writing a book.  I mean, you write a book for people to read and you  make drawing and things for people to see.  You see an artist doesn't work for himself.  If he did, why should he bother to make pictures?  You make pictures to communicate with other people.  And all life is communication in a certain sense.  That's how we get along.  Talk to each other in all the various media.  By words, by signs, by pictures, by music and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: What, what does it mean for you to be having this long conversation with the rest of the world?  You've been conversing since like you said, you were six up until now.  And how does that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I do a lot of talking with my pictures and so forth and like to be heard.  So I'm just one person doing that.  that's one among everybody else.  See we all talk to each other and use various means of doing it.  Whether it's by word of mouth or by writing or by drawing, or by photographs or whatever.  We live by communication.  The worst thing you can do for a person is wall a person up in complete solitude.  See we don't live alone.  We live with everybody else.  And so we're sitting around and standing around here, but we're only part of a whole picture of all the millions upon millions of us are doing similar things.  And we're all part of this one picture,  all six billion of us on this planet.  We're all taking part in the story of man,  you might say on this planet.  So that's the one thing that I have.  I might put in as a sort of footnote an experience.  I had a chance to hold a little child in my hands one time.  And the child was about from here to here, as far as length was concerned.  And the two things I was thinking about when I looked at that youngster,  that two people had to get together to bring him into existence. Four people to make-- to take care of those two and so forth and so on.  By the time I got through thinking about it, virtually millions of people had to get together to make that one child.  And so in a certain sense  that one child is related to everybody on the face of this planet.  And-- it made me think.  In a certain sense we're all related to each other on this planet.  And all of us have taken part in the story of life together.  We're never alone.  You might say life is a shared experience.  And if  you look at life that way, then  the--  of course, that means that when you go in the woods for example, the trees, grass, the animals like birds and so forth; all and ourselves all are sharing the gift of life.  Meaning life is a shared experience.  And so if you walk in the woods,  you are sharing the life which is expressed through the grass under your feet or the animals that walk around, the other people walking around and the birds in the air.  We all had-- We all had a shared experience.  You're never alone.
Story_ID: 5848
Speaker 1: [Photo- William Crite portrait]
Story_ID: 5849
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite in workspace]
Story_ID: 5850
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite at a Harvard University commencement 1997]
Story_ID: 5851
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite as guest of honor  for Cmmonwealth of Massachusetts State Archives in 1998]
Story_ID: 5852
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite with his mother in circa 1916]
Story_ID: 5853
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite portrait in 1984]
Story_ID: 5854
Speaker 1: [Photo- Allan Crite Polaroid portrait by Roger Gregoire]
