Story_ID: 331771
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers. I'm the interviewer; this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.  So what we will do today is just get your oral history in--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in chronological order as much as possible.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we, we start by having you just state your name and spelling it out for me?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] James H. Cone, C-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: And the H stands for?
Speaker 2: Hal, H-A-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is August 5, 1938.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 24, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is being done at Union Theological Seminary where I teach in Manhattan, New York, New York.
Story_ID: 331772
Speaker 1: Okay I'm gonna start with five sort of People magazine type questions, and they can be short, simple answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is salmon and broccoli and potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so salmon, broccoli, potatoes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is black, that's most of my clothes are black and so that's my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is actually Paris [France].
Speaker 1: And then lastly, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It's hard to say; I guess it's the one that I use the most which is black theology.
Story_ID: 331773
Speaker 1: So we'll start by talking about your life in Arkansas, your, your childhood. But a good place to start I guess is with your mother.  If you can state your mother's name, spell it out for me and give me her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, Lucy Cone, C-O-N-E [Lucy Frost Cone]. She was born September 12, 1912.
Speaker 1: So she was born September 12th, 1912?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And what town in Arkansas was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Fordyce, Arkansas or near there.
Speaker 1: Now Fordyce, Arkansas is near Bearden [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: So did she grow up in Fordyce or did she grow up in Bearden?
Speaker 2: She grew up near Bearden, which is in the country part, but it was near Bearden.
Speaker 1: So your mother was born in 1912?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did--what do you remember her telling you about her childhood, having grown up in the South during the Depression [Great Depression] era. Were they sharecroppers?  Did they live on a plantation? What you know about her childhood?
Speaker 2: They were sharecroppers, and her father [James Frost] had a lot of children; about fourteen, and they all worked in the fields.  And my mother wanted to go off to college, but he said no you have to stay and work in the fields.  So what I remember the most is her talking about that work but also the most--another thing that I remember her talking about is lynching, which we didn't--she didn't observe anybody, but there were many--there were some that took place in Arkansas and in the South.  And I think my mother told us about that largely because she wanted to make sure we did not violate the Jim Crow laws down there in such a way that it would invite brutality against us.
Speaker 1: So did your mother ever talk to you about personal experiences with racism as a child or were they all just lynchings, of things she'd heard about; did she talk (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mostly things--my mother talked about things that she had, had seen and--but not experienced personally. My mother was very protective about her family.
Speaker 1: So as sharecroppers what--was the crop cotton?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did it work for them?  I mean do you know any stories about what they're--what is it--was it called the plantation owner, you know?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is it?
Speaker 2: No, you didn't have plantations in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you did have large tracts of land in which black people would either rent or would, would farm getting so much percentage from what they did and so much would go back to the, to the owner.  But it was cotton and corn and other kind of farm products that, that were on the land that they farmed.
Speaker 1: So did she have an opportunity to attend school at all, your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes she did. She attended school up until she got in the ninth grade; that's when she had to drop out of school, the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: So she went through the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  Not through the ninth grade, she went through the eighth grade.  And she dropped out just that--I mean she had to drop out largely because they did not have a high school in Bearden at that time.  They did not have one--and so not one for blacks anyway.  And so she would, would've-- it would have been necessary for her to leave in order to go to one of the small black colleges which also had high school connected with that.  And we were A.M.E.s [African Methodist Episcopal] she wanted to go to Shorter College in North Little Rock, Arkansas, which at that time also had a, a high school attached to it.  Now her brother [Charles Frost] did do that and that he ran away from home--that was her older brother. But since she was a girl that was not as easy for her to do that--
Story_ID: 331774
Speaker 1: Now he [Cone's maternal uncle, Charles Frost] ran away from home because--?
Speaker 2: He ran away from home because he wanted to go to school.  And his father [James Frost], my mother's [Lucy Frost Cone] father, did not did not want--they needed them to work, work the fields and et cetera.  Well, he just ran away.  He first went to, to Little Rock [Arkansas] and then he eventually came to New York [New York], and he actually finished his college and master's degree at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Now was he the first person in the family to attend and graduate college?
Speaker 2: Yes he was. He was the very first person in my family to graduate from college.
Speaker 1: What was his name (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name is Charles Bussey [ph.] Frost.
Speaker 1: And do you know his date of birth?
Speaker 2: No I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he was like about seven or eight years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Older than your mother. So he was born in--like around the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what do you remember about--what legends or stories do you remember about him that they told about him being the oldest son, running away going off to college.
Speaker 2: Well, that was the legend, is about him running away and going off to college and never coming back until he had finished and established himself.
Speaker 1: And when he--what did he end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: He ended up being an insurance broker and a businessman in Harlem [New York, New York]. He died maybe about fifteen years ago, after I came to the city.
Story_ID: 331775
Speaker 1: So before we talk about your father [Charles Cone] I want to talk about your mother's [Lucy Frost Cone] mother and father, so your grandparents (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: What do you know about them; when was your mother's mother [Mittie Green Frost] born; what was her name?
Speaker 2: I don't know my--I don't know when my mother's mother was born, but I did know her. She died when I was five years of age.  So what I remember most about my grandmother on my mother's side is how much she loved me.  I was her favorite 'cause I was the baby in the family.  And so I remember that in a very pleasant way and I also remember when she died and the commotion around that, around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because she'd had fourteen children?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes she did.  And so I remember, I remember her very well as a little child.
Speaker 1: What did she look like?
Speaker 2: Oh she looked beautiful, yeah she was a very beautiful woman and she-- of course, my father my, my grandfather was a very handsome, good-looking man as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now as, as far as you know, were they all black or are they mixed with Indian [Native American] and black or white with black--?
Speaker 2: Mixed with Indian. My grandfather, in particular. His mother, his mother, my grandfather's mother was full-blooded Indian and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name--I'm named after him. His name is--was James Frost.  And I'm named after both my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were about to say your grandfather's mother, James Frost's mother was full-blooded Indian?
Speaker 2: Yes, we just heard my mother talking about that, we heard the family talking about that, but I never knew her or seen pictures--I did see a picture of her a long time ago, but I don't, I don't ever remember meeting her.
Story_ID: 331776
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father; what was your father's name, his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name, Charlie Madison Cone [Charles Cone], and he was born in 1906, October 6.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born also in the same area where my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] was born (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fordyce [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yes, near Fordyce and they moved to Bearden [Arkansas] later.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your father's childhood?
Speaker 2: I don't know much about my father's childhood except I know he's the youngest of a large family too (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How large?
Speaker 2: In the neighborhood of nine or ten brothers and sisters.  They lived, in--his brothers and sisters lived in Fordyce or near Fordyce.  And my, my father was the youngest and he, he only finished the sixth grade.  He stayed at home in order to take care of his mother because his father died when he was very young.
Speaker 1: And your--so your paternal grandmother--no I'm--say that again. Your father stayed home to take care of his mother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: So that was your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: I do not know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you didn't--okay so you didn't know her?
Speaker 2: No I did not know her. She was dead long before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you was born.
Speaker 2: In fact, when my, when my, father's mother died, my mother and my father got married shortly after that.
Story_ID: 331777
Speaker 1: And that was largely--I remember them talking about it a lot that is my father [Charles Cone] promised to send my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] back to school if she would marry him.  He promised that he would do that for her one day, and they did get married and had children and that also actually happened.
Speaker 2: So why did, why did your mother say--if you can remember--why, why did she, why was school so important to her at the time?
Speaker 1: She had a passion for education, because she admired her older brother [Charles Frost] who left and that was not an easy thing to do, to leave on your own as a young teenager.  But my mother--if I have any love of education, it comes from my mother because I'm the youngest in my family, and my mother talked about the value of education.  She said if you really, really want to succeed in life and overcome Jim Crow laws you got to get an education.  She instilled that in her three sons and so that's what happened with me and that's what happened with my brothers.
Speaker 2: So how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 1: I have two, two brothers. One is in Atlanta [Georgia]. He's retired now, but he, he also got his Ph.D. in theology.
Speaker 2: In theology. His name is Cecil [Cecil Wayne Cone]?
Speaker 1: Cecil; and he was president of Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida] for a period of time.  My other brother Charles Cone, he is the oldest; and he was--he's retired, and he was a principal in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Story_ID: 331778
Speaker 1: I guess I would imagine having three boys in the South it's imperative that you teach them the ways of the South and the Jim Crow laws and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --to and not to do.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly right, and my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] was very good at that.  And my father [Charles Cone] didn't teach us much about that because my father was much more aggressive and much more militant in his attitude toward the South in which he grew up, even though he had very limited resources in which to resist it.
Speaker 1: How, how do you--how did he show he's adamant against what was happening?  Did he was--did he talk to you guys about it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: How did you see that he was (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he, he talked to us about it but mostly--my father didn't talk much, he--my mother did all the talking--but mostly he illustrated it with his life.  I remember asking--he was self-employed, he was a woodcutter.  So he cut puff wood and so he would cut the--he would, he would buy the wood on the land, the pine wood and, and other, other wood and he would take it to the mill and that's how he earned his living.  When I asked my father why he did not take a regular job at the mill that was dependable, which most blacks did, he refused, and he said the reason I can't do that because you cannot work for a white person, a white man and also be a man yourself.  So he refused to work. He was always self-employed.  And so he never--that was the most profound way in which he illustrated his resistance.  He, he also would never--he would try hard never to give out my mother's first name.  So that she would not be called by that, or be called--he always called her Mrs. Cone whenever he introduced her to anyone particularly whites.  So those examples and other things like that. But he also filed a suit against the school before I graduated from high school.  And this was in the late--early '50s [1950s] and oh he got a lot of threats.
Speaker 1: What--why did he file suit against the school?
Speaker 2: Because he said the schools were not equal.
Speaker 1: Well, what year is this we're talking about?
Speaker 2: This was is in the late--this is early '50s [1950s] like '51 [1951], '52 [1952] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is before Brown versus Board of Ed--[Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]?
Speaker 2: This was before Brown versus Board of Education.
Speaker 1: So this is Cone versus--what's the school's name?
Speaker 2: Ouachita County Training School [Bearden, Arkansas], that's what it was. That's the name of the school.
Speaker 1: And what was the outcome of this legal case (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, the court was a long drawn out process.  So by the time 1954 happened, then the suit turned into that and not no longer equal.  So it turned into that, and that's when it got a dangerous for my father, and he did have to leave the city for a few time.  I graduated the year that that happened, but my father still kept his name on that suit.  And he was joined initially by two other men, two other black men in the city. They (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were--what were their names?
Speaker 2: I forgotten their names now. I was, I was--I've forgotten their names  (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it was joined by two other men (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there were three of them and, and two of them took their name off the suit when they began to threaten violence and lynching, but my father refused.  And I remember him and my mother talking about it. I had left high school, and I was in Little Rock [Arkansas] going to school [Shorter College, North Little Rock, Arkansas], but I remember worrying about my father and what was going to happen to him because of the threats that were being made by the whites, even by the ones that he knew around there.
Story_ID: 331779
Speaker 1: Are there any legacies in your family that you'd like to share with me about possible people that were slaves or ex-slaves?  Are there any stories about people who were--the Underground Railroad or anything like that you--that's in the family?
Speaker 2: No I do not, I do not know of anything like that. Most of my, most of, most of--there was not much talk about slavery or its heritage.  It was mostly in terms of the grandparents who were actually around at the time, rather than way back in the history.
Speaker 1: Right because what they--because they were still--they themselves was still very oppressed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: So that their stories were stories that they could relate to you they didn't have to go, go far back, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No they didn't have to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was all around.  And so what--most of what I heard was about the dangers during the current times.
Speaker 1: Can you describe to me what Bearden [Arkansas] was like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Bearden--well, was small, it was small.
Speaker 1: Is this the population of, what 1200 people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1200 people.
Speaker 1: Eight hundred blacks--I mean--?
Speaker 2: Eight hundred blacks--whites (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Whites.
Speaker 2: And about four hundred blacks. It had two stop lights in that city, in that little small city.  And what I remember most, what I remember most is, is we, we only went into Bearden, generally the city, on Saturday.  We lived in Cotton Belt [Arkansas] which was out about three or four miles outside of the city.  And so we all--it was an all-black community, so I remember growing up very, very happy and never having any fear of anything because while we knew that whites were a very threatening presence in Bearden, so we had to watch out for that, but we only encountered them, generally speaking, when we had to go to the store to buy something when we go down on Saturday but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So in the broader society you had contact with them but in your own world--?
Speaker 2: In our own world, no.
Story_ID: 331780
Speaker 1: Describe for me that world in which you lived, that was separate, segregated from this larger white community [in Bearden, Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  The, the black community--there were three foci that defined it for me.  One was my family, my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and father [Charles Cone]. They were the most influential people in my life. Even 'til today, I mean, in terms of who I am and what views I have about the world.  So the family is what's crucial, but connected with the family was also the school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas]. It was a segregated school but--and it was not a very highly academically oriented school because most whites in Arkansas, particularly in little small towns like that--rural South, they wanted the teachers not to be too smart.  So they intentionally got teachers who would be subservient and who would not challenge and who did not have much education.  In fact, many of my teachers, some of the teachers did not even have-not--had not finished college and et cetera.  The other area--so it was home, school and church (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was the home, school, and church.
Speaker 2: Now the church was crucial, but all three of those are crucial because--.
Speaker 1: Well why was the church more crucial than the other two (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I said--the church wasn't more crucial.
Speaker 1: Oh it wasn't?
Speaker 2: I said all three were crucial.
Speaker 1: All three were crucial, okay.
Speaker 2: They were interconnected. I couldn't separate one from the other.  Because the same people at the school came to church, and my mother and father were deeply involved in school and church.  So I, I was--I didn't see any, any separation between those two. I saw them reinforcing each other.
Story_ID: 331781
Speaker 1: Would you say though that because of who you've become, that church must've had a profound impact on your early childhood?
Speaker 2: Yes it did, it did.
Speaker 1: How so, though?
Speaker 2: Because it was the source of the spirituality that empowered me to cope with the world as I encountered it.  See the church gave you that, that something within you that enabled you to hold up yourself.  Keep yourself together even though the forces may be pretty strong and pretty, pretty oppressive.
Speaker 1: So how young were you when you first encountered that spirit, felt it, and knew that this spirit can help me overcome these feelings of oppression or these people that are oppressing me?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I've always had it. I don't remember when I didn't have that because I was taught that very early.
Speaker 1: But how early; don't spare me (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know; when I could talk. My mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and father [Charles Cone] had always stressed that and so did I get it stressed at school.  That same message. See the church was in the school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas] too. I mean, I mean the teachers out there taught that same kind of--do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  Or you are just as good as anybody, just as smart as anybody.  You can go as far in this world as you want to go if you study hard.  And, and school taught me that, church taught me that and so did my mother and father at home.  So it was one spirituality, it wasn't one at home and one at the church and one at school.  They all reinforced each other, so much so that, that I grew up in a, in a community in which the whole community was the example and the discipline for me.  And anybody, any adult within that community could discipline me within--at any time, whether my mother and father were there or not.
Story_ID: 331782
Speaker 1: What were the highlights in that community, Bearden [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: What do you mean, what were the highlights?
Speaker 1: I mean, I mean I guess the community leaders. Who were the leaders outside of your mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and father [Charles Cone], who were the people that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Who ran that--who ran the black world, like--and then also like I guess the same guy would be the liaison between you and the white world. Who was the community leader?
Speaker 2: Well the community leader was usually the preacher, the minister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who was he that you knew?
Speaker 2: That I knew Reverend Shelton [ph.], Reverend Hunter [ph.] these were some of the people.  But also, there were laypeople because the ministers only came about every other Sunday because it wasn't a regular every Sunday church.  Because we're not like that large enough to support a minister and there were other churches there as well.  So the minister sort of was the lead, spiritual leaders.  But the men in the community, my father's friends and, and et cetera they were the ones who were the leaders and my father was a part of that and my mother was part of that.  So they were the ones, and they met at churches and et cetera.  So when something happened in the community, they were the ones who came together to deal with it.
Story_ID: 331783
Speaker 1: What are your--some of your earliest memories of your childhood in Bearden [Arkansas].  And they can be whatever you remember, first thing that pops up?
Speaker 2: Well I just remember going to school, church and being at home and having a hell of a lot of fun. I really do.  I played basketball, I played, I played, you know, stickball; we made toys.
Speaker 1: Now what did the--like in the community, were there dirt roads and shotgun houses?  Or was it--because I grew up in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --very close to the border of Arkansas--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Lake Village [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did the black community look like physically?
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was dirt roads, and my, my father [Charles Cone] built his house along with his brother from, from the ground up.  It's the first home in Bearden that had indoor toilets, the first.  And my father created that himself by--we lived on nine acres of land, and he ran the sewer way down out on his property down in the lake, down the creek.  And so we were the first to have an indoor toilet; that's what I remember most.  I remember when my father built that house--his brother was a carpenter, but my father could do most anything. I always believed that there was not a task that he could not do.  And so that was, that was one of the most startling things, the things I will never forget about my father building his own home.
Story_ID: 331784
Speaker 1: When do you remember feeling your blackness as--I mean, for lack of a better word, oppression.  When do you remember being discriminated against, did that come about as a child (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You can't grow up in Bearden [Arkansas] without seeing that.  It's, it's almost as--I saw that almost as quickly as I saw anything else.  And because my mother [Lucy Frost Cone], my mother talked a lot, she taught us a lot.  My father [Charles Cone], my father, was good by example; he was a man of courage.  My mother was articulate; she was the one who spoke. She taught Sunday school; she was a very prominent voice in the church.  So they all talked about segregation, and they all talked about that.  So that's where I first heard about it; in home.
Speaker 1: Now did your parents want to integrate?
Speaker 2: Of course; everybody in Bearden that I knew, we knew that, we knew-- everybody in the Bearden that I knew, wanted to integrate.  But not everybody was willing to take the risk for that; they wanted to, but they weren't ready always to take the risk for that because they knew how mean white people could be.  So as long as whites did not make that risk death, they would do it but not, not under the oppressive conditions in which they lived 'cause they would lose their jobs, they would lose everything and maybe even lose their life.
Story_ID: 331983
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the first grade?
Speaker 2: I was five years old when I went to first grade and what I remember most is my, my teacher and also some of my classmates who were there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was your teacher?
Speaker 2: Ms. Janelle [ph.], she was my first-grade teacher and what I remember most about her is her love and her encouragement; that I just I felt that I was her favorite.  And I felt very--school was a great place for me, I enjoyed it very much. I certainly enjoyed my teachers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you attend first grade?
Speaker 2: I was five years old (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay you were born 1938.
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938] so '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943].
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943] that's right, that's when I attended first grade.
Speaker 1: Now with the war [World War II, WWII] going on did--how did that affect your family life?
Speaker 2: All my uncles went in service. I had several uncles who, who served in the, in the [U.S.] Army and [U.S.] Navy.  My father [Charles Cone] did not because he was not physically--he, he--broken his foot.  So that prevented him from being drafted; he didn't want to go anyway, so it, it was not a disappointment for him.
Story_ID: 331984
Speaker 1: Okay, so you also said that the schools were segregated--?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your first grade. So were there two separate schools or you attended the same school, but in separate areas?
Speaker 2: The schools were segregated; two separate schools, not even close together.  The black school was in the black community, the white schools was in the white community and blacks did not go there.  And we knew that and it--the white school was really nice, and we got the hand-me-down books, everything whites did not want, they send it to the black school.  And we--I don't ever remember our school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas] getting anything new.  It always was given to us from the white schools.
Speaker 1: So let me just ask you how did that make you feel. As a, as a child, you see that you are being given stuff that this other group of people don't want. How does that make you feel about yourself?
Speaker 2: It didn't bother me in the way in which one might expect it would, largely because of the teachings of my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and father [Charles Cone] and because of the church.  And also because of the school as well.  You know, you may be treated badly, but that doesn't mean that that's who you are.  You never accept your identity from the people who are oppressing you, and we had sense enough to know that.  So we had a sense of humor about it that, and that's why my father filed a suit in the early '50s [1950s] when he felt he was--it was capable, you know, it was possible for him to do that. Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Sr.] who was one of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] lawyers at that time living in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], he was the one who led that, and he was the one who encouraged my father and other people in the community to do that.  But I don't ever remember feeling inferior. I always felt that whites wouldn't go to school with us because they knew we were smarter.  I don't know, I always believed that and that we beat them at everything else. They didn't want to play basketball or anything with us because they knew we would beat 'em.  And so we sort of took it as, as something that they didn't want largely because they knew that they were not as good as us.  And Jackie Robinson had just, you know, come into baseball at that time.  And so he illustrated that we actually were better, you know, and Willie Mays soon came in and, you know, I say look at that, you know, if they let us we'd beat 'em at math and everything else.
Speaker 1: So you had a good sense of yourself, self-worth that came from your parents when you were young; you never felt inferior (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes from my parents, from the church, and from the school and from the community.  That is we--I don't, I don't ever remember being taught or being made to feel just because we didn't have as much as the next person that we were not worth as much as the next person. Because God created us all equal, we were taught.  And that since Jesus was crucified, you know, us being treated badly is no different from how Jesus was treated and Jesus was the Savior of the world.  So it seemed like the people in power always the people who are the worse off as human beings.  So, that did not make us feel that we were less than human.  It made us feel that we were more human than they because we didn't act like they did.
Story_ID: 331985
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you can remember about your early years in school that had some profound effect on who you became?
Speaker 2: I think the ministers who came through Bearden [Arkansas] they were the ones who gave me some sense of how you use education for your people.  There were some also lawyers who came through from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] like Wiley Branton [Wiley A. Branton, Sr.] who is a prominent--was a prominent lawyer.  I, I remember saying, what am I going to be, a lawyer or a preacher because those were the two models of men coming in and out of the community, that I admired.
Speaker 1: And you admired them because they were able to be at the forefront of fighting for change?
Speaker 2: Yes that was the primary reason why. I loved it when they could stand up and talk and use big words that I, you know, that I was just encountering in school.  So I admired anyone who could stand up and articulate any sense of what God is about and what justice is about and what is right in the world.
Story_ID: 331986
Speaker 1: So do you remember in 1954 when the Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision came down, and you were in high school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in high school had about a week left. It was May 17, 1954, and I remember saying to mother I--okay I can go now.  I actually was gonna go down there in order to enforce the decision that the [U.S.] Supreme Court had just given.  But my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] said no now is not the time we got to wait 'til it comes down here, yeah.  But I do remember that. I think every black child remembers that.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember about it? How did that--this day May 17, how did it feel?
Speaker 2: Oh it felt great, it felt--what it made me feel is that we were right all along.  We knew that segregation was wrong because all it meant is that we were paying for education that we didn't get.  We paid taxes, but they control how the taxes were expended--used the tax money.  So we were angry about it, but there was little we could do until that Supreme Court came down; then we figured that was something we could do now about it.
Story_ID: 331987
Speaker 1: A year after that, in 1955, Emmett Till was killed.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that incident and what--if you do, what effect did that have on your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I do remember that. I think every black person, adult or young adult or teenager remembers that because I was, I was about 17 at the time--15, 15, 16 right in there at the time 17, 15, between 16 and 17.  It was in August of 1955, and I remember thinking that it could've been me, it could've been me. I was at that time in college [Shorter College, North Little Rock, Arkansas].  And I was reading--the one responsible for reading the news around the world in the chapel.  And two things I remember reading about or talking about was Emmett Till.  And the fallout of that and what that meant, and Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the Montgomery Bus Boycott that started in December of that same year.
Speaker 1: Now at this time you are reporting for--you're a reporter for the school, is that correct?
Speaker 2: What I was is, is that I would stand up in chapel and be the reporter to talk about the news for the week or for the month or for the year.  So we did that in chapel and, and I was one of the ones who, who talked, who reported the news, who was the primary person responsible for that.
Story_ID: 331988
Speaker 1: So I read that it was around sixteen, seventeen that you received your calling to go into the ministry from God.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Will you explain that, that occurrence to me?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, it was not a sudden Damascus Road experience like Apostle Paul or like Malcolm X in prison.  Mine was more like Martin Luther King, Jr.'s [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I guess. Certainly it was, it was a gradual maturation in the ministry; it was like choosing becoming a lawyer and a minister.  And when I got to college [Shorter College, North Little Rock, Arkansas] it was clear to me that the ministry was the way I wanted to go because it gave me more freedom to articulate what I believed about justice and about life in the world.  And with Martin King as the model, shortly emerging and thereafter, I was sure that I had made the right decision.  I was sixteen years old, and I preached my first sermon December 12, 1955.
Speaker 1: So that was during the time around about the time of the Montgomery boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott]?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: And King you say--did you have the opportunity of seeing King in Montgomery [Alabama], the boycott?
Speaker 2: No I did not see him in Montgomery, no. I just read about him in the paper, in Arkansas and around.  But it was one of the most crucial events that helped me to understand what the ministry was really all about.
Speaker 1: And the ministry was really all about?
Speaker 2: All about preaching the gospel of justice and reconciliation and integration. It was about right and salvation was about making things right, and that's what God was about, and that's what God had called us to do.
Speaker 1: So upon receiving that calling into the ministry as sixteen, or the evolution of that calling into the ministry at sixteen, what were your plans to do with yourself after college or after high school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas], I should say?
Speaker 2: My plan was to pastor a church, that is to say, my plan after high school was to go, go to college, finish college, go to seminary.  And then get a church; come back to Arkansas and pastor a church. That was my goal.
Story_ID: 331989
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: So it's '54 [1954], you graduated high school, so by the time that--oh that's right, by the time the decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], come--had come down--it was--you were graduating.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was graduating, yes.
Speaker 1: And how did you come to go to the university--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous} To Shorter College [North Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: To Shorter College?
Speaker 2: Because it was my church [African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.)] school, and it's the only school--my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and father [Charles Cone] had no money, absolutely none.  So we couldn't even--all they could give us was food, and they would come there, you know, about once a month and bring food.  And supply sheets and stuff like that for, for the dorm. But they didn't have any money.  And so going to the church school allowed you the opportunity to work your way through school.  So I went to Shorter College because it was an easy way for me to get my first two years of college.
Speaker 1: And then what, what years were--that from '55 [1955] to '57 [1957] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-four [1954], '54 [1954] to fifty--.
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954] to fifty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-four [1954] to '56 [1956].
Story_ID: 331990
Speaker 1: And what did you do in '56 [1956] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-six [1956]?  Then I transferred. I left Shorter [Shorter College, North Little Rock, Arkansas]; I graduated from Shorter and then I went to Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas].  Now that's a United Methodist school. It's not--it's a little larger than, than Shorter.  Shorter was about two hundred black students and Philander was about five hundred.
Speaker 1: So this is your first time of actually going to an integrated school?
Speaker 2: No it's not integrated.
Speaker 1: Oh they were not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the students were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: --black just didn't mean they were integrated?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: No college is integrated (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, there may have been one, one or two graduate schools were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's right because this is before James Meredith--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --was trying to get into--.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you remember in '62 [1962] when Meredith was trying to get into Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes I do.  I was in graduate school then at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  Yeah, I remember that very clearly; of course.
Speaker 1: Now once you graduated from Land--.
Speaker 2: Philander Smith College.
Speaker 1: Philander Smith College.
Speaker 2: In Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958].
Story_ID: 331991
Speaker 1: You decide to immediately go to grad school?
Speaker 2: Exactly. I, I graduated [from Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] in May of 1958, and I was in graduate school at Garrett Theological Seminary [Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary] in Evanston, Illinois  and September 1958, was when I started.
Speaker 1: And so that was also not--that was shortly after that I guess is when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] did the, the big prayer, the prayer pilgrimage [Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the prayer pilgrimage, 1957.  Yeah, I remember that, but I was still in college at that time.  And King had emerged as a prominent, prominent figure. The most significant civil rights event that happened to me when I was in college was the integration of Central High [Central High School] in Little Rock [Arkansas].  The, the Little Rock Nine; Daisy Bates. Philander Smith College was about fifteen or twenty blocks from that high school.  And I was a junior in college at that time, and I remember that event because I knew quite a few of the--that nine that went to that school and Daisy Bates was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], and so I knew about her and et cetera.  So that was--that was the key event that happened to me while I was in college.
Speaker 1: Can you talk to me about that event; just why, why it was a key event for you?
Speaker 2: Well, nobody could be in Arkansas (laughter) and not know about that and not be impacted about that because that--'cause the next year, you know, they shut the schools down, they shut the schools down.  So it was, it was quite an event, and the tension of seeing all those troops out in front all over the, all over the school.  And the tension that Faubus [Orval Faubus] created, you know, and, and saying what he was saying regarding what was happening then, that just made me more determined that I knew I had to go in the ministry.  And I knew my ministry had to be one that was seeking justice in this world.
Story_ID: 331992
Speaker 1: So you graduate Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: And so 1960--so that's, that's a little later on I mean, lots of stuff had happened as far as civil rights (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, lots of stuff, yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm X because--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --both had different approaches, but both had profound effects on you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during these college years.
Speaker 2: Not during the college years.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: King had a profound affect during the college years because no minister could ignore the impact of King.  And so since I went off to graduate school at Garrett [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], Garrett invited King to become a teacher there after or during the time I was there, but he didn't accept.  But I remember all of the hope and the anticipation that maybe he would because he did act like he seriously wanted it--wanted to come.  So it was King who had the overwhelming impact on my life King. Malcolm didn't impact my life until black power or until the middle of the '60s [1960s], that's when Malcolm began to impact; during that time.
Speaker 1: But before we get to black power because this is a big turning point in your theology--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --King you admired because--not solely because of the nonviolence but did the nonviolence have--play a role in your admiration for him?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily so no, no because you--we all figured King had to be nonviolent.
Speaker 1: And he had to be nonviolent because?
Speaker 2: Because black people are such a minority.  I mean, I grew up in the South. We didn't have no guns to fight white people.  So all white people needed during that time was the--just the slightest excuse just to kill black people, just to beat up on 'em.  They controlled the police force, they controlled every element in the state, local, city government.  So to try to fight them violently would've been, been the silliest thing in the world.  So we figured that King's choice of nonviolence was not so much a religious choice; it was an intelligent, practical choice.  And if you read King early on, that's why he chose it. Not because of Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], at that time and not because of his religion at that time.  It was about two months into the boycott that he had this religious conversion to nonviolence and makes it a not just practically the best way, but also religiously, theologically and spiritually the way.  The way that every Christian, every religious person must choose.  That's when non-violence became important, but it wasn't important when he started, and it certainly wasn't important to most of the people I knew.
Story_ID: 331993
Speaker 1: So before we go on, I just--we're at a good place, and I want to just find one thing I wrote down along the lines of what you were talking about a quote from one of your books about--and you're talking about King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the nonviolence.  And, and you, you've, written something about self-defense being--so but King, King was nonviolent.  You know, he didn't--but, but it, but is--self-defense is something one needed for social change?
Speaker 2: No, not for King.
Speaker 1: Not for King?
Speaker 2: Not for King (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Self-defense was not a philosophy for King for social change.  Nonviolence was always practically and religiously; at least practically, always the only option black people had.  We were only 10 percent minority in the United States, so King was not stupid enough to think that we could get guns and get our way--couldn't.  So King chose nonviolence initially for practical reasons, but as the movement [Civil Rights Movement] progressed, he chose it for religious, theological, Christian reasons.
Speaker 1: I see, but now it's becoming clear to me but, but you said, or I read someplace--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that one of King's biggest misconceptions that people had is that he was--that this nonviolence was passive and that he, he believed--
Speaker 2: Yes that's right.
Speaker 1: --and so does that mean that he believed in self-defense or no, what does, what does that mean that it was not passive?
Speaker 2: He believed that nonviolence--nonviolent direct action is what he called it, was not passive. What it did when you march 100 or 200 or 500 people down the street.  And you disrupt the normal workings of a city, the normal workings of the community; you make it impossible for the people who are oppressing you to function.  So when you go and sit in, you know, at lunch counter or when you do that, you keep others from being served as long as you sit there waiting to be served.  So nonviolence disrupted--but you didn't fight back you just--if they lock you up, then you have enough people to keep being locked up 'til they fill up the jails.  So that the, the disruption would be so strong--what King would say is: "We are bringing the violence that is submerged beneath the surface. We--we'll bring it up." We will show you what violence is in the system.  And then through police and others, they will become violent against us.  So King believed that--the movement takes the violence and we put it on TV. And TV was just emerging about the time of King.  So when King could show the world what these white segregationist racists were doing, then that would cause the world to identify with the civil rights workers.  And cause the community to change its laws because you wouldn't be able to function unless you did get them changed.
Story_ID: 331994
Speaker 1: I also read that you said that they, meaning white people of Bearden [Arkansas] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tried to make us believe that God created black people to be white people's servants?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. I mean that's a part of the philosophy of, of white Christians generally in this country for many, many years.
Speaker 1: So did that thought come about prior to you?  I mean, is this thought about, about Christianity and the people, the white people in Bearden feeling--did that come--when did that come to you?
Speaker 2: The idea (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, idea that--
Speaker 2: That white people believe--
Speaker 1: Yes, that people--
Speaker 2: --that we were created--
Speaker 1: --were created to be their servants, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah I--it's, it's--that thought came to me just observing the world in which I lived in. I always thought it was amazing that they thought we should serve them.  But they always used it--see in the South, religion is key for both groups, blacks and whites.  You can't do anything without religion, so anything you do has a religious reason for it.  So segregation was not something that just was political, it was religious. God created the world separate.  And God did not intend blacks and whites to have mingled together; that's what white people believe.  Black people did not believe that. We believed that out of one blood, God created the world.  We believed that God is no respecter of persons; God created everybody, everybody came from Adam we were taught.  So black people did not believe that, but whites believed that God--that segregation itself was a religious doctrine, but blacks never accepted that doctrine.
Story_ID: 331995
Speaker 1: I also read when you were younger, that you and your brother [Cecil Wayne Cone] had this idea that on some Sunday you were gonna barge into some(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was a particular church in Bearden [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was a Methodist church (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A Methodist church.
Speaker 2: Methodist church, Methodist church I'm--we're Methodist; we're A.M.E. Methodist, African Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal].  But the Methodist church was there. And I, you know, I just was amazed that whites would even think that God intended people to be separate.  Everything I've read in the Bible just since a child, that it did not reinforce that.  God was always on the side of the little people, you know, David against Goliath.  Children of Israel, you know, coming out of Egypt, you know, and all that--they and, you know, Moses against Pharaoh.  I mean, just every example you could think about in the Bible, just seeing that God was with the little people, not with the big people.  And so it's seem amazing to me that white people who run everything, could think that God would be on their side and justify their oppression of black people.  I did not believe it. And besides, they had a welcome sign on their church outside.  So I just--my brother and I debated because we were talking about going in the ministry.  We debated as to whether--what would they do if we walked in there.
Speaker 1: And you were how old at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh I was about, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixteen?
Speaker 2: About twelve or thirteen.
Speaker 1: Oh I see you were even younger; twelve or thirteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twelve or thirteen, you know.
Speaker 1: You can, okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember that from being very young--
Story_ID: 331996
Speaker 1: I mean I guess to go back a little, before we can go forward chronologically in your life, is the history of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. It was--inception was in the 1600s.
Speaker 2: Not 1600s.  It, it came into being in the 1800s (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like the birth of it was 1816 I think.
Speaker 2: Now--the birth of it was 1787.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the reformation moment of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was created though, founded, created in 1860, that's when the A.M.E. became a denomination.  But there were churches around before they came together.
Speaker 1: So they were just Methodist before?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then so the A.M.E. is a division of the larger (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Methodist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and it broke off and formed its own because?
Speaker 2: Because of segregation.
Speaker 1: Because of segregation.
Speaker 2: See it started in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So it's was a race issue to be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most of the churches; all the black churches.
Speaker 1: So go ahead, it started in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: It started in Philadelphia in 17--you know, Richard Allen, the founder of the A.M.E. church.  I heard this story--if I heard it once, I heard it a thousand times.  Richard Allen and a group of slaves, you know free person, free persons at the time; in Philadelphia, but black people in Philadelphia, was a member of St.--well, you know, attended St. George Methodist Church [St. George's Methodist Church] in Philadelphia which is still there.  And they went there this Sunday morning, they had a--there was a separate gathering for blacks. Separate--segregation in the church.  In fact, segregation started in the churches, you know, it didn't start in society, it started in churches.  Because--and so blacks, you know, they had separate balconies and separate sections for the blacks.  So when Richard Allen and his group of about twenty or so came that morning to worship at St. George, that's where they were members. Somebody was praying as they walked as, as they were going to their place, and they just stopped in respect for the prayer.  And the ushers were stunned that they should stop at a section that was not theirs.  And so they, they--the ushers came over and said no you cannot stop here you gotta go, and Richard Allen just said wait until the prayer is over and we will go.  But he said no you gotta go now, and he began to manhandle them out.  And that's when Richard Allen rose, and the other group--Absalom Jones was a part of that group too--they got up, and they left.  Never again to come in that church to worship in that way. And they started their own church which is Bethel A.M.E. Church [Mother Bethel A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--that church is in, in Philadelphia too. That's the first A.M.E. church.  But they don't become A.M.E., that is African Methodist Episcopal, until 1816 when churches in New York [New York] and Baltimore [Maryland] black methodists, who had similar experiences in their places, decided to get together and found the A.M.E. church.
Story_ID: 331630
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had not been at Garrett [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], which is right adjacent to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] that--see Garrett was the theological school and they gave joint degrees with Northwestern.  So I got my Ph.D. in theology but my base was Garrett, but I also took courses in philosophy and religion over at Northwestern.  And Northwestern gave the degree. But my, my most influential professors were at Garrett, 'cause that was the theological school.  I remember my first, first week or so at Garrett, I walked in a barbershop to get my hair cut 'cause I didn't know where, you know, I'm just a new student.  And first thing I was told is we do not cut black, you know, Negroes' hair (laughter).  So you better go somewhere else.  And I remember that shop because growing up in the South--I have a lot of relatives in Chicago [Illinois].  And that's one of the reasons why I went--that's why I chose the school because I knew I'd be close to my relatives who lived on the South Side in Chicago. I had several uncles and aunts.  And--but they had told us all these glowing stories, you know, about freedom up North. And I just assumed that there was freedom, you know, and in Evanston [Illinois].  And I not only discovered segregation and that nobody would cut my hair, but I also discovered that it was as difficult to find a place to live, in Evanston.  You know and particularly around Northwestern and, and near Garrett where I was, where I was a student.  So I had to live on the campus.  And I was married and, and--but I could not find a place to live in the, in the city, no.  So it was a lot of segregation but also not just at Garrett, not just at--in Evanston or in the Chicago area but also at the school itself.
Story_ID: 331631
Speaker 1: You were telling me off-camera just about King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] perception of Chicago [Illinois]. And you said that he said--
Speaker 2: I said--
Speaker 1: --during his march through Cicero [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, doing his march, during--King went to Chicago--King took his movement to the North.  It was mostly a southern movement from '55 [1955] up until '66 [1966].  But when the Watts riots [Los Angeles, California] happened in August 1965, King and--he then decided that it was time to go north.  And he chose Chicago as his city to go to and in the context of doing that--in 1966 was when the Chicago movement happened.  Well, King took, you know, started marching for open housing outside of Chicago.  And, and in those--and King got stoned out there, and he was going to march in Cicero.  And people said no you can't march there now. That, that is when you get yourself killed.  And that's when Daley [Richard J. Daley] came to try to negotiate with King to get him out of Chicago.  And they did--he achieved some things in Chicago but that--but for a group of blacks to march in Cicero, now that was really dangerous.
Story_ID: 331632
Speaker 1: So Malcolm X is killed.  Well, King's [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] big speech is in 1963, the King's big speech-the I Have a Dream speech is on March on Washington, '63 [1963] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes you're right, right.
Speaker 1: But then Malcolm X. is killed in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], February of 1965.
Speaker 1: But the summer of '66 [1966] when, when Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] coins the phrase black power that's when you have a whole turn in your ideology towards your theological studies.
Speaker 2: Yeah, black power was very important for me, but it was not just Willie Ricks and black power or that meritorious march. I remember that march and I remember the impact of that march.  I was teaching at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas]--no, I was teaching at--I was on my way from Philander to Adrian, Michigan to teach at Adrian College [Adrian, Michigan].  The, the event that really, really changed me was the Watts [Los Angeles, California]--the Detroit [Michigan] riot in, in July, 1967.  Adrian, Michigan and Adrian College are only about seventy miles from Detroit.  So I felt the impact of that. That was so overwhelming; it just was naturally connected with black power. Because that was black power erupted not far from me.  That's when I really said I got to do something. That was my conversion experience in its most radical set. Now when black power happened, I was already moving that way. I was already going that way.
Speaker 1: And you were moving that way because?
Speaker 2: I was moving that way because of reading the Malcolm X. Malcolm became important after I got out of graduate school [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] and I, I was searching for an understanding of the gospel that did not require me to be a Negro, but black, and King didn't help that.
Speaker 1: Okay say that to me again. You were, you were in need of--?
Speaker 2: I was in need of an understanding of the gospel that not only emphasized justice and freedom and liberation, as King did.  But also, I needed an understanding of the gospel that would also help me to accept my blackness and not be a Negro.  See I lived in Adrian College, at Adrian College.  I was the only African American with the college education in that town, in that city of twenty-five thousand.  And I felt the impact of whiteness and the difficulty of being black in a white society right there.  Even though they were nice to me, but when white people are nice that just brings out some of the depth of the inhumanity that is beneath the surface that they do not even recognize.  That's when--that was the change for me. It was, it was a radical turn to blackness that's what the 1967 riots did to me.  Along with Malcolm X and, and the gradual impact of reading his autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley] and et cetera.  So that was--that change was much more radical than my turn to Jesus.  See the Jesus turn was a gradual, natural, non-challenging turn. It was an empowering, soothing experience because it was in my community.  But the turn to blackness, the turn to Malcolm, was a much more radical turn because most blacks were not turning that way.  In fact, many blacks disliked that, particularly in the church.  And King didn't turn toward blackness initially, he kind of opposed black power.  And that was the radical element in the Civil Rights Movement, coming out of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Well that's where I was.
Story_ID: 331633
Speaker 1: And black power to you at the time meant what? It meant that and in context to your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The complete--black power meant for me the complete liberation of black people by any means necessary. That's what it meant, it meant that.  And I didn't see--I thought any group of people would believe that. 'Cause white people certainly mean to, mean to be liberated by any means necessary.  And that's why they went into the Revolutionary War, and that's why they fought in World War I [WWI] and World War II [WWII]; they were liberating themselves with guns.  Well, I figured it's time for black people to liberate themselves by any means necessary.  And we certainly do not accept being described and have received out identity from the people who oppressed us; that's where Negro came from.
Speaker 1: So for you by any means necessary meant what?
Speaker 2: It meant just what is said: by any means necessary.
Speaker 1: So now were you ready to take up arms and fight for your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No that--because I don't think I would get it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: See, see if I--see, see that's where people misunderstood Malcolm [Malcolm X], Malcolm didn't carry no gun.
Speaker 1: Right, right and he didn't and that was the biggest misconception of Malcolm, you've written, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, see, but people always gonna--always misinterpret you because they don't want the world to accept you anyway.  So and the best way to get the world not to accept you, is to twist what you say into something else.  By any means necessary doesn't necessarily mean violence.  And it certainly--besides white people were violent.  They certainly are not in the position to tell anybody else not to be violent, particularly against them when they are responsible for the oppression. That seemed to me was so silly.  And I was not going to promise them that I would be non-violent.
Speaker 1: So when you took black power, the essence of it and, and liberating yourself, did you look at Christianity as having been something that also had been an oppressive tool by white people?
Speaker 2: Yes without question, without question.  In fact, that's why I said white Christianity was really not Christianity, really not the gospel.  It's a poisoned form. See just 'cause you have, you know, food that looks like food, if you got some arsenic in it--you eat it, it's gonna kill you.  So the religion that white people had, had arsenic in it for black people.  And so if they accept Christianity the way black--the way white people taught, taught it to them, black people would never get free.  And they would never understand what Christianity and what the gospel was really about--what the Bible was really truly about. And so my job as a theologian was to tell 'em.  See what white theologians did is that they ignored the race question.  They just gone tell you about everything else about the Bible back then, but they don't tell you what that means for black people in their struggle for justice.
Speaker 1: And what is it, go ahead, keep talking?
Speaker 2: No, what?
Speaker 1: No I was going to, to ask you so what does that mean what is--how is--how do you put the race question to the Bible?
Speaker 2: Well the race question is, is deeply embedded in the Bible.  See the Bible is about the salvation of all people. That is--what does that mean, what is salvation?  Salvation means you become fully who you were intended to be by God, without any restriction, where your full humanity can emerge.  And when you learn to love yourself and empower yourself to be who you are that's what the Bible--that's what the goal--.  Now black people are not allowed to be who they are.  So just like the children of Israel were not allowed to be who they were.  Just like any poor person is not allowed to be who they are or created to be.  Nobody was created to be homeless, nobody was created to be oppressed and lynched.  So, so the gospel has to be a religion that empowers people to claim what has been taken from them.  So black people--I remember growing up not wanting anybody to call me black. Why not? Because whites had made blackness evil and wrong and worse.  So the, the task is to turn it upside down, and to make it black as something beautiful, and that's why black became beautiful.
Story_ID: 331634
Speaker 1: --How was it that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had not embraced race in this movement, or blackness as we're talking about it, and Malcolm [Malcolm X] had?  What was--what are the differences?
Speaker 2: The main difference between King and Malcolm on blackness--see King worked in the South.  He worked, and he inspired religious black people in the church to rise up and become something new. Somebody who would resist and fight for their freedom; now that was a major thing.  But black people were not suffering from a lack--from the kind of disorientation that Malcolm saw in the urban ghettos.  Remember, there were no riots hardly at all in the South.  See black people, black people in the South had a religion that bond them together, and it had deep, deep historical resources going all the way back to the 18th century.  So black religion was a force in the southern blacks that gave them a sense of identity.  But when black moved north, on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], West Side of Chicago, in Harlem [New York, New York] and in Watts [Los Angeles, California]; when we moved north into the urban centers, we did not take with us the community that we left behind in South.  So this sense of self was being crushed by drugs and all the other kinds of violence taken place where we were cramped into very small places in which to live.  So Malcolm spoke to that group; that is, to a group of blacks who were alienated from Christianity.  A group of blacks who were not only alienated from Christianity, but they were alienated from themselves.  So, so you would've had to have a message of empowerment that addressed blackness because blackness was what was being rejected.  King didn't address that; didn't need to address that initially because he was in the South.  And the religion served as the means by which community was created.  But in the North, religion didn't--the churches weren't that powerful like that.  And so it was blackness that served as the religion that bonded people together.  So I, I was then in the North; I was not in the South (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Story_ID: 331635
Speaker 1: If blackness was the bond in the North, what role did Islam play in Malcolm's [Malcolm X] life and in the movement and in your life as a theologian and a Christian?
Speaker 2: See Malcolm was talking about black in the '50s [1950s] from the time he got out of prison.  So Nation of Islam was describing Christianity at the white man's religion all the way back in the 1930s and '40s [1940s].  Now Elijah Muhammad didn't emphasize blackness, Malcolm emphasized that, but Elijah Muhammad did critique whiteness, and he critiqued Christianity in the most powerful way that anyone could think about from a black point of view.  So already with Malcolm's voice criticizing the churches for preaching a white man's religion, that impacted us profoundly in the church, particularly in the '60s [1960s].  Now we sort of passed it off in the '50s [1950s], but when black power emerged we could see the whiteness of Christianity as white people preached it.  And as it was found in the black churches 'cause we had these white pictures of Jesus in these black churches.  We could see this white gospel that was being preached.  Now--and we begin to say now how can we black people bow down to a white Jesus.  We are not worshiping a God that looks like us, a savior that looks like us.  We are worshiping a savior that look just like the man who oppresses us.  Now that's a powerful message, and it was a Muslim that articulated that in such a way down in Harlem [New York, New York], in Detroit [Michigan], in Chicago [Illinois], they articulated that with the force of moral and religious power that no black could ignore that. I certainly could not.
Speaker 1: So what did that make you think about the education that you'd received--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I--
Speaker 1: Of and, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the education that I received.
Speaker 1: Was white (laughter).
Speaker 2: I said, I said (laughter) I sort of smiled, and I said, you know, I've been mis-educated, mis-educated.  I remember going back reading Carter G. Woodson, 'The Mis-Education of the Negro.'  And which if you teach a person what to think you don't have to worry about what he does.  And here I had learned all this theology, all this religion, six years in graduate school [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] I was studying religion, white religion.  Teaching me what the gospel was about; all these theologians I read but not one of them mentioned anything about black people, anything about black people's struggle for justice in this society.  Here, I was in seminary from '58 [1958] to '64 [1964] and didn't read one book by a black person, didn't hear anything about the Civil Rights Movement in my classes.  And when I got my conversion to blackness I got myself liberated from the mis-education I had learned in graduate school.  That's when I knew I had to either leave the church or discover in that gospel the truth that would empower black people in their struggle for justice.
Story_ID: 331636
Speaker 1: And what have you discovered in that gospel that allows us to empower ourselves?
Speaker 2: What I discovered is, is that the Bible is primarily about a God who is almost always on the side of the little people, always. I don't care what part of it you read.  The, the central events in the Bible for Christian are two: Exodus and Jesus' cross. All of those are about weak people, about poor people.  And then you got the prophets: Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Jeremiah all of 'em speak on what God is gonna do to people who oppressed the poor and the weak.  When I really began to read the Bible without all these white commentaries that tell--was trying to tell me what their message was, I could see that message clear.  But not only could I see it; when I begin to read about the spirituals and the spirituals and read about what black preachers were saying in my history, I begin to discover that those preachers knew too. All I had to do was read Frederick Douglass.  And Douglass talked about our Henry Highland Garnet, Henry Highland Garnet, or David Walker, all these people talk about that.  King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] wasn't the first one to discover justice in the Bible, but even Garnet was a nationalist, and he loved his blackness.  And Martin Delany was the father of black national--he loved his blackness, all of these are religious people.  So I begin to say that I've been mis-educated in this white seminary [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois].  And therefore it's my job is to teach my people what this message is about and it is a message, strangely enough, that looks quite different from the one that I learned in graduate school.
Speaker 1: So and you said that this had also come about because students started to challenge you about--these students in the '60s [1960s] challenged what you were teaching them?
Speaker 2: Well I think what I--what I really meant to say and what I intended to say is, is that I began to teach at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas].  I went back there to teach, and I taught there almost three years.  And then I began to ask myself, there in 1964 to '66 [1966], what has what I learned in seminary to do with the lives of these young black students coming from the cotton fields of Arkansas and Mississippi?  What does Karl Barth have to do with them?  What does Frederich Schleiermacher have to do them?  I mean how are, how are these people going--these European theologians going to empower them to claim their place in the world.  That's when I begin to see that I had to find a new way of talking about religion that simply would not reinforce the ideas that I learned in seminary.
Story_ID: 331637
Speaker 1: After teaching, after going back to Philander [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas]
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You taught there from six--what were?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], January '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: To?
Speaker 2: To May of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: So I mean, and was it in '66 [1966] that you started to think about the idea of 'Black Theology and Black Power' [James H. Cone], and it was '69 [1969] when it was published?  When did that idea come to you that I've got to put this in a book?
Speaker 2: That came to me shortly after the riot in Detroit [Michigan], it was during that time.  That was my reformation, my conversion experience. That's when I knew I had to begin to interpret and make sense out of what was happening to black people in this society.  And I began to tell people that I was going to write a book about this.  I first wrote an essay called "Christianity and Black Power" ['Is Anybody Listening to Black America?,' ed. C. Eric Lincoln]. It was the first thing I wrote.  And from that essay I wrote 'Black Theology and Black Power.'  'Black Theology' came to me out of a movement that was going on at the time among preachers; young movement.  But I didn't know them, but I knew that they were at work up in the North.  I was in Adrian, Michigan and young preachers, young, young A--you know young black preachers.
Speaker 1: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] preachers?
Speaker 2: Well, now some of them were A.M.E., but there were Baptists--it was the ecumenical group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were responding to the same thing I was responding to. In fact, they wrote our, our black power statement in January 1966--not January but July 31, 1966.  They wrote this paper; a group of, of preachers and some of whom became friends of mine afterward wrote this statement on black power, endorsing it. This is 1966; this is one month after Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada] sounded the black power on that Meredith March [Meredith March Against Fear].  And they were responding to the critique of black power by white preachers and white society and also from black people.
Story_ID: 331638
Speaker 1: Have white and black ministers prior to this--was this the first sign of any sort of tension that we are going to speak a different language from the pulpit? Had everybody been speaking the same language up until now?
Speaker 2: Well I think progressive white preachers were, were--supported the Civil Rights Movement, the March on Washington, and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. King interpreted nonviolence in such a way that it was the one thing white people could endorse for black people.  And so you have a lot of white preachers in the Civil Rights Movement along with black preachers who were preaching nonviolence and preaching justice, and nonviolence has a way to get to it.  When black power emerged, white preachers said no now it's the Antichrist that's not Christian. That's when black preachers said yes it is, and that's when they wrote that statement.
Speaker 1: Okay let's talk about that for a moment because prior to this, white preachers you're saying had not spoken out against lynchings from their pulpit?  They had not spoken out they had not spoken out against the violence against black people.  But when black power emerged and black people were saying now we are going to--by any means necessary, then white preachers decided to speak out against this violence that may be perpetrated towards them?
Speaker 2: Not quite.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Not quite (laughter), not quite as simple as that.  No--see if you want a date when white preachers really began to speak out against the violence that was being committed against black people in the Civil Rights Movement and King's movement that would be January, 1963.  They met in Chicago [Illinois] about, you know, three or four thousand of them.  And along with whites and blacks; King was at that meeting.  That's when he got the support of the white church. And in getting that support from all these ministers, ecumenical, all denominations, Jews too, and Greek Orthodoxs, all of 'em met in Chicago opposing segregation and the violence that emerged out of it; this is January, 1963.  So you got white preachers opposing the violence very early. Now that's when King, about three months later writes his Birmingham [Alabama], you know, Letter from Birmingham Jail.  And white preachers they, they love that letter.  And they, they met, you know, they published over a million copies of it and passed it out in their churches.  And shortly after that, then you had the March on Washington in, in August 1963.  Well that, that--you never would've had that many people in Washington, D.C. without the white preachers because the white preachers from their churches urged their people to go.  And they went, so you got a whole black and white together in, in Washington, D.C.  So the white preachers were right there supporting and against the violence, but also you got white preachers supporting the Selma [Alabama] march, and many were killed in that march. Whites were killed in that march supporting blacks for the right to vote. This is in March and April of 1965.  So you got white preachers and white Christians supporting the Civil Rights Movement and King, King is the most beloved figure in America, almost the world, in 1965.
Story_ID: 331639
Speaker 1: What I was emphasizing was is that, is that white preachers did oppose the violence, and white Christians kind of generally--if they had not, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], would not have had a movement.  So King had to pitch his movement to, to arouse moderate liberal whites.
Speaker 2: Christians.
Speaker 1: Christians and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Non-Christians as well, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Non-Christians too, to oppose violence of white people, the brutality.  Now before King started the Civil Rights Movement in 1955, whites did not speak out against the brutality, no white preachers did.  So that's before the Civil Rights Movement, that's before 1955, but shortly after that started, King makes it public. Then '63 [1963] they come out and join King and et cetera.  But that's not what led to black power. Black power emerged--
Speaker 2: Because?
Speaker 1: Black--first you have to understand where black power comes from. Black power comes from SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee; that group that had worked in Mississippi, Alabama.  The, the most difficult areas, the ones that didn't get on TV, they worked from there from the early '60s [1960s] all the way up to '65 [1965].  They were in Mississippi. By the time they got the voting rights bill [Voting Rights Act of 1965] which was passed August, 1965, whites in the South, in Alabama in Mississippi--Carmichael [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was in Lowndes County, Alabama, and he organized a black political party down there black group to elect blacks. Now we got the right to vote, now let's put blacks in there.  But several blacks and whites too were killed during that process after the voting rights bill had passed.  So they didn't get any protection and so, as a result, whites devised all kinds of mean--even though you got the right to vote, you ain't gone get a chance to really have an impact.  So whites still figured out a way to keep electing themselves for office, and I tell you, Carmichael, them became very, very disillusioned.  But the disillusion part also was in the 1964 Democratic Convention [1964 Democratic National Convention] in, in Atlantic City [New Jersey], which had also emerged out of Mississippi.  And they got rejected in the convention, and they seated the white racists there.  All of the violence that emerged on these young people --now see these--SNCC was truly integrated.
Speaker 2: Well they--well just to, to--in at Atlantic City--SNCC was integrated--but in Atlantic City they gave them what two seats?
Speaker 1: Two seats.
Speaker 2: And they said we, Fannie Lou Hamer says, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We didn't come here for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all tired.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so SNCC, go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right see, see what I'm trying to tell you, is explain to you the rise of black power.
Speaker 2: Right, so right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gotta keep the Atlantic City thing in mind.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what they did there; you gotta keep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so they rejected them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you gotta keep in mind what happened after the voting rights bill was passed with Stokely Carmichael in Lowndes County (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Alabama; you gotta keep that in mind and the violence that emerged in Haynesville [Alabama], where people were killed, whites and blacks.  And basically, they got tired, they got fed up.  As Carmichael said, "integration is a subterfuge for white supremacy."  He say we ain't for that no more we ain't for no integration, now we for black power, now we for black people running their own thing.  We gone put some black people in this office, and we're are going to get power, and we're going to use it.  And that's when those civil rights philosophies of integration began to be dropped off.  And by the time when SNCC began to meet and when, you know, and they were talking about getting rid of white folks and black power long before it emerged on that merited road now on the, on the road in June of 1966.  During that time, Carmichael just saw the occasion in which to use it to its most public effectiveness.  But it had started from out of that democratic convention and all the time blacks using the democratic process trying to get power.  And white people manipulating the process and not playing by the rules that they created.  And every time blacks use their rules to get in and get ahead they change them again in order to disenfranchise them.  That's when black power emerged and June of 1966 was just the occasion to articulate it.
Story_ID: 331640
Speaker 1: So just as there was this buildup that led to black power, what was the buildup that led you to black theology?  You laid it out clearly for me, the Atlantic City [New Jersey], you know, all the stuff that led up to black power; what led up to black theology in your life? How did it build up for you?
Speaker 2: Well there are two key events-there are two--you know, how it, how it emerged for me was, you know--of course, the '66 [1966] had an impact (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the riot, and I mean that--
Speaker 2: No, no the, the black power during, during that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, in that summer that '66 [1966] okay.
Speaker 2: It had an impact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It had an impact, but it wasn't the thing to say I gotta write this book ['Black Theology and Black Power,' James H. Cone] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Naw, it wasn't that--it was it first was '66 [1966]. The second was the Detroit [Michigan] riot.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], July '67 [1967].  Now that was the most crucial thing that was, that was the event that made me say yes I got to do this, I got to do this.  I don't care what hell or high water. I either get out of the ministry--I got to make sure that everybody knows what Christianity really is.  And that black power is not alien to the gospel. It is the gospel.
Speaker 1: And had people been saying that this isn't religious which is why you rose up to speak to the fact that this is religious.  Is this when the white ministers started to say that we can't cosign, and you had to rise up and say well this is black power (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no what happened is this, what happened is this is that when black power emerged, black and white ministers said no this is not Christian.  You could see it all in the papers, all on the TV, everywhere, in the churches, everywhere, this is not Christian.  The civil rights King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is Christian; this is not. And so I saw the ministers' statement, you know, a small group of ministers endorsing black power. It did not articulate black theology.  And they did not articulate a clear, logical understanding of the gospel.  They had no depth in it and I, I wanted to say, you know, I want to make an argument.  It's one thing to say something, it's another thing to make an argument so clear and so strong that people would have to listen.  But not only have to listen but engage in it and then we get a debate going and see what is true in this thing that's what I wanted to do.  And the two events that force that on me--there were three actually; first it was the black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: It was '66 [1966], next was the Detroit riot, and then the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. in April '68 [1968].  And I wrote my book in June of '68 [1968]. It was published in March of '69 [1969]. But the King assassination had a profound effect.  It didn't initiate it. Detroit 1967 was the most crucial initiating point 'cause it had--because I had written "Christianity and Black Power" ['Is Anybody Listening to Black America?,' ed. C. Eric Lincoln] by the time King, before King died (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: The essay.
Speaker 2: The essay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: The essay I had really--and had presented it in February of, of 1968.  So I was going to write this book, I was going to write this book, but when King happened in May in, in April of '68 [1968], April 4, '68 [1968],  that just made it more deep, made me say--that made me mad, that made me really mad; really, really mad.  And now it's time for me to say this thing.  And I, I had the force of King's assassination and just and just in the background as I sat down to write in June of 1968.  That was, that--those were the events black power, March and emergence was the--was the kind of priming pump thing.  Detroit riot, absolute conversion there. And then King was like the last push that made me who I am today.
Story_ID: 331641
Speaker 1: What happened after you've written the book ['Black Theology and Black Power,' James H. Cone], in your life?  I mean you, you are--you've become a black theologian and which is different than a theologian. You put some qualifiers on it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And then how does that affect your relationship with the broader theologians' society which you come from and had been a part of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was challenged to make--to prove what I was talking about. I was challenged publicly and otherwise both by blacks, whites, and others, everybody.
Speaker 1: And you were challenged because people didn't want to believe that there's black theology and then theology? Why were you challenged?
Speaker 2: They said theology didn't come in colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just theology. The gospel is universal.  It is not, it is not for one people, it is for everybody.  And it's not, it's not just for blacks or for this or for that; it is for everybody, it's universal.  It's beyond all these things, and I said no it's not.  It's not beyond all these things 'cause if it's beyond it, it has no concrete reality. It is these things, and you have to make sense out it.  The universality comes through the particular; you don't skip over it--you have to understand.  You don't skip over the cross, you go through it to the resurrection that's the universal, but you don't skip over the cross, that's the key thing.  So you don't skip over blackness to get to some universal something because if you do, all you've embraced is whiteness.  So that's, that was--and thus--one of my professors in graduate school [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois] he refused to speak to me after that and another one you know, most were challenging me; they were upset that I had the audacity to say it and to act like it was true.
Speaker 1: So were you one of how many in, in that community? How many black theologians were there in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well at that time there were--
Speaker 1: At that time--
Speaker 2: Very few, almost none.
Speaker 1: --very few.
Speaker 2: I was the only, I was the only professional systematic theologian as they say.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were other preachers around.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And other, you know, not many with Ph.D. degrees.  They were just preachers in the organization called the National Committee of Black Churchmen.  And they were not teachers in theology; they were just teachers, they were pastors.
Speaker 1: So did they, in turn, come to you to be, to be re-educated themselves about the gospel that that they had been teaching (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came to me yeah, yeah they came to me and asked me to join their organization.  And to be the theologian for them in the organization.  To be the one behind the ideas that they were trying to articulate.  Because they saw in my first two books 'Black Theology and Black Power' and 'A Black Theology of Liberation' [James H. Cone], the one published in 1969 the other one in 1970.  They saw in those two books what they were seeking to say.  And they invited me to speak at their occasions and invited me to be a part of their group, which I did join.
Speaker 1: And what year did you join, was it 1970?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: So, so that--'A Black Theology of Liberation' came right on the heels of 'Black Power,' 'Black Theology and Black Power'?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes right on the heels of it.
Speaker 1: So you put those two books out one right after the other (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah one after the other, one after the other yes, I didn't stop.
Story_ID: 331642
Speaker 1: And during that time also was the [U.S.] Supreme Court de- (unclear) you know, with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], the representative was unconstitutional (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then there's like in '69 [1969] also, like the Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]--the attack on the students.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I remember that.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Also do you remember in Mississippi when the three kids go missing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 1964, yeah.
Speaker 1: That--so that's before you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's before.
Speaker 1: --you're a theologian?
Speaker 2: That is before the rise of, of black power and that is before my radical turn.  Although I remember it, I was teaching at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] then, just begun there.
Speaker 1: Now what would you say are some of the biggest differences in the way you taught pre-and post-black power (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) See pre-black power, I simply taught what I had learned in seminary [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what was that?
Speaker 2: And, and it was basically what Europeans has said about the gospel in, in history.
Speaker 1: Now did the Europeans say that, that Jesus was white?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Then, then how did we inject that into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, with images of Jesus as white.
Speaker 1: --into, okay.
Speaker 2: Images of Jesus as white is throughout all of history by Europeans.  People tend to make Jesus the color who they are.  You know, you know, Jesus really not white, 'cause nobody growing up in Palestine during that time is--would be white. They'd be colored; they'd certainly not be European.  And so--but Europeans made him white; so all the pictures you see of Jesus in America at least and, you know, throughout much of Europe are white pictures of Jesus (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 2: So you don't have to say Jesus is white, you just presented him as white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so doing the Black Power movement is that something that people wanted to refute now that Jesus is white?  Did, did a part of black theology present a new side that okay Jesus was--is not a--this image of him is incorrect?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, of course. In fact in my first book, I said Jesus is black.  I mean it's in 'Black Theology and Black Power' [James H. Cone].  It's in the very first thing I wrote that Jesus is black, and that was the--that was the dominant thing. Albert Cleage [Albert B. Cleage, Jr.] was--come and saying the same thing.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this, Mr. Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Prior to your change--post- did you think Jesus was black when you was growing up or did you accept the image of the Europeans?
Speaker 2: No I did not, no I did not think Jesus was black when I was growing up.  I did not think too much about color when I was growing up, as to what color the characters in the Bible were.  I, I--probably if I was pressed, I would say, I probably assumed Jesus was white because that's what even in the Sunday school literature that I saw from my churches from all the churches, Jesus was white.  So to say, you know, I didn't--nobody said he was, but every picture you saw, he was white.  So yeah I probably did think that, but I don't remember consciously saying it, but I do--I'm sure subconsciously I believed it.
Speaker 1: So and, and I just quick, a funny story about myself (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just too quickly yes, you know, one--a couple of days ago I guess I was doing some the research, and it dawned on me that I had never thought about Jesus as being black.  And it didn't dawn on me until--I'm forty now. I was like, you know, just maybe I have an image, you know.  I'd see my sister's picture of this, but as far as my consciousness is saying for sure oh 100 percent. I'd never had that thought until I started to do all this research and read some of your books.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well, you know, that, that was--that was the most important thing. That was the biggest thing.
Story_ID: 331643
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you guys set out to change the image of Jesus?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.
Speaker 1: And how did you do that?
Speaker 2: Well we did it in several ways. One is literally to say that Jesus was not a European and anything not a European is generally regarded as white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the first.
Speaker 1: That's the first now.
Speaker 2: That's the first.
Speaker 1: Now you, you--it's, it's one thing to say this to the theologians that you are a part of this group [National Committee of Black Churchmen] with, the other black ones.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The other black ones is another want to present this to the, to the--your, your theologians that are classically--who have given you this education.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How do they accept you with this statement that Jesus is a person of color?
Speaker 2: They, they, you know, first they resist, and they say no.  And then I just call them to--to what possibly could people look like in 1st century Palestine.  You know, I mean you don't see no Europeans there.  I mean, it just not. And all I have to do then is to is to call them to their own teachings.  They cannot--they don't claim today that Jesus was white.  And it--they did not try to defend that Jesus was white now even when I came out that Jesus is black.  They just want to say the color doesn't matter, Jesus was not black, he was not African. I said no, he wasn't African but he was colored and colored here means black.  And so we had some debates about it, but the key thing for me was not the pigmentation.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: It was Jesus' solidarity with the poor, the oppressed who today in this society is best symbolized and, and actualized in the experience of black people who were enslaved for 246 years in this land.  Jesus was a slave during that time, that's the one--that's the people Jesus would identify with I have no doubt about that.  Just like Jesus identified with the poor in his time, he would've identified with the poor in our time, so you got to explain to me why he would not do that.
Speaker 1: So once you, so you set out to help change his image or the way people see him through--so what are some of the steps you--that were taken to do that within the community.  I mean does that mean okay so every black church in the South now we're gonna get rid of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --blonde hair blue-eyed portraits, no more Last Suppers with Jesus and twelve white disciples?
Speaker 2: Well I think, you know, it's hard to--you just can't walk in black churches and start taking their images down, you can't do that. What you can do is teach 'em.  And what I would do and a lot of black preachers did that, a lot of black scholars did that.  I remember going to a little small church in Arkansas, a church--they knew me and I preached on Jesus being black.  And it was not a difficult experience for them; it was initially a shocking thing to say.  But when I begin to explain to them, I said now look I say, you know, Jesus does not look like the white policeman that beat our kids.  Jesus does not look like the white grocery store that cheats us.  I said when y'all look at the images of Jesus in this church, all the people--all the images I see are images that look just like the people who oppress us.  Is that your savior?  I said now you say well Jesus is not any color and you could make that kind of psychological distinction. Maybe you can, but your children cannot; five, six, seven and eight-year-old children cannot.  And they see it too, and when they go down in, in the white person's community, they gone think of Jesus as white just like you do even though you don't admit it.  I say who ever Jesus is Jesus is not one who believes in white supremacy. And you ought not have images of white supremacy in your church.  I didn't tell them take it down but next time I went there it was all down.  You have to teach people, and you have to respect them.  If you teach 'em and respect them, they will make the decision for themselves.  So now a whole lot of churches have changed their images. Even now the Sunday school--our Sunday school material now got color in it now, see.  And that's all coming out of black theology and black consciousness movement of the 1960s.
Story_ID: 331644
Speaker 1: Was religion one of the last places to be challenged or--?
Speaker 2: Challenged with (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean in the sense that sort of a racial challenge.  I mean it, it had been accepted that, you know, the theology had been accepted for so long in this country or as you say 247 years of what Jesus was.  And so with the movements of civil rights we started--you said the churches were segregated before.
Speaker 2: Well in during times of slavery, during the times of slavery (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During the times of slavery.
Speaker 2: And after slavery, during Jim Crow segregation.
Speaker 1: Right, so we, we fought the--okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pretty much they're almost segregated now too.
Speaker 1: Okay because what I was going to say--
Speaker 2: You know, social thing, that's a choice.
Speaker 1: Yeah is that we fought the schools, we fought the lunch counters, we fought the downtowns.  Were churches the last front we needed to fight to integrate?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And have we done it?
Speaker 2: No we have not.
Speaker 1: So could you or are there still places in the country where you could go to today and walk in and be a black man and they'd be shocked to see you?
Speaker 2: No they won't be shocked, they wouldn't drive you out.  I don't think there would be hardly any churches.  Maybe some of the extreme white supremacists would drive you out.  But I would say the vast majority of the mainstream white churches would not drive you out.  Nobody wants to be a racist today, not explicitly so because that's not cool. Even George Bush [President George Walker Bush] doesn't want to be a racist.  If you want to upset white people who are public figures call them racist. That would disturb them to no end and they will go to all extents denying that.  And so the same would be true of white churches; they're not goint to put you out of there.  But how they treat you, how they receive you, how to become a part of that church, now that's a question.  Because they still want the church as a place which they control.  So black churches still want a place where they control.  So you don't have much--you have visiting each other, but you don't have churches that are truly are integrated not at the level of power. You have members.  But the power remains in the hands of the people of the racial group who runs it.
Story_ID: 331645
Speaker 1: So when all of the cardinals met to elect the new pope was--did you see enough diversity in that group.  And is it--has it changed enough with the times or its still--?
Speaker 2: No basically the Catholic church is a European church. I mean even though they got more people of color in it 'cause when you include the third world, Asia, Africa, Latin America and also people of color and minorities in, in other parts of the world,  actually, blacks, I mean, people of color are in the majority even in the Catholic church, they're in the majority. But not who run it. Not who are cardinals who elect the pope; they are a majority European.  And most of the blacks or people of color who are cardinals they usually get there because they think white and they, you know, are just as deeply committed to the white doctrines as the Catholic church or the Protestant church have communicated down through the centuries.  So just to make something black in color alone--you gotta be black in thinking.  See it's how you think, not just how you are 'cause there are--you know, you got Clarence Thomas on the [U.S.] Supreme Court, but Clarence Thomas doesn't represent me.  He represents the people the white people who put him there, so just having somebody black doesn't do it.
Story_ID: 331646
Speaker 1: What kind of thinking does Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] have? Is, is he--do you consider him a black thinker?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I, you know, a flawed black thinker, but he's a black thinker; flawed.  We--most of us are flawed in some way (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Most of us yeah, I'll accept that but, but will you put that--
Speaker 2: Most of us are flawed, but he is in a serious way.
Speaker 1: But he is in a serious way, and that means what?
Speaker 2: Well, I think his history is one I know pretty well. Came into the movement 'cause Malcolm X brought him in.  But yet he was a part of the Muslim element within in there that killed Malcolm X.  He wasn't the one who-with the group that shot him but he certainly created the atmosphere--and he's acknowledged that--that led to Malcolm's assassination.  So I cannot--anybody that creates an atmosphere that helps kill one of the greatest figures in our history it takes me a long time to get over that.  And I'm not sure that Farrakhan has addressed that properly enough for me to feel comfortable with it.  But I think in terms of what he says publicly generally, you know, it's okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah because I was going to say how do you, how do you--and this will be the last question for today--but, but what do you think it is about him that, that has led him to bring a million people to Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: You know what that is? That's blackness 'cause people--he can articulate blackness.  He can articulate black solidarity in a powerful and an effective way.  The same way Malcolm did and the same way Elijah Muhammad and the same way anyone does who has--who can articulate the hurts and pains of black people in this society.  And the need for us to get together in order to do something about it, Farrakhan can articulate that.  And white people in this society are so bad as long as you have the, you know, the George Bushes [President George Walker Bush] and, and the Rudy Giulianis and, and all the other white public officials who give you reason for black people to be worried.  Then the Farrakhan emerge are gonna have power, largely because they articulate that blackness in opposition to the obvious white people who had mean us no good.  So he would become popular but just because he become popular doesn't mean that he's speaking the truth.  Popularity is never the best clue for truth.  Best clue for truth is when you're working against the stream; that's why Muslims was so powerful, and Malcolm was so powerful.  You know what made Malcolm so powerful? It's because nobody in the black community hardly embraced him.  Malcolm was embraced after his death and remember Malcolm was killed by black people.  So he was going against the community's deepest values at a time at, a time in which in which it was a not a popular thing to do.  Now Farrakhan, on the other hand, is not going against the values. He's creating a kind of popular, arousing thing, you know, about blackness which everybody will accept.  They didn't accept Malcolm though.
Story_ID: 331997
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone]; myself. It was taken in Arkansas when I was a student at Shorter College [North Little Rock, Arkansas] in about 1956.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken about 1954 when I was a senior in high school [Ouachita County Training School, Bearden, Arkansas], and it was taken in Arkansas about the time of my graduation from high school in 1954.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in Arkansas when I was about two or three years of age.  I am in the middle, my brothers Cecil [Cecil Wayne Cone] and Charles [Charles Cone]--a little older; about two and three years older than I am and it was taken in Arkansas where I was born.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in New York City [New York, New York] in 1969 when I first came to Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], but there I am speaking at the Church of the Master in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: This picture was taken around the year of 2001 or two [2002] when I was in Arkansas, Little Rock, Arkansas.  I was inducted into the Black Hall of Fame [Arkansas Black Hall of Fame].  The other persons standing were inducted into the Black Hall of Fame along with me.
Speaker 2: And you are in this picture--?
Speaker 1: I am on the far right.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in Arkansas around the year 2000 or 2001; it is also at the Black Hall of Fame.  I am on the far left, the governor of Arkansas is in the middle, and my brother Charles is on the right.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in Arkansas at the Black Hall of Fame when I was inducted in the year 2000 or 2001, and it was the portrait that was taken.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken when I was less than a year old in Arkansas where I was born.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in Evanston, Illinois on the campus of Northwestern University.  And it is a picture when I received my doctorate degree from Northwestern in the spring of 1965.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken about 1948 when I was still in high school, and the person on the left is an adult friend, and I am on--in the middle, and the person on the extreme right is a childhood friend.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in Arkansas in Little Rock, Arkansas in 1958 when I graduated from Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] with a bachelor's degree.  On the left is my brother, in the middle is me, and on the right is my mother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture was taken around 1979 or '80 [1980]; it is a picture of my family; my late wife Sandra [Sandra Cone] and our children.
Speaker 2: Can you name the children?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Let me say oh yeah, on the far left is my mother and next to her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's name.
Speaker 2: Lucy Cone [Lucy Frost Cone] and next to her is my daughter Robynn [Robynn Cone].
Speaker 1: You can look at it right there for you need to see it up close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I think I can see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My daughter Robynn, and behind Robynn, next to me is my son Michael [Michael Cone] and then I am the tallest figure in the middle.  My wife Sandra is to my left of the picture, and my son Charles [Charles Cone] is standing in front of me, and my daughter Krystal [Krystal] is just in front of her mother.  This is my wife Sandra and I on the day we got married in June of 1979.  This is a picture of me in Monte Carlo [Monaco] vacationing with my wife in 1978.
Story_ID: 331998
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I'm James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone].
Speaker 1: Neculai Burghelea; today's date is May 5th [sic. May 10, 2006], and we are completing the interview we started in--I can't remember the date--January 24th [2006].
Story_ID: 331999
Speaker 1: So we will start--I wanted just to start with your professional career and then we will--as things come up we'll throw them in the mix.  But I'm interested in what happened the year you graduated university in Arkansas, and you went to work shortly after that.
Speaker 2: I graduated from Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] in the spring of 1965 in Evanston, Illinois that's where I graduated.  And that's--I began teaching a little before I graduated in the spring of '65 [1965].  I begin teaching at Philander Smith College [Little Rock, Arkansas] before I finished my dissertation, and that was in January of 1964 when I started to teach.  I finished the dissertation in the fall of '64 [1964] and graduated in the spring of 1965 from Northwestern.  But I was teaching at Philander while I was defending my dissertation.  I began teaching at Philander in the middle of the year, the second semester.  And I was teaching courses in religion and philosophy. I was the only teacher of religion and philosophy there.  I taught such courses as the life and teachings of Jesus, philosophy of religion, the Old Testament, and history of philosophy, et cetera.
Speaker 1: So from--how many years did you teach at Philander?
Speaker 2: I taught there until the spring of 1966, so I taught there two and a half years.
Story_ID: 332000
Speaker 1: Because it's 1965, this is a good time for us to talk about what was happening in the summers in Mississippi, the freedom riders--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]?
Speaker 2: Yes, well in the spring in 19--1965 is a crucial year largely because that's the year of Selma [Alabama].  The year of the achievement of voting rights for black people and the passage of the voting rights bill [Voting Rights Act of 1965] in, in July of nine--passing of it in July.  And the signing of it by Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], President Johnson, I think around August 6, 1965. What is significant about that is that six days later the Watts riot [Los Angeles, California] erupted.  And that was a major, major turning point because you had thirty-four people who were left dead.  Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had assumed that the achievement of the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964] in 1964 and the voting rights bill in 1965--he believed that those two major accomplishments actually had laid the groundwork for the full equality of black people in this society.  He, he thought basically the movement was coming near to an end and so did most everybody else in the Civil Rights Movement.  In fact, Selma represented the high point of the Civil Rights Movement. Now the March on Washington in '63 [1963] was a high point.  But is a high point at the beginning of achievements because the Voting Rights Act happened in '64 [sic. 1965], July.  And then next came Selma but Selma represented the major achievement largely because it achieved voting rights.  And King thought the power of the vote would be the power to elect black officials and the power to elect white officials who were interested in freedom and democracy in this land.  So when, when the voting rights bill was signed Johnson, President Johnson and also Martin King and the civil rights thought that this was really the beginning of seeing full equality in this society.  But what's happened six days later and it shocked King--I think he was in Puerto Rico when it happened, vacationing.  And he came back to this country because he was so shocked and went to Watts, and there he walked in some places that did not receive him well.  And blacks shouting him down and told him to get out.  And there King realized that the achievements that he had made in the South with the civil rights bill and the Voting Rights Act, were achievements that blacks in the North or in the West and in New York and California, they already had 'em.  So why were they rioting in Watts if they could already vote?  And they could already, you know, go where they wanted to go in terms of civil rights? That's when King realized that the problem with racism was much deeper.  The consequences of it--it led to unemployment, it led to poverty in the extreme.  And if you wanna see it all you have to do is to go to the inner cities of our, of our cities in this nation.  Now that's when King decided that he was going to Chicago [Illinois] and make Chicago the testing ground of nonviolence and of the Civil Rights Movement.  And that turned--that was when America began to not to feel so kindly about King.
Story_ID: 332001
Speaker 1: What did you think when Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] signed the Voting Rights Act of [Voting Rights Act of 1965] (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was with King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at that time; at that time I was with King.  I thought, too, that it was only a matter of time before King--and I mean before black people would achieve that.  So I was thinking pretty much the same thing because I was with King. I--you know, Malcolm [Malcolm X] had been assassinated essentially by that time 'cause he was assassinated in February, 1965.  And at that time, while I like Malcolm, King was my man.
Speaker 1: But you being a theologian you could see--I mean, was there a difference in the, the black churches in the South versus the black churches in the North and their view of, of what their responsibility was towards civil rights?
Speaker 2: No, black churches in the North also supported civil rights too.  There were many black ministers like Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] and, you know; there were a lot of black ministers in the North who supported King.  Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] in Brooklyn [New York] and the whole--all around, they supported King, but they supported him and his movements in the South.  But they, you know, black ministers did not support him as strongly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So.
Speaker 2: In the North.
Speaker 1: In 1960, so the Watts riot happened in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: The Watts riot happened in 1965.
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: In August of 1965.
Speaker 1: What effect did that have on you because I'm, I'm assuming (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It shocked me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like it shocked everybody else but not to the degree that I was ready to do a new kind of theological reflection.  I was still reflecting along with King with an emphasis on justice and with an emphasis on addressing the problems of, of the injustice in the society.  And that's what King taught me, that the gospel pushes you.  You cannot be a Christian unless you are for justice and what Watts riots revealed is that there is still injustice in America, and it's deeper than what I thought, and that's exactly what King thought.
Story_ID: 332002
Speaker 1: So in 1967 was Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967]--the Detroit riot.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], Detroit.  Where were you working then? You'd left Arkansas.
Speaker 2: I, I had left Arkansas. I left Arkansas in 1966.
Speaker 1: Why did you leave?
Speaker 2: I left because the president at Philander [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas] made it clear to me that I was not welcome there because of certain radical expressions I was beginning to develop in my theology; and which made it uncomfortable for a lot of white people who were on the board of directors at Philander.
Speaker 1: What were they? You got, you got to tell me what it was about.
Speaker 2: Well I grew up in Arkansas because there is still prejudice there.  You had, you had white people in Little Rock [Arkansas], who ran Philander Smith College.  And they did not like any blacks who asserted their independence from their thinking.
Speaker 1: Well, you were teaching about the same Jesus Christ that they were teaching about weren't you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No--yeah well that's what they thought.  You see, no, see white gospel and black gospel has always been different.  You think black people accepted segregation?  Of course not. We never accepted that, but whites did, and they went to their churches.  And they would not allow black people to come to their churches. Now why am I going to believe in the same God as they.  So at that point King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] showed us--see King's movement was to bring down segregation, and that's where I was at that time to bring it down by anyway you could.
Speaker 1: Was--Philander was not segregated, but you felt that there were still some levels of oppression at the university--at the college?
Speaker 2: No not at the college, only at the board of directors who ran the college. It's a black school.  I just didn't like white people running a black school telling me what I should be teaching and how I should be acting.  And so they wanted you to--they wanted all faculty to show a certain kind of deference to the white people on that board.
Speaker 1: Did the white people on the board like King and what he was teaching?
Speaker 2: Oh they, they not--oh no absolutely not; this is 1965.  I mean, King is not well thought of. King was made a national hero after he was assassinated.  But no white people I knew in Arkansas liked Martin Luther King, Jr. because he was creating disturbances.  He was regarded as a rabble rouser, and there was many signs in Arkansas which said he was a Communist.
Speaker 1: Well, what did they do? They asked you to leave, or they made it so difficult that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the president made it clear to me that the white people were annoyed with me.
Speaker 1: And what did you think were your options for your career at this time then?
Speaker 2: Well, I was gonna go teach somewhere else (laughter).  Well, I, I mean I always--I don't want to be anywhere where I'm not wanted as a teacher now; you can't teach.
Speaker 1: But why, why did you go to Michigan of all places?
Speaker 2: Because I was invited there by a classmate friend of mine who was teaching at Adrian College [Adrian, Michigan].  And if that had not happened I don't know where I would've gotten a teaching job.
Speaker 1: So I guess they just added fuel to the fire of what you would later teach with the incident that had happened at Philander?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was born in Arkansas I went to Philander as an undergraduate.  When I went back there to teach, I knew where I was going.  I knew the white people in Little Rock 'cause I was--I, I lived there.  So their racial sensibilities about me was nothing new.  I was ready to fight that as much as I could. The problem was, was the president at that time, who I understood had to cater to the people who gave the money for the school.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me his name?
Speaker 2: Ernest Dixon; he's deceased now.
Story_ID: 332003
Speaker 1: So you're in Arkansas [sic. Adrian, Michigan], sixty miles outside of Detroit [Michigan] and the, the riots of Detroit happens in 1960 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did that push you further to what you would later teach then, the Watts riots [Los Angeles, California] had pushed you?  How did Detroit push even further to, to coining the phrase [black theology]?
Speaker 2: See what happened with the Watts riots is that it made me realize that injustice still existed in this society.  And that we had not achieved with the voting rights bill [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964], what I thought.  But it didn't radically shake me up that it was going to change my understanding of the Christian gospel to make it a slightly different from what King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was saying.  Now in between Watts riots and Detroit's riots was black power which happened in June of 1966.
Speaker 1: Now was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] the first to--okay?
Speaker 2: He was the first to do to black power what I did to black theology.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were saying it started June, 1966?
Speaker 2: It's June, 1966 when he--when Stokely Carmichael was on this James Meredith march [Meredith March Against Fear] along with Martin King.  It was King and Carmichael; Carmichael headed the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee called SNCC.  And King was in SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference. They were--the tension between them were emerging at that time over violence and nonviolence.  Stokely Carmichael had been an ardent devotee of nonviolence as a tactic, as a strategy, never as a principle.  King, a devotee both as strategy and principle. Now when Carmichael realized in Alabama that the strategy of nonviolence did not work there in the way in which he anticipated it to after having worked with it for nearly four or five years there, he then began to advocate self-defense for black people.  And he decided he saw black power as a way to assert that.  So that black people are no longer dependent upon white people for their self-determination.  So black power meant black people determining their own future by any means necessary as Carmichael said it.  Well, when Carmichael said that on the James Meredith march with King present, the crowd went wild.  And that's when the media got a hold of the phrase and made it a national phenomenon. Well, the next--this was in June of 1966.  Well in July 1967 and '66 [1966], to say about a month later, a group of black churchmen--I was not with them--over at 475 Riverside Drive, here in New York City [New York, New York] decided that they needed to respond to black power because black--white churches were condemning it as the antichrist.  And they wrote an ad; they put an ad in The New York Times--ad hoc committee of Negro churchmen they called themselves, and it was a statement about black power.  In which they emphasized an endorsement of black power because black people were powerless.  And white people had the power, but they had no conscience.  Black people had no power, but they had a conscience. Conscience-less power, you know, conscious -less power which white people had, led to an unjust society, unjust church.  That's when--they didn't endorse black power uncritically, but they did endorse it.  And that is what made me begin to think too--and that's when I began to think about if there's a black power, there must be a black theology.
Story_ID: 332004
Speaker 1: And out of that thinking came the book?
Speaker 2: Well the book, yes, out of--out of this beginning started me to thinking about the book, but the Detroit [Michigan] riot--now keep in mind the New York [New York] riot had happened about two weeks earlier.  Before the Detroit riot, the same month. Thirty, twenty, thirty-four or thirty-five people killed in New York riot.
Speaker 1: So you had Watts [Los Angeles, California]--?
Speaker 2: You had, you have Watts, and then you had New York and then you had Detroit. Now these were the major riots.  The major--now there were hundreds of riots small ones where two or three people got killed.  But in Detroit, it was the largest; forty-three people were killed in that riot, that's not including the property damage and all the people injured.  And with the riots in New York and Detroit happening the same month, that shook up the country. that's when Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] declared, you know, set up the Kerner Commission [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] to have a report on that. Well, I, I was sitting in Adrian, Michigan about sixty miles from Detroit.
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you a question?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Had you been afraid to follow your thinking before? Did these ad hoc Negro ministers pave the way or help open the door for you to take say black theo-to be a bit more radical in your thinking?
Speaker 2: No, no I was more radical than they at that time. I was already thinking that.  What they did was give me encouragement to keep thinking what I'm thinking.  In fact they--it was the riot and seeing black people struggling for justice and seeing the attitude of white Christians that is what made me angry.  And, and the next year 1968 King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in April. With that assassination--I had already decided I was gonna write about black theology before King's assassination.  Because I'd already written an essay called "Christianity and Black Power" ['Is Anybody Listening to Black America?,' ed. C. Eric Lincoln].  So I just--so I was on the way, but it was King's assassination that's really was the last straw that broke my--that, that really shook me.  And I wrote 'Black Theology and Black Power' [James H. Cone] in the summer of 1968; in fact in June, July, in about one month.
Speaker 1: What did your thinking become with black theology that it had not? What became visible?
Speaker 2: What--see black power was, was created--Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], Willie Ricks [Mukasa Dada], people in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. They were called the children of Malcolm X; they embraced blackness.  King remained a Negro 'til the day he died.  He never, he never became explicitly black the way in which Carmichael was shouting, because King felt emphasizing blackness affected the capacity to integrate blacks into the dominant society.  Well, black, black power advocates were not interested in any integration; they were interested in separation; they were interested in blackness.  That's when the cultural expressions of black people began to make themselves felt throughout the whole of the black community in every section of this nation.  The afros began to emerge; James Brown began to sing, "I'm black, and I'm proud."  Aretha Franklin began to demand respect.  All of these forces began to arouse the younger element in the Civil Rights Movement to take a radical stand about blackness.  So it was the--Malcolm X began to look different to me after that.  So with Malcolm X and blackness, I had to say now what has this to do with the Christian gospel?  How do you I bring Malcolm and Martin together?  The problem is I'm a Christian through and through.
Story_ID: 331759
Speaker 1: The problem is, is that I'm a Christian through and through; that is the heart of my identity as a religious person.  And King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther Kimg, Jr.] expressed that in the society, in the Civil Rights Movement, the best I have ever seen in my life.  So I couldn't leave King, but yet I was black before I was a Christian; I couldn't turn my back on myself.  And I would be black if I decided to leave--I don't have a choice about that.  So I have to learn to accept myself as a human being, as a black human being.  And Malcolm [Malcolm X] taught me the best of how to be black and what that means, being black.  Now Malcolm was a Muslim not a Christian and Malcolm had said that Christianity is the white man's religion.  Now I had to find a way to bring Martin and Malcolm together. Martin had said that, that this Muslim separation emphasis, black power emphasis was not the Christian way.  So here I am drawn to the message of Martin King and what King was doing, but also drawn to the message of Malcolm X and what he was doing.  Neither tried to get together to make one movement where blackness and Christianity would come together.  So I had to ask, what does it mean to be black and Christian at the same time; that is what gave rise to black theology.  In black theology--see the black in black theology comes from Malcolm X; that's why I called it that.  The theology in black theology comes from Martin King; that's that Christian identity, that's why I'm a theologian.  So black theology is my effort to bring my Christian identity and black identity into a oneness.  So I would not have to be split between being black and Christian, but see the two as complementing and empowering each other.
Story_ID: 331760
Speaker 1: Once you discovered that, what, what was your--what did you feel your role would be and how would you use it?
Speaker 2: When I discovered that, I realized that my role would be that as a theologian because I had spent all my life training to become a theologian. I was teaching theology.  So I said what the good of all this I'm doing if I can't make it relevant for my people and for their struggle for justice.  Now I thought about going back to school and actually went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to talk to Dr. Nathan Scott [Nathan A. Scott, Jr.], who taught at the Divinity School [University of Chicago Divinity School, Chicago, Illinois], theology and literature.  I thought about going back to school because it was--the literary writers like James Baldwin, Richard Wright, Albert Camus, they inspired me more than the theologians I had read like Karl Barth and Paul Tillich and Reinhold Niebuhr.  Baldwin and Wright and Camus were talking concretely about what it means to be a human being and what it means to establish justice in the world.  These other theologians I had studied were talking about revelation as if he had nothing to do with this world and with black people's struggle for justice.  So I was gonna go back to school and get me a Ph.D., another Ph.D. in literature.  But I couldn't do that 'cause the war [Vietnam War] was going on, the movement was going on.  And everything--I had to speak now because the time was now, the crisis was now I couldn't go back for another two or three years working on another Ph.- by that time the movement would be gone.
Story_ID: 331761
Speaker 1: So how did you relate the struggle of Jesus Christ to the struggle of black people?
Speaker 2: Well, I began to see that Jesus did not come from an advantaged group. Jesus was a Jew in the time in which Rome oppressed the Jews.  So Jesus was a carpenter; he was a man who was concerned about the poor, the weak, the helpless in the society.  There was no doubt about that when you read the New Testament. Jesus didn't say blessed are the rich for they shall inherit the kingdom of God.  No; blessed are the poor, blessed are the meek, blessed are those who struggle for justice; that the blessed right there.  So it wasn't difficult--Jesus began his ministry by saying the Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor.  To set at liberty the captives and to set free those in prison.  Now that's how he started his career, and he died just like black people died in those riots.  He died humiliated on a cross like a lynched victim, like white people lynching black people.  So if you want to understand something about Jesus, you have to see what happened to black people in this society.  As Jesus was crucified, and the crucifixion was nothing but a lynching, a 1st century lynching.  It happened to slaves; it happened to the foreigners, not to the Romans citizens.  So when you come to this country, then Jesus was in a similar position that black people are in this country.  So the lynching of black people was nothing but a crucifixion and people like Langston Hughes and W.E.B. Du Bois, Countee Cullen, they made that connection between lynching and the crucifixion.  Between Jesus-what's happened to black people and what's happened to Jesus in the 1st century and I saw that.  And anybody can see if you read the Bible with a little bit of openness.
Speaker 1: What did your critics say?
Speaker 2: They did not like what I was writing, and they came at me fiercely, but I was ready for that.  Because I went into the ministry in order to defend the gospel, in order to preach the gospel.  And in order to do precisely who in--the very same thing that the one who embodied that gospel to us, namely Jesus Christ.  So I--you cannot do right and not expect people to oppose you. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had already demonstrated that, and so had Malcolm X.  So I was not surprised when there were objections to the way in which I understood the Christian faith. And they were powerful.  And, and especially in the white community, but a lot of people in the black community didn't like it either.
Story_ID: 331762
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you to speculate now because there's no way to really know the answer to this, but how do you think King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would've felt about this position you were taking now?
Speaker 2: Well he was around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was around--
Speaker 1: Well, what did he (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when the black churchmen were coming out with that; he was around during black power, and he was around a little bit when the National Committee of Negro Churchmen who endorsed black power and he was around a little bit.  I, I didn't--I saw King, but I did not know him personally, but yeah King would've been uncomfortable with black theology.  And he made it clear to some people; not explicitly, that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But how--yeah, I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: He would be uncomfortable because King was interested in the beloved community.  And he thought an emphasis on blackness implied a separateness which the gospel did not endorse.  And which democracy did not endorse.
Speaker 1: And you disagree with that?
Speaker 2: I do, I do, but I disagree with Malcolm [Malcolm X] too (laughter). I disagree 'em both; you can't bring 'em both together otherwise they would've come together.  So I was bringing them together even though I knew they would be uncomfortable to do it themselves.
Speaker 1: Well if the church had not approved of King then they most certainly didn't approve of black theology.
Speaker 2: No they did not like black theology initially, but they came around to seeing--they don't--still don't like it as much as I like it.  I mean (laughter) but, you know, but they didn't like Jesus that's why they nailed him to the cross.  They didn't like King that's why they killed him.  They didn't like Malcolm that's why they killed him too.
Speaker 1: But are you, and I'm playing devil's advocate because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --would people say that you're using--that you're just twisting Christianity to, to benefit what you, what you see--your platform is or your--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, anybody can say that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can say that yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: The issue is, is to take--is, is to engage in debate and discussion about it and --
Speaker 1: I guess, right.
Speaker 2: --to see how the argument goes; I think we--there are people who have a different understanding of Christianity than I do.
Speaker 1: But--
Story_ID: 331763
Speaker 1: Well, anyway, moving forward.
Speaker 2: Yes, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When the, the minister spoke here at the, the--what was considered the Black Manifesto--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1969; that was after you had joined the Union [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], or before (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I joined in, in--I knew about it but I was not here then.  I came in, in the fall of '69 [1969]; see I began in '69 [1969], but it's the fall. School begins in September, you follow what I mean, that happened in May.
Speaker 1: Who was that gentleman?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] James Forman?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was a very important person in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], but he was not a Christian, but he was initially a firm believer in nonviolence.  But he had tensions with King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] understanding of non--King's uncritical commitment to nonviolence.  So he and King had some tensions, but he was a radical.  So he wanted to shake up the churches because he saw the churches as a part of the society.  And so he decided to write that Black Manifesto which came out at the black economic conference [Black Economic Development Conference] in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: In which he asked black churches for reparations?
Speaker 2: No, white churches.
Speaker 1: White churches for reparations.
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, how do you fall along the lines of white churches and reparations; did you think it was a ridiculous concept?
Speaker 2: No, I did not think it was a ridiculous concept. I did not necessary think that it should, you know, go through James Forman.  But I did think that the churches need to really wrestle with their own complicit and often explicit support of white supremacy in this society.  The churches need to wrestle with that. Any time you're supported by a society that oppresses people you have to ask yourself in what ways am I contributing to that.  So I think churches in any society has to ask, ask that. That's why the church should be more prophetic in its relationship to the society, not simply one who endorses it.
Speaker 1: What had been or what had the, what had white communities done; white--were there any white churches that had come on board and that was supporting the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: There were white ministers, and there were maybe one or two whites' churches supporting King, you know, in, in ways as long as it didn't get too, too confrontational.  But most of the churches stood on the sideline until the March of Washington; that was their introduction into the civil--but that was a pretty safe march.
Speaker 1: Why was why was that their introduction?
Speaker 2: They chose--they didn't join before then; you have to ask them that.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Although I think I know; they don't--they, they like themselves. They don't want to be challenged; they don't want the gospel challenged--
Story_ID: 331764
Speaker 1: It took the '67 [1967] Detroit [riots] to really shake you up.
Speaker 2: Yes that's right.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about the--what the, the church's role had been during slavery because you were a, a theologian (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you, how did you--?
Speaker 2: I did not like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I thought the church was wrong about that.  So did King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and so did anybody else, so did my mother [Lucy Frost Cone] and daddy [Charles Cone] too; we all thought that.  But we did not think that the white churches--see we thought that the white churches' ethics was bad; they didn't act right.  But we didn't necessarily think that they didn't have the correct understanding of God.  We hadn't made the connection between faith and action, that is, that you can't have the correct faith unless you act right, see, follow what I mean? We hadn't put that together.  We had assumed that you could think correctly about God but not acting right.  Just like we feel that the Declaration of Independence thinks right when it said all men are created equal, you know, and all that and et cetera what Thomas Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] wrote.  But we don't think old Jefferson lived up to what he wrote, and neither did any other founding fathers; that's why they left slavery in place.  So you have this contradiction in the society and also in the churches.  The churches endorsed slavery; the churches had slaves.  Now we did not think that God endorsed slavery, yet we thought that the white churches had a correct view of God even though they did not act right.  That's why back black people say everybody talking about heaven ain't going there, but we thought the talk about God was right even though we thought their action out of that talk was wrong.
Story_ID: 331765
Speaker 1: So when Malcolm [Malcolm X] said that Christianity--or, I don't know if he said Christianity, but when he said about that being a white man's religion (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Christianity's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Christianity is a white man's religion--could you understand what he meant?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What did he mean?
Speaker 2: He meant that Christianity is a religion whose public meaning has been defined by white people who enslaved black people.  Black people did not create Christianity.
Story_ID: 331766
Speaker 1: You talked about how to, to--for Christianity to be, how you, you--historically, you have to know one's history and the meaning of it in order for certain--in order for it to apply to you.  What is it about being black or about black history that, that is different about white people's history and Christianity? That you--that either you or Malcolm [Malcolm X] was talking about--you need to understand your own history in order to relate to Christianity and how it relates to Christianity.  Does that make any sense? I, I'm all jumbled.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I think--let me just talk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think what you're talking about--people's social setting, historical setting, helps them to understand a certain faith or a certain religion, help them to understand who God is.  You see white people do not need a God who liberates because they already in charge.  Black people need a God that's going to bring them freedom; that's why they sang, "Go down Moses, way down in Egypt" ['Go Down Moses'].  That's why they sang, "Oh freedom, oh freedom, oh freedom I love you thee for I be a slave, I be buried in my grave and go home to my Lord and be free" ['Oh, Freedom'].  So the slaves needed Christianity to speak to their slavery.  And to their desire for liberation in that slavery and they believed that God created them to be free.  Well, white people didn't need no God like that. They already had their freedom; they were the slave owners.  They needed a God to save their soul.  So they needed God to liberate their soul so they can go to heaven when they die.  We wanted to go to heaven when we died, but we wanted to be free here too.  So we had to have a religion that spoke to the social and the political situation of our desire to be free.
Speaker 1: And is that what Malcolm was saying when he said that that was the--that Christianity was the white man's religion?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was saying that white people created a religion that makes black people passive and not desire freedom; that's what he was saying.  And he said you get rid of that passive religion that had that desire for heaven, going to heaven when you die, then you'll do something about the earth that you're on.  And Christianity is a religion about heaven, he said. It's about passivity, making blacks passive, being good the way white people wanted them to be good.  So they can go to heaven when they die while white people have their heaven right on earth, and that's what Malcolm was emphasizing.
Speaker 1: Do you feel Christianity had made you passive here on earth?
Speaker 2: I think there is some passivity that naturally comes along from any dominant group that gives you a religion.  There is some passivity that's encouraged, and that--and nobody can escape it exclusively. You have to fight it.  So what black theology is doing is fighting it.  What King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was doing was fighting it, and he fought it.  But you see Malcolm, Malcolm introduced blackness into it and he--Negro is something that white people gave us.  We didn't create that to call--we call ourselves Negro because because whites had encouraged that.
Story_ID: 331767
Speaker 1: Well, why did King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] consider--still consider himself a Negro?
Speaker 2: Because because we all had internalized Negro at that time. Most black people considered themselves Negros at that time.  When blackness emerged in 1966 many black people resented that.  I knew when I grew up in the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] you call somebody black, and they would fight you.  So we did not like blackness, but Malcolm [Malcolm X] would love blackness in the '50s [1950s].  He was preaching blackness as long as he was in--as soon as he got out of prison in 1952.  So Malcolm and the Muslims they had no trouble being black; it was the Christians.  And that's because they had a religion which they had in part internalized from white people.  And they sang songs like "Wash me, and I'll be whiter than snow," and they thought of themselves as becoming white when they become Christians.  We had to fight against that--the pictures of Christ were white.  How are you going to have a Palestinian in the 1st century looking like a European in the 21st century?  But you got that in white churches. Any picture of Jesus you see in most white churches and in the history of Europe, they are all European.  Jesus was not a European, he was a Jew, a Palestinian Jew, and he was of dark skin.  He could not possibly look like the pictures that you have of Jesus throughout Europe.  So that's what Malcolm was resisting, and that's what I began to see too. When I was in graduate school [Garrett Theological Seminary; Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary, Evanston, Illinois], they showed all pictures of Jesus as if he was white.  And King thought of Jesus as a white man.  And so did I, until I began to encounter Malcolm and began to think.  See what Malcolm taught me was to think for myself about this thing.  You see if I'd just thought about Jesus being a Palestinian Jew and look at people like Arafat [Yasser Arafat], somebody like that, then I'll know he's not European.  But yet all the pictures of Jesus was European so I--Jesus was a person of color, whether he was of African origin, that's another question, but he certainly was not European.
Story_ID: 331768
Speaker 1: So in the fall of '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how do you get to Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York]; how do you get here to teach?
Speaker 2: Writing 'Black Theology and Black Power' [James H. Cone] I sent it to one of my--one of the professors here at Union who was teaching here at the time; a black professor, C. Eric Lincoln.  I sent that--a copy of the manuscript to him, and he said can I get it published for you.  And I said yes if you would like (laughter), you know, I, I didn't know anything about that.  And he was the one who selected the publisher and, and got that commitment. And he then later said I think you should be teaching at Union Seminary.  And pretty soon I heard from the president at Union asking me to come up and interview here and in January of 1969.  And most of the faculty had read my manuscript on 'Black Theology and Black Power' which came out officially in the spring of 1969.  And on the basis of that and on the basis of the interview, they decided to invite me for a three-year appointment to teach at Union and that's how I got here.
Speaker 1: Which has lasted for longer than three years (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, thirty-seven years as of this time.
Story_ID: 331769
Speaker 1: Your arrival into New York [New York]--were you received well by the black community?  Had--was the book ['Black Theology and Black Power,' James H. Cone] a hot topic amongst like black theologians here, here in the city?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  The book was a hot topic among black and white preachers and theologians, scholars.  It, it was it was a kind of blockbuster book in the religious community and to a large degree in the black community as a whole.  And Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] read it, and he referred to it and et cetera because he liked what I was saying.  Baraka [Amiri Baraka] who was then LeRoi Jones at the time he read it.  And he invited me to be a part the Congress of Afrikan People that was being held in Atlanta [Georgia], and to lead the religion workshop for that--for the Congress of Afrikan People. That was in 1970.
Speaker 1: So 1970 you go to Atlanta to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: To lead the conference?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the religion workshop in the conference.
Speaker 1: At, at this time, was it--was the nation catching on to black theology? Is that what everyone was asking you to speak about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody was asking me to speak about that; black theology because black power was still enough around but it was losing some of its force.  But there were a lot of black churches, a lot of black religious people and everybody wanted the black church to be a little bit more radical.  And to be a little bit more firm and of the cultural revolution that was taking place in the black community.  There was a cultural revolution going on. You had black poets like [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez and Don Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and Baraka, all these blacks, all these speaking about this blackness and stuff.  You had it in the music.  You had it in the, in the plays.  And they're going on Broadway and stuff like that.  And [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins and people like that were writing plays.  So you had a cultural revolution going on. People wanted the churches, black churches to be a lot more progressive and they wanted white churches to address white supremacy and racism.  And they saw my text as helping both of those.
Story_ID: 331770
Speaker 1: So what's your opinion on how--I mean you--I mean I'm sure you do but, but white churches should be far more--they--you can't preach without preaching about the oppressed people.
Speaker 2: That's right.  See, you can't preach Christian gospel without doing that.  See, my thing is I'm really not just preaching to black people and for black people. I do that because I come out of that community.  I'm preaching for everybody. My concern is to understand what the Christian faith means.  I happen to in this society, but if I was a Europe, I'd be doing the same thing.  I would be struggling with what is the meaning of the Christian faith in our time, at this time, right now, with all the people involved.  Now I'm a black person, so I know about that, so I have to speak out of that particularity.  But I'm interested in everybody and am interested in that beloved community, just like King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Well, with the cultural revolution that you spoke about, did you embrace Kwanzaa when it was invented as an opposition to the Christian Christmas (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No I did not, I did not--you know, I like Kwanzaa, you know, Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and his stuff, you know, at the time. I like Karenga--I mean, I like Kwanzaa, it's okay.  See but I'm not a separatist; I'm not an extreme on anything. I'm an extreme only and being thinking for myself. I don't let nobody else do my thinking for me now.  And my thinking arises out of what is--does it mean to be a human being in the world today.  Now I ask that question out of the context of being a Christian human being.  I'm not trying to convert people to Christianity, I'm not because my understanding of it is, is probably different from most people. What I'm converting people to is to justice.  And to a oneness of beloved community in this society which is embodied in the life and ministry of Martin King and the whole Civil Rights Movement and to some degree also in the cultural revolution.  But the problem with Kwanzaa and some of the extreme black national is that they emphasize separatism too much.  I'm not a separatist although I do believe that you have to pull back in order to integrate sometimes.  You, you need power. You just don't integrate out power; you integrate with power.  So you need some separateness in order to--for a community to have power.
Story_ID: 331667
Speaker 1: Did you expect for black theology to be embraced by the black people or the country the way black power had been?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, black theology and, and--came out of black power--that it--theology is always a reflection on something that's happening in the world.  It's always a reflection on something that's happening. Black power is what was happening, this cultural revolution, and this political revolution, this civil rights revolution.  So black power had captured the imagination, and I wanted to show that we have to introduce a religious dimension to black power because it is such a positive force in empowering black people to take charge of their lives and of their identity.  So I expected the black theology to be the religious, theological arm of black power; that's what I expected.  So I expected it to be national, in fact, international and, in fact, it lasted much longer than black power as a currency, so you--people are still talking about black theology.  And black power I don't know anybody walking around talking as much about that as people are talking and writing about black theology. 'Cause black theology arises and addresses black churches, black society, white churches, white society.
Story_ID: 331668
Speaker 1: So just to move forward, like in 1984, for example, when the Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was running for president--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and he was a reverend then did you--what did you--what were your feelings about his candidacy, that he had come out of the community in which you exist within?
Speaker 2: Yes, I felt halfway positive toward it--my main concern is--see I think a minister is prophet; doesn't seek political office.  When you go into politics, you go into compromise.  All you have to do is look at the black politicians (laughter) in Washington, D.C. right now.  I mean they're not a radical force, I mean they're okay, they okay.  But politics you have to negotiate, but there are some things that are not negotiable, and my humanity is one of them. The humanity of black people is another.  If King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been a politician, do you think he could've achieved what he did?  No, he had to use confrontation as the tactic.  Confrontation; he didn't want to go anywhere where he would not arouse the racism and the resistance in white people.  So people could see how bad racism is. A problem with today is racism is submerged; you don't have anybody who can draw it out.  And most white people want to keep racism a little invisible. It's there, and it's operating, but it's kind of invisible.  So, so King wanted to draw it out and so I think you have to draw it out so I think black theology is, is a way of drawing out racism in the, in the churches and in the society.
Story_ID: 331669
Speaker 1: What were your feelings in 1993 when Pope John Paul II [Saint Pope John Paul II] apologized for the Catholic church's historical attitudes towards the slave trade?
Speaker 2: It's a bit late, bit late, you know (laughter) a bit late, but better late than never.  That's about all I can say about that. I'm not sure it really is so progressive because--although the Catholic, the Protestant church is no better.  So it's I--from my vantage point I, I think I think you don't wanna give 'em too much credit although you don't wanna, you know, disregard it.
Speaker 1: So speaking of political leaders like the pope I mean, you know--it's just funny in my mind that I am putting Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] and the pope in the same stratosphere.  But that that Louis Farrakhan could amass a million black men to march on Washington [D.C.]. What were your thoughts about what he had done?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought that was quite an achievement. I was there and--'cause I wanted to see that.  And I wanted to be a part of that. That's the kind of unity among black people that, you know, we need.  And the issues he was addressing about black men and our responsibility--that was an important issue as far as it went.  I, I had some reservation about excluding black women from it, I thought it been great just invite black people too, but he wanted to address black men in a special sort of way.  And he thought that that's the way to do that.  So I, I--there're other things I disagree with Minister Louis Farrakhan on, but not--in terms of that Million Man March I thought that was positive at the time, and I think it is right now, too, as I look back on it.
Story_ID: 331670
Speaker 1: So as you look back on your career you've been here, and you've written several books since 'Black Theology' ['Black Theology and Black Power,' James H. Cone] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: What stands out for you in your own--in your--as, as personally as achievements things that you--that still stand out for you as you look back over your career here [New York, New York] in Arkansas, in Michigan, your personal life?
Speaker 2: I--the, the professional life has been one of the most rewarding experiences any human being could have.  I--it has empowered me to say things and to do things I never dreamed I would be able to do and say.  I never thought of myself as a writer or as a theologian when I was growing up, in college, or anything like that.  It's just that the spirit of intellectual reflection just captured me, and it infused it as a religious force inside of me.  And I began to see that my greatest legacy, you know, would be in the writings that I leave behind, and the students that I would teach over a course of years.  And as I look at that I have no regrets about that. I am deeply pleased that God gave me the strength to do what I have done.
Story_ID: 331671
Speaker 1: As a people, black people, in your lifetime, what do you see as some of the things that we have achieved?  What do you--where do you think we still need to--where we still need to be fighting?
Speaker 2: I think one of our most distinguished achievements is being able to say to the world that we are determined to be free.  And to not only just say it, but to live in a way and to act in a way in which it would inspire freedom; that desire in other people to achieve it too.  What is most interesting about us is that the abolitionist movement, that is our resistance against slavery, led to the women's movement, the suffrage movement.  Then the Civil Rights Movement beginning in 1950s and '60s [1960S] helped initiate the modern day women's movement--came out of the civil rights--the same women that took up there, learned the tactics from the civil rights.  Even right now, the immigration movement going on among Hispanic people right now, that's a movement that we inspired with our movement.  And you see that with red power and with gay power, every to kind of power.  You even see it Tiananmen Square in China, singing 'We Shall Overcome' at the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany], they were singing 'We Shall Overcome.'  They were singing civil rights songs and, and also and using the name of Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [Malcolm X] all over the world.  Everywhere people are struggling for justice; the poor people, Martin King and Malcolm X, especially Martin King is a symbol that people see as liberated.  So the black movement, the most amazing thing--we've influenced everybody.  I don't know of another people who have inspired others across the world like black people have inspired other people at the bottom, for justice.  There are other people who have inspired, you know, Jews have inspired people that's why we get Christianity and all that and they have a strong intellectual legacy.  Ours is not primarily intellectual legacy, though we got that.  Ours is a legacy of justice and fighting for justice among poor people.  And we have--that's our great achievement in this world, and that's why I just sort of sit up anytime anybody refers to our movement as the reason why they are doing what they are doing.  And almost everywhere you--you identify any resistant movement that's happened since the Civil Rights Movement they refer to us.  We are the inspirers of those movements, and that is our greatest achievement because we ourselves represent the freedom that everybody else wants to.
Story_ID: 331672
Speaker 1: Continuing that same line of thought, what are your--what are your comments about Darfur [Sudan] today and what's happening there?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's one of the genocides of our time.  And that's why you cannot make everything just--that's, that's what Darfur shows is that people of color, black people, are the last people to inspire other people to want to help them.  See if they were white people being committed genocides as in Bosnia, people would--this country would go there immediately.  But because they're black, we are slow to respond. Even black people are slow to respond.  So that genocide like the genocide in Rwanda and like the genocide in other places of color, people are slow to respond, and that's what's happening in Darfur.  And what it shows is that racism is not just in America, it's all over the world, even in Africa. That's what I see in Darfur.  And if we, you know, they said never again with the Holocaust, Jewish holocaust but it's been again and again, especially for third world people in this land and in this world. That's what I see in Darfur.
Story_ID: 331673
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is freedom and justice; that we will become so focused on that, that we will not let it go, no matter how discouraging it might appear at times.  Always keep hope alive, as Jesse [HistoryMaker Revered Jesse L. Jackson] says, and that's real.  Keep hope alive, because as long as people have a future or think they have a future, they will act to realize that future.  If you don't think you have a future, if you can't think about the future, you will die.
Speaker 1: Isn't that the role of Christianity for a lot of us, is to keep hope alive?
Speaker 2: Yes that's right. Religion is that force in the lives of people, good religion is that force in the lives of people that keeps hope alive; that lets people know that who they are is not primarily what other people try to make them.  But who they are is something even bigger than themselves; that there is a higher power who defines our humanity.  And it's our job to realize that potential that God has already given us in creation.
Speaker 1: Well, we thank you for being a part of our project.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
