Story_ID: 64662
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Callie Yvonne Crossley, C-A-L-L-I-E, Y-V-0-N-N-E, C-R-O-S-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I can give you my place of birth, Memphis, Tennessee; my date is 11/29.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Pause) What is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I have several titles right now.  I am host of 'Under the Radar with Callie Crossley' here at WGBH Radio, I'm also hosting a program called 'Basic Black', I also do television commentary for a program called 'Beat the Press' and on Fox Television News Morning Show and various national news programs, like the 'PBS News Hour', 'Reliable Sources' on CNN, the 'Take-A-Way', 'Tell Me More with Michelle Martin'.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 23rd, I think.  Is it the 23rd?  Yes. Thank you, April the 23rd, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Boston, Massachusetts.
Story_ID: 64663
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five light-weight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up-
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --And they only take a brief period of time to answer.  Can you tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I love Louisiana cooking.  My family is involved in restaurant business, so I love that really spicy food.  Memphis barbecue, the rest is not really barbecue (laughing).  Just so Memphis barbecue is done correctly.  Those would be my two favorites, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Chartreuse green and purple.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, it's that period that's--it's not fully summer and it's a little past spring, so I don't know what that is, late spring so it's, you know, really no humidity and it's just generally beautiful and sunny and warmish.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying.  I probably do but it's not coming to me right now.  I have so many, so it's hard to sort through anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well if you think of later, let's-
Speaker 2: Let me come back to that.
Story_ID: 64664
Speaker 1: --So, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, separate from your father's side and then we'll put them together.  First of all can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mattie Lee Robinson, M-A-T-T-I-E, L-E-E, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: See this--this is what--my sister send me is October 15th, but I don't- not quite sure about that, the year, honestly.
Speaker 1: Did you have a guess?
Speaker 2: I have the exact information my sister sent to me, so I'll have to--I'll have to actually send that to you.  I don't know what to do about that.  This is the kind of biographical information that I had to have my sister look up for me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, do you know what decade she was born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, she was--let me see, she died in--she died 2002, and she was 72, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Pause) So, about 1930, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more or there.
Speaker 1: And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Winter Quarters Plantation, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay-
Speaker 2: I take that--let me correct that.  She was born in Newellton, Louisiana.  My grandmother--was born on Newellton.  Her mother was born on Winter Quarters Plantation.
Speaker 1: --Okay-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --So grandmother was born on Winter Quarters Plantation.  She was born in Newellton.  That's N-E-W-E-L-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: --Okay-
Speaker 1: It's a tiny little town in Louisiana.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace your family on that side and what are the stories that come down from that side?
Speaker 1: I have done a pathetic job of tracing it back, but I--my mother and I used to talk about an older woman in the tiny town of Newellton where we would visit our relatives.  My aunt--really, my great aunt, her aunt, and there was a woman with--I just never will forget her, she sat kind of quiet in the room, and her hair was divided into two silver plaits that just came down either way.  And I was, you know--I barely really--ever so little, I just was vaguely aware of her, as my mother talked about her later, I remember, you know, I have this impressionistic memories of her, just flashes, but she had been born a slave, my mom told me and I said "oh" obviously she'd be at the end, but still, she was quite old, and I don't recall her ever saying anything, I'm sure she did, but I was too little to really understand.  So I remember that.
Speaker 2: So this lady would have been approaching 100, or-
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, she was quite up there.  And her name was Mama Matt.  I knew my mama--my mom told me about that.
Speaker 2: --Mama-
Speaker 1: Mama Matt, M-A-T-T.
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: That's all I know.
Speaker 2: All right.  And your mother's name was Mattie, so is there a relationship between them?
Speaker 1: You know what, I don't.  I wish I knew, but-
Speaker 2: So this lady was not related to you?
Speaker 1: No, no.  She was.  You said on my mom's side.  I said, I just don't know, I don't, you know, I was too little, I just have this impressionistic flashes of this woman sitting in a room with these--I remember the plaits and later on, I said to my mother, "Who was that?" You know, and she talked to me about it.
Speaker 2: She was a relative-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --But you don't know what the relationship was?
Speaker 1: I don't, you know.  You know how hypothetically we all are in trying to trace these things when we should be tracing them.
Speaker 2: Slavery is not as far away as people think.
Speaker 1: No, they do not -- that's right, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 64665
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--your grandmother was born at Winter--on Winter Quarters-
Speaker 2: Winter Quarters Plantation.
Speaker 1: Now this was actually a plantation where they-
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was, you know, at one time, but what it was now that, you know, my grandfather, who my grandmother married, and my grandmother, they were all involved in picking cotton for a living.  So it just kept the name of the place and this is where a lot of people who were sharecroppers either were born or were raised because you were going to be raised into a situation where you would be sharecropping for your living and that's what happened on my grandmother's side, my mother's, mother's side and it definitely--she married a man who also was a sharecropper.  So that was--that informed my mother's life, she was born to two people who were sharecroppers, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Now that's a tough way of life down south.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Is there a story -- Now was your mother raised in the same-
Speaker 2: She spent some time at Winter Quarters.  She really detested it.  Winter Quarters now is a historical site, so you can go and visit it.  And it became so later on in my life and my mother would say, "I am never going there to visit."  So we never--in fact I've never been there to visit.  I should go just to see a historical landmark, but she would have nothing to do with it.  It just brought back so many bad memories.  So the story is that my grandmother was a sharecropper, and then when she married my grandfather, he was a sharecropper.  They both maybe had second grade, maybe third grade education; let's just say they didn't have much education, because they didn't have time because they're following the seasons in trying to, you know, get those crops in, and a lot of it had to do with cotton.  And when my mother got old enough, she was very, very bright and had done very well in the one-room school house there in--I mean we're talking very poor rural Louisiana.  And that was going to really--going to be the "it" for her, because there was no high school for black students in her tiny little town or kind of really right around the area, but my grandfather, and now I tell this story, and it's really so forward-thinking.  There was a white county agent who came by to talk to the sharecroppers, because you know about the crops and whatever and take whatever other data he had to gather.  And my grandfather asked him if there was a black family in a couple of towns over that he knew about.  And he said, "Oh, well, I can check it out."  Not that they would be working for him necessarily, because it--but any black family that would be better off not sharecropping would be known in these parts.  And the reason that my grandfather asked that is that he wanted my grandma--wanted my mother to go to high school, and that was the only way that she was going to be able to go to high school, so indeed, located a black family.  My mother left home very early because she went to college at 15 and stayed with those--that family to go through high school.  And if she had not had that opportunity, she wouldn't have been able to go to college and then on and on and on as we know.
Speaker 1: Okay-
Speaker 2: So it was, you know, that fact that there were sharecroppers and how my grandfather handled it, you know, I think back on it now, and it's really quite amazing that he-
Speaker 1: --It is-
Speaker 2: --Was thinking ahead and wanted to do it, and I don't know if he understood that once you get one kid through a system then of course she pulled my aunts and, you know, then the rest is history then of course what would happen to me and my sister later on would be profoundly different than what was happening to her when she was really without a high school until she moved to live with that family.  And they were well off in the sense that they owned their property and, you know, and I'm sorry I don't remember quite what they did.  I can check with my sister, but-
Speaker 1: --The people your mother stayed with?
Story_ID: 64666
Speaker 1: --The people that my mother stayed with.  I didn't particularly care for them.  When we got old enough, we would always, whenever we'd go to my mother's hometown, her little town to visit her aunt, my great aunt and other relatives and other friends that she grew up with, we would have to make a pilgrimage in the town over to go visit these people, see I blocked their name.  I thought they were a little snobby, but my mother would not hear, not one hint, not one word of anything disparaging about them, because for her they were a bridge to a whole other life for her, and in fact she was correct.  And aside from the fact that she just wasn't going to have that because we needed to be polite.  But there was just--she was not having it.  She understood what that link meant for her and what their allowing her to live with them meant.  I think it was very hard, she was young.  My mother was always way more mature than everybody in the family.  She was just known to be that, and I think it started early on when she had to leave and live away from her family and try to go to school-
Speaker 2: It was wonderful that her father, you know, realized the talent that she had-
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --And appreciated it on that level-
Speaker 1: Exactly-
Speaker 2: --That he would have her move away to, you know -
Speaker 1: I honestly think my mother was his favorite as we were young kids, it seemed to us--it became clear to us that he was a little bit more partial to us than some of my cousins, so I think that my mother was.  I think she just was, and it may have been because he saw that she was so talented and that she could be the one that could make a difference for everybody else.
Speaker 2: --Okay.  So did your mother pass down the name of the high school that she went to?
Speaker 1: Larry, I feel so bad, I mean, these are details my sister--my sister has been much better at keeping up with this information (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The reason why I asked-
Speaker 1: --It's just not--it's not coming to me-
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) It's amazing how--tell the story.  Some of them are the names of black folks that founded the school, you know-
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: --And they're people that really did something.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And some names described how the white community thought of a black community-
Speaker 1: No, you're absolutely right-
Speaker 2: -- Colored training school, or whatever, you know.
Speaker 1: That would be good to know.  I don't have that information with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  These are things you have to dig sometimes and find these-
Speaker 1: Yes, you do.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- I know I've had to dig in my family to find some of these things.  But (unclear)--
Story_ID: 64667
Speaker 1: --Okay, so mother finished high school.  Now, did she go on to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to Southern University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where she met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  Now-
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Did she live close to Baton Rouge?  Where did she live?
Speaker 2: No. Newellton is northern Louisiana.  So it's-
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: --A couple of hours or so, you know, a few hours away.
Speaker 1: So Newellton-
Speaker 2: It was a world away from Baton Rouge.  Baton Rouge would have been the considered the huge city, not just a big city from Newellton.
Speaker 1: --Now Newelton is probably closer to Grambling [Louisiana] in some ways?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's a--it's really tiny, yeah.
Speaker 1: She went to Southern, and what did she major in?
Speaker 2: It was education, you know, she did English and education.  She ended up being an educator, a very good one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  English teacher?
Speaker 2: She was an English teacher then she rose to the level of supervisor of secondary education in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she had her Masters, she did that.  She didn't get her PhD because she would have had to--we  were--both of her kids were either high school or she had to make a choice about what she was going to do and she just couldn't balance that career and motherhood at that point and work.
Speaker 1: Now, she met your father at Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisisana]?
Speaker 2: At Southern [University, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  My father was there on the GI Bill and he's six years older, so he had just been discharged from the army and his arm was slightly injured and they took a class together.  I want to say it was accounting, but I'm not absolutely certain.  I could find that out.  I think it was business administration or something, and that's what he ended up majoring in and they--the teacher asked my mother, who, I just told you, she was very talented academically, and she was determined to put her nose to the grindstone, both in high school and in college.  So the teacher asked if she would take his notes and she did and he was trying to put some moves on her, and she's told me the story.  She told me the story many, many times that she said to him, "Listen, I am here to graduate from college.  Now I don't know what you're doing, but this not--I'm just taking notes for you." In his class, that's it.  (Laughs) Obviously, he prevailed.  But they--I think he asked her to marry him while they were in college, she would have none it.  So they got married very close to after graduation.  Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 64668
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, did your mother have any stories that she--are there any good stories from your mother's upbringing that she tells?
Speaker 2: Yes.  One that stands out, she was a soda jerk in a little drug store in her hometown of Newellton [Louisiana], and you could imagine, it was not available for black kids or black people or anybody black.  So she's serving the white students and the white families, but it was the young people who were horrible and they would, you know, spit at her and throw things and taunt her and do whatever they could, just because they could.  And she tells me--she would tell me often of coming out of that situation one day, and remember she's quite young and stopping and really falling to her knees in the middle of the road and saying, "Oh God will it always be this way?"  And the way she said it with such deep emotion every time she told the story, it really--you could see that it really took her back to that time, and she really wasn't clear that it wasn't always going to be that way.  She was just so down about it and just felt so bad, but you know, obviously, her family was doing everything they could to survive.  Everybody had to do their piece, and she didn't feel she could complain at home.  Dad was sharecropping.  Everybody is trying to put it all together and this was just a little bit of work that she could do.  But that is the story that I can just hear her telling right now.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: It's really quite a story.  And it really, not just influenced her in that moment, but it had a great impact on what she decided to do with her life and her whole perspective on life.  She came away from that experience, the whole being in Newellton [Louisiana] with no black high school and just with a sense of narrowness.  If you really wanted to insult my mother, you know, just call her narrow, which is something she was not, and if she wanted to insult you, she would, she would--said "You're just narrow"; she couldn't abide narrowness, couldn't abide it.  She wanted her kids to have as much exposure to everything, and it became clear to her from growing up in that very narrowly defined time and place and town that she didn't know the world.  And she would tell us often of the first time she met a white person who was kind to her that she could really feel as though they were on equal terms was the summer, she would have been in college then where she went to Chicago [Illinois] to stay with relatives and worked at Marshall Fields in the department store, because a black person could at that point.  And she met a young white woman about her age, and my mother said it was like a revelation, she just, you know, we were just doing the same job and we were talking with each other and--and she said I said to myself, you know, and of course, she's in Chicago [Illinois], which is you can imagine compared to Newellton [Louisiana] was, I don't even know how mind-blowing it could have been for her at that time, said "If I ever have children, they will know that wherever they are, the world is larger than that place."  So for the rest of her life she was all about what's going on in the world, what can we learn?  When we were kids growing up, she joined every international group known to mankind, my father would say.  And she would host people from different countries all the time.  It was a period of time where every Sunday there was somebody from another country coming to eat dinner with us to the point that my dad asked her somewhat meekly one Sunday, "Could we just have dinner with, you know, just us on Sunday?"  And she said, (laughing) "No, this is what we are going to do."  He said, "I was just asking, okay, all right."  But it was at that--those Sunday dinners that I look back and think about how much I learned ahead of everybody else, my only little peer group, because it was at one of those dinners that we had Muslims.  You know, we lived in Memphis, Tennessee.  This is meat and potatoes country and my mom was preparing dinner and I said, "Where is the meat?" and she says, "They do not eat meat." and "What do you mean, they don't eat meat?"  So a whole discussion about what it meant to not eat meat and while people lived in the other parts of the world.  I mean her whole thing was you just gotta know that just your way is not the only way.  She stressed that at every point, there was--that was always a life lesson wherever we were, and it was at home, at the dinner table on Sunday evenings, for Sunday dinner and it was through every other experience, exposure, exposure, exposure, do not be a narrow person, and you know, she did her job because I cannot abide someone who's narrow, (laughing) I cannot abide it, so.
Story_ID: 64669
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.  So, we'll go to your father's side.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Samuel Crossley, S-A-M-U-E-L, C-R-0-S-S-L-E-Y.  So when my mother was mad, she'd pronounce all the syllables.  "Sam-u-el" she would say. (laughing)
Speaker 1: Now, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: Or parts(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (unclear) I want to say '29' [1929], I don't know maybe it's '24' [1924].  I do have the information, I just-
Speaker 1: Was he a World War II veteran?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't think I knew that.  It would be earlier than that, maybe '20' [1920], earlier than that-
Speaker 2: I'm just terrible -- He died in--he died January, 2006, he was 82, so back it up from there.
Speaker 1: --Yeah he was- [1924]
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Do you know where?
Speaker 2: McComb, Mississippi, well, it's actually a little bit outside of McComb, Mississippi, but that's about a pinpoint.  His folks owned land which was really unusual as I've come to know now.  They owned actually a big piece of land and they were--they farmed some of it.  It was (unclear) quite rural.  I mean we were on dusty roads when we'd go visit them as kids for a long time getting to the house.  The land as I understand it and I know you're going to ask me the details of this but I cannot tell you, again, I'd have to check it out, was somewhere down through that whole slavery passing down from hand to hand and there's somebody owned land and was white and gave it to somebody in the family and then they had it-
Speaker 1: That's usually what happens.  That happens a lot, let me say that-
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: I can't say you can, but it happens a lot where the off-spring of some white person that owns land gets some of the land, you know, or part of it.  I don't know if it's out of guilt or pride or whatever, they give-
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: --That's how a lot of people--black folks got land in those days because they weren't giving it to--I mean, and they, a lot of times didn't want you to buy it, because it was so-
Speaker 2: So they had this piece of land for--and it was--it was--even as a kid I was aware of how big it was. They had enough space to have, you know, animals on it, and you know to farm some part of it and, you know, he went to little rural schools there, he talked about how poor they--even though they had that land, they lived off their land and they had to, you know, sell the product to try to survive.  And there's always been confusion about ownership of the land as it went down to him and finally it disappeared before my dad died, they all--you know, it started to get sold off by this one and that one, and there was arguments about it, but let me--suffice it to say that if we could have ever have gotten everybody together to be cooperative about the land, I think we all would have been better off in terms of being able to sell it because it was quite valuable piece of real estate.  But instead it got frittered away by family argument and my father was having none of it after a certain point.  He was like, you know, I'm done here.  And we were too young, my sister and I, to have tried to figure out if there was a way for us to have just hung in there and negotiated it.  So it's kind of a shame because that's that family homestead land that so many people build wealth on and definitely was a huge piece of land.
Speaker 1: --It had structures on it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, big house, well, you know, relatively big.  And it was big enough so when there was a period of time when somebody had begun to squat on a piece of it, this just wretched it up the whole family consternation about who owned it and who--about how we're going to throw these people off and what's going to happen and, no, you have a bigger piece and blah, blah, blah, all that, so--but it was big enough so that the squatters were undetected for a while and yet, you know the house structure wasn't that much.  There was an out--when I was little--now I remember there being an outhouse, because it was not something I enjoyed. (laughing)
Speaker 1: Was there a barn and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, you know, because they had animals.
Speaker 1: So there's no story that's passed down as to how they got the land, except there is the white -- (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: There is, I think, but you know, again, my--I've been horrible.  My sister is a little bit better about it than I am so she probably has more information than I do.
Speaker 1: --So maybe in more detail (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Story_ID: 64670
Speaker 1: Now, you know, my father used to tell the story of, you know, which we--I think every parent must co-opt, you know, when I was a kid at Christmas because he'd talked about how much bounty we'd have at Christmas.  You know, I had a orange, an apple and maybe a wooden toy.  We would repeat this every year.  "Yeah, yeah, Daddy."  He'd walk to school, he'd talked to us about walking to school miles and miles, blah, blah, blah, whatever, whatever.  It's extremely clear to me that if Daddy hadn't been in the army and had been able to take advantage of the GI Bill, I'm not certain he could have ever gotten to, you know, higher education that definitely made a difference for him.  So, and he was smart enough to know that this was something I need to try to do.  So that worked out in that way.
Speaker 2: Did he come from a big family?
Speaker 1: Yes.  See, that's why--I mean, the immediate--there were four of them in the immediate group but then there were all these other people that were allied in some way that I--we didn't really know that well.  We knew his two sisters--three sisters and a brother as our--and a couple of them died very early on when I was little.  The two sisters that I knew throughout most of my life settled in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  So it was kind of nice because my mother's sisters also settled in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  So when we would go visit them, we'd get both sides of the family for a long period of time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So your father did finish-
Speaker 1: Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: --Well, he did finish like high school, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yes.  But I don't know what school it was.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So you think he went to school in Mccomb [Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: Yes, definitely, somewhere in that general--because he talked about walking to school, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And did he serve overseas during the war?
Speaker 1: You know, you'd think I'd know that.  Yeah, he--he--were did he go?  But as I told you he was slightly injured which is why he ended up getting--being able to, you know, end up in school.  One of those European countries (shrugs).
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he went to (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm pretty sure, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Okay.  All right.  Now, any stories about his father or mother?
Speaker 1: His mother died four days before I was born, so I was named after her, so I never knew her.  But his father, I knew a little bit as a kid, and he--just a lovely man, and I don't know beyond his just being a nice guy to be.  I don't remember anything else about him.  I'm sure there must be more to that story, but it's not coming to me, yeah.
Story_ID: 64671
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father came back from the war, he took advantage of the GI Bill and went to Southern and met your mother.
Speaker 2: Met my mother, they married really like a few days out of college after graduation and then they moved to Memphis [Tennessee] where they both struggled to try to get work.  And then my father eventually-
Speaker 1: Did they have relatives there?
Speaker 2: --No.  I think they were both interested in getting away from Louisiana and Mississippi.  I think my dad told me many years later, because when he talked about, yes, the GI Bill was very helpful but that--there were limitations on African American vets as opposed to white veterans, because he talked with some bitterness about where one could actually use that GI Bill to buy a house, and if he had to do it again, he said to me and I'd had more opportunity, I would have tried.  He said I should have gone to Atlanta [Georgia].  A lot of people were saying "Go to Atlanta, go to Atlanta", and you know, that turned out to be a booming place for black people.  He said but I just thought--and even then there were limitations, but what happened in Atlanta, made it--would have made it better for him to have moved up from what was the starter house, you know, on up.  So he said, "I made a bad choice and came to Memphis [Tennessee]".  You know, personally it was great, but in terms of where I think the family could have been from a wealth perspective, it would have made a whole lot of difference if I had chosen Atlanta over Memphis."  So he came to Memphis, felt that he was even more limited in where he could use his GI funds to build a house and then that was that.
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here.
Story_ID: 64672
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents moved to Memphis after Southern?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I guess around 1950 or so, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it had to be '49' [1949] or (unclear) in there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So Memphis, Tennessee.  A segregated city, yet, black folks can vote in Memphis and other things?
Speaker 2: Right.  But it wasn't any Atlanta [Georgia], as Daddy said, as it turned out to be, had he had that to do again, he would have done that.  So they were--you know they were a young couple struggling.  My mother had her teaching certificate, and I think she tried to get work and it just wasn't working out right away.  And I'm trying to figure out, I think Daddy had finally gotten on with the post office, but they were--they were struggling. It was hard for those early years.
Speaker 1: Did they have relatives there already that they joined?
Speaker 2: No.  Uh-uh, uh-uh.  I think they were just striking out on their own.  That's an interesting question, because you know, clearly, he had relatives in Chicago [Illinois], but maybe that was just too far up and too--it may have seemed too urban for him.  I mean, at heart, I think he preferred a little--a little country sheen on the city, you know (laughs).
Story_ID: 64673
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they looked, how they talked, walked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: A little bit of both of them, I have to say.  My father was generous to a fault, and loyal to a fault, that's not to say my mother wasn't but, you know, that--he just led with that as part of who he was, totally gregarious, that's definitely where it comes from.  He never met a stranger -- few times when he'd come to visit me here, people would just fall in love with him.  He also looked far younger than his years, and people were always surprised by that.  So he just was a--just a friendly great guy who had those hearth values, you know, family, I mean, he was very much a family person.  I once asked him because, really his background would lend him to be a bit chauvinistic, which he tended to be occasionally, but he had two daughters and a very strong wife.  And I said, "How come that didn't play out more?" And he said, "Well, you know, after a while, I just give it up, give it a (unclear) (laughs) who I was living with," but, you know, "I appreciated what both of you girls did," and he said, "I wouldn't take anything from my girls."  He said, "I wanted a son for so long, but then I realized, wow, this is great, this is just what I want."  So he was somebody that a lot of folks admired and thought well of.  But he gave back to the community, he was big on that.  He would always say to me, "Peach," that's my nick name, "You just got to help somebody else."  I think--I could think of more than a few times when I would tell him, I was working with somebody or doing something and he would be so excited about that, as excited as he was about some of my other awards and achievements, he'd be very excited about any kind of community work or outreach, that really impressed him.  And he really didn't have any use for people who were mean and greedy and cheap.  He just couldn't--couldn't abide that.  So I get a lot of that from him.  I also unfortunately get--he was very hot-tempered, (laughs) so if I'm angry, you know, I can't be my mother, my mother would be so angry, but she was a cool angry.  So you really have to look at her and examine her to know that she was mad.  She was able to keep that in.  She -- intellectually curious to a fault, big reader.  My father started off not being such a huge reader, but my mother really gave to both of her girls such an interest in reading, and he supported that.  That just wasn't his thing for a long time.  And I think it's because he said, I am a slow reader, but my mom was fast and as are both of her daughters.  And so we just grew up reading.  The story that all my friends knew when I was growing up in Memphis and my now older friends knew and think this is hilarious.  They wanted to punish us.  This is punishment, my father would say, "You can go to the library but you could only check out one book."  Oh! You would have thought we had been stabbed! (Laughs)  We would ball and cry, "Please we won't do it anymore, please."  He'd say, no, you're just going to have to read that one over and over till next week.  You should have not done whatever we'd done (laughs).  And that was serious punishment.  Our friends would laugh, you're crying because you can't--you could go, but you could only get one book, what's wrong with you?  But that for us was a big deal.  And my mother had really built up the love of reading to that extent in both of us.  Now we both look at--back and say, boy that had us--they were scamming us, but we loved reading, it was great.
Speaker 1: What a household, that's something.
Speaker 2: That is something.
Speaker 1: Really something to treasure when you look back on it.
Story_ID: 64674
Speaker 1: Yes.  And my mother was an educator's educator.  She could not help teaching or being in a teaching moment or helping somebody else.  She--I think because it was so important in her life, in reshaping her life, she just always gave.  So whether that was initially, her first work was in the class room to working with young teachers to designing curriculum to, you know, designing systems for the Memphis City Schools of which she was a part for many, many years, that's just who she was.  When she died, so many people she taught and supervisors came to the memorial service as when Daddy died, so many people from the community, organizations he worked with, mentoring organizations, literacy, this is what my--these were my parents, they were actively involved in their community, felt very strongly that you needed to give back whatever your talents were and they demonstrated that.  They didn't just talk about it, they really demonstrated it.  Not only I think because what they knew what any--how any small thing, any kind of outreach could change somebody's life, because both of their lives had been changed profoundly by small things that turned out to be big things, but they wanted us to understand how important that was and how fortunate we were, even though, you know, we were not wealthy people at all, but we were very fortunate, and they could, you know, just a few years back, they could look and see how they come up and understand how important that was.  So, my mom was a cool person who was very forward-thinking which was tough for her sometimes in Memphis, Tennessee, where the wifely role was really thought to be one of submission, and that was not my mother.  Many a party my father had to take her home when some other woman said to her, well I would do this, but my husband won't let me, and he could hear my mother across the room going, "Let you?" and then he'd have to get her and take her home (laughing).  "That is not your business, come on out of here."  Because she just was appalled by that.  She was a very strong woman.  I remember I was breaking up with somebody years later, and I was talking to Daddy and, you know, sobbing and (making sounds), and I don't know, and he said, "You know, Peach, it's hard for a guy to deal with a strong woman." and I said, "Wait a minute", amid my sniffles, "you did."  He said, "It's hard for a guy to live with a strong woman.  I didn't say it was easy, I'm just telling you."  So I thought, oh, well, that's interesting, he said, "I'm not telling you to change yourself, I'm just let--wanting you to understand what the reality is," and that's tough.  They were both fabulous.  The thing I so enjoyed about them as well is that they were truly partners and a couple.  People would, you know, they'd hold hands, they'd sweetheart every day, and my most favorite memory of them is that they would have almost the same tiny argument every day and then laugh about it.  So many times in my own life and then watching other people's relationships, you know, it's just gets to a point where you might have--you could have the same argument about stuff, but it just goes to another level and you can't come back, you end up saying some ugly things, it never leaves you, it's so hurtful.  So, and here's the argument, "Mattie, where are my keys?"  "Where did you leave them?"  "I don't know but where are my keys?"  "Well, how would I know where they are?"  They'd have this little exchange for about five minutes then both of them would laugh.  (Laughs) They just--their foundation was so strong and it's something I admired, other people admired and wish for myself and haven't been lucky enough to find that, but it was really quite something.  So, that's who they were.  They were generous, they were very grounded in what being black in America was all about us, what some of the realities were and what they wanted us, their children, to do to go past what were considered realities at the time, all of that.  But, and they were very proud when we broke barriers.
Story_ID: 64675
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your siblings now, and give us -- if you could name them and give us the order where you come in?
Speaker 2: There's only one so it's very easy (laughs).  My sister is--her name is Fayre, F-A-Y-R-E; she's named after a relative, Crossley, and she's younger than I am by four years, and so, you know, the two of us came up together with my parents.  She's a lot smarter than me. (laughing)  And speaking of people who could read fast, this is the woman that read "Roots" in an afternoon, I mean, you know, she has 80 percent, 90 percent comprehension, she's just very good at that.  And we both ended up as Wellesley [College, Massachusetts].  I was there first and then she had applied different places and gotten in, but decided in the end that she would come to Wellesley, so for a year we overlapped.  I was a senior and she was a freshman.  And she is more like my mom, a little calmer, little shyer, not as gregarious as I am.  She has children now that I'm -- my niece and nephew, and she said she was going to tell them when they were born, "At any point that you go to your aunt's house, there could be thousands of people, just get used to it."  (Laughs) That's just not who my sister is, one or two people, that's who she is.  She's fine with how I live my life, but we're very different in that way, but we're very close though.
Story_ID: 64676
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is there a particular--did you grow up in the same neighborhood, or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: No.  We pretty much grew up in the same neighborhood.  I think, you know, when I was really little, I forgot where my parents lived, they were renting someplace and then we moved into the house that we were in for really all of my life, you know, when I was in college, and you know when you go to college, you're essentially not coming back, and then they moved after I graduated from college across town, which is where they were until both of them died.  And my sister now lives in Memphis [Tennessee] close to where they were living at the end of their lives, but she moved home when my mother became ill, just to be close to them and be the point person for the two of us, so that's why she--otherwise she wouldn't have moved back to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: But the neighborhood that you grew up in was known as what?
Speaker 2: South Memphis [Tennessee].  And we lived in a very traditional black neighborhood, middle class black neighborhood.  Everybody's lawn was all neat and clipped, some people more obsessive than others.  You know, we knew all our neighbors.  If you went about, I guess, fifteen blocks over or something, you got into a little bit, what somebody might consider a dicier situation, but you know, even in dicey was mild compared to what you mean, (laughs) how you would define dicey right now.  So I did hopscotch and dodge ball in the street and they were kids about my age on the street and I grew up with them.  And it's interesting now to talk to people who don't have that experience.  That was great.  And anybody's parent could call you out or bring you in, and likewise with my parents.  And it was the whole street lights come on, you should be in the house crowd.
Speaker 1: You know, over the years so many people, you know, told me about the village kind of atmosphere in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And that was, you know, my parents were like, "Don't let Mrs. So-and-So have to bring you over here and tell me something."  Oh, that was going to be bad. (Laughs) And so we definitely learned respect.  Everybody was yes ma'am and no ma'am when I grew up, and there was not of that first-name stuff, I would not allow my niece and nephew, when they were little--that's still--I still hold that, you know, you're not calling an adults by their first name, I'm sorry.  You know, just not doing that.
Story_ID: 64677
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We went to Metropolitan Baptist Church, which, in some quarters, it's considered a kind of "shi-shi-pooh-pooh" church in Memphis [Tennessee] (laughs), but my dad had been a deacon there for many, many years.  And then he got fed up with some of the politics of the church way late.  I was long gone and left and joined a small church. My sister, at that point, was at home in Memphis with her kids and she left with him and that was a big deal in our house because we had--I did Brownies [Girl Scouts] in that church, I mean, I met some family friends that have been with us for years, a lot of my childhood friends, all of that.  The children, or the daughter of one of the women that went to church there was the first black woman I knew at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts], so I could explore that with her in church, yeah, kind of thing.  So it was a very [heart-]wrenching decision my father made.  But as I told you he didn't like snobbery, he didn't like greed and he thought a little bit of that was going on, he didn't appreciate it, so he left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now.  (lights go out)
Speaker 2: Whoa!
Speaker 1: That doesn't-
Speaker 2: That doesn't bode well.
Speaker 1: --(Lights come back on) Okay, but you grew up in the Metropolitan Baptist Church-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --In Memphis-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --You had the Brownies there-
Speaker 2: The Brownies [Girl Scouts], Sunday School.
Speaker 1: --Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I remember the banner.  I keep thinking I'm going to write a speech around this banner with the--the motto was "Extra Effort Wins" we had to say that all the time when we were little kids and that just stuck with me.  You know those big purple banners that hang up in church-
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --Churches.  Yeah, so.
Speaker 1: "Extra Effort Wins."
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is Bible Belt territory, but this is a kind of banner that, you know, speaks to dedication and education or perseverance-
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --More so than a bible verse, you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There was all kinds of--the church was really community center.  As I said this is where I did the Brownies, but Girl Scout, you name whatever kind of organization was under the roof of the church, there was some kind of affiliation along with the traditional church organizations like the Ladies Auxiliary and the Usher Board and the deacons and all of that, but there was a great amount of emphasis on education and supporting young people and getting education and, you know, along with the choir and everything else.  That was very clear that everybody in the church wanted you to do well.
Speaker 1: Now who was the pastor there?
Speaker 2: I'm looking right at him, and I cannot call his name.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe we'll figure it out.
Speaker 2: Owens was the first, now I'm blinking on his first name and then, but for the majority of the time, after that was another pastor who I'm looking right at and can't call his name, but that is, you know, I can get that for you, obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad left under his watch.
Speaker 1: The second one?
Speaker 2: Under the second guy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had been there under the first one too.
Story_ID: 64678
Speaker 1: Now, was Reverend Owens the one--the pastor during the Civil Rights years?
Speaker 2: He probably would have been, but I can't imagine him being out front on that, but you know I may be casting aspersions on him, I don't know.  He seemed to be a rather mild-mannered guy to me.  He's not the person I would have thought would have, you know, been active in that way, and in fact, as we know, you know, so many of these particularly middle-class churches were not.  That was not where they were.  Some of the members may have given refuge to some of the Civil Rights workers and all of that, but that wasn't really the place.
Speaker 1: I remember Dr. [Martin Luther] King was asked not to come to Memphis [Tennessee] by a group of pastors.  The Pastor Association said "Don't come."
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  So I would not be surprised if I went back through some articles and found that, you know, whoever was leading metropolitan might have been one of those saying we don't know that you necessarily need to come here.
Story_ID: 64679
Speaker 1: So, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest.  Well, I guess the earliest would be just being in my neighborhood and you know doing the fun things that I don't see kids doing a lot of now.  I mean I was a hopscotch fanatic (laughs).  And we were always drawing hopscotch and hopping all over the--all over the driveway, and, oh, chasing balls.  My father is an avid golfer, so my sister and I had to, you know, chase balls when he would ever do putting practice.  And that was a big deal.  He would do putting practice a lot.  We hated chasing balls.  This is probably why I don't care for golf today, (laughs)but he was really into it.
Speaker 1: All right.  We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Memphis [Tennessee] is hot and humid.  So you have to put that out there first and I'm actually thinking back on it now, I don't even know how I survived all that humidity, but it was really, really humid and sticky.  And yet there were these, you know, the azaleas, they don't have a smell, but all of the flowers, so there was always a lovely smell and maybe to me that just seem part and partial of growing up in the neighborhood like that where you just had these beautiful flowers, and as I said some of my neighbors were just fanatics about their yards, so they'd be shaped beautifully and all that.  We had a lush green lawn, but you know, bushes, we didn't have flowering plants so much, unless they just grew naturally.  But there was all of that.  So if you look down, particularly on my block, it just would be overflowing with the colors and the smells of these wonderful flowers.  So I distinctly remember that.  And it just seemed to me a beautiful, you know, wonderful place.  Everybody--we--I would sit on the steps in the back of the house because we had to come in--we wouldn't trump through the living room, we had to come in in the back when you'd been outside and were rather stinky at the end of the day (laughs).  So I have fond memories of, you know, going in the back of the door, headed through the kitchen and my mom being there and my dad being there and various other friends.  My father was extremely friendly and gregarious, and we would go with him all the time when he would do "pop-calls" what we called "pop-calls" just go visiting people.  It was a big shock to me when I moved to Boston [Massachusetts] and I tried to do a pop-call.  You do not do that in New England.  People need to know you are coming (laughs).  I was so shocked by that.  So anyway, did a lot of that.  Those are my memories.  I have a distinct memory of going in to our neighbor's yard and, you know, doing what your parents told you not to do, which is don't mess with her trees.  They had some kind of fruit-like thing on it, and it wasn't that tasty, it was just the idea.  And, of course, we went over there and messed with it and tried to come back home, and I thought I had gotten away with it, and my father said to me, were you in Mrs. Williams' yard, "No", but of course in the front of my shirt is all this purple stuff (laughs).  So you can imagine what happened.  No, that was not good.  My parents were not about foolishness like that.  But basically it was just a--I just remember it as a fun time, having a lot of freedom to play and to, you know, be with the kids on my street and it was nice to have a lot of kids on my street.  I didn't love them all but we had fun, we played together.
Story_ID: 64680
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you go to kindergarten?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I loved my kindergarten teacher.  Now, you're going to ask me her name, I'm trying to think of it right now.  That was when I--it became clear to me that I was taking after my father because I think the note that she told my parents was, "She's a great little girl, she just talks a lot."  But I don't feel so bad now, it's my career (laughs).  But I didn't know it was going to be my career at the time.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of job can you get talking like that?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Now you're going to hear this.  It pays to know how to talk.  But I loved my kindergarten teacher, yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My very first school, so, that would be.  Do you mean the kindergarten school or my first elementary--I went to-
Speaker 1: Were they in a different place-
Speaker 2: --Yeah, I--it wasn't in the same place.
Speaker 1: --So kindergarten was like a private school, local (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, just separate.  And it may even have been some kind of, not necessarily affiliated with our church, but I think that there was initially something in the church and then it moved out. I moved someplace else where there was--what we would not call day care, but, I don't know where that would be, and then of course then it was kindergarten.  I don't know what the name of that school was.
Speaker 1: --What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: That I can remember?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Grade school?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  I went to Dunn [Avenue] Elementary [School, Memphis, Tennessee], that's what it was.  I knew it was coming to me.  Dunn Elementary.
Speaker 1: D-U-N-N?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then [G.W.] Carver High School [Memphis, Tennessee].  And these were mostly black institutions.  They were all black pretty much, you know black teachers (simultaneous)-
Story_ID: 64681
Speaker 1: Now - did you have -- now we know you were interested in reading, keenly interested in reading?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And did your parents receive like periodicals, like the local black paper?
Speaker 2: They got everything.  My parents were big--well, they were big news and information people, period.  So they got all the newspapers.  And at the time in Memphis [Tennessee], when I grew up, there were two newspapers, two main newspapers.  And then there was the black newspaper, the 'Tri-State Defender', which my parents subscribed to.  And then later on my mom would, because I told you about how she just had a really open--openness to hearing everybody's ideas, there was a guy that would come by the house every Saturday.  My father wouldn't deal with him.  But he would come by, and I think he must have adjusted his schedule.  He was selling what was then called 'Muhammad Speaks' which was the Nation of Islam newspaper.  And my mother would wait for him, and he would come by and he would sell her a paper.  She'd always buy a paper and he would try to convince her about the evils of pork and ice cream.  And she would engage in some long intellectual conversation with him every Saturday.  He would try to convince her to be Muslim, she'd say, "No, I'm not" (laughs).  But they'd have a long conversation about life and this and that.  I mean it would go on forever in the front door.  And the rest of us would just go about our business and then at the end, he'd try to convince her, she'd laugh, she'd pay for the paper and that would be it.  But she always wanted to read.  She didn't necessarily subscribe to everything in the paper, but she wanted to know what was going on and, again, she was demonstrating to us and modeling to us that you need to know everybody's perspective.  It's important to know and to have an exchange.  And she enjoyed that sort of push and pull intellectually with him.  My father said, why do you do this, and she said I like talking to him.  And she'd laugh and go on about her business.  So we grew up with all of those perspectives, represented, talked about in the household, and that's very important to me.
Speaker 1: I don't think 'Muhammad Speaks' gets enough credit for having and "The Final Call Today" having a lot of international news, which they actually do-
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --You know that plus the harangue they give you, but what they get for that (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Right.  I mean, and he certainly got to the point where he was selling my mom a bean pie or two (unclear) (laughs).  He came for, I don't know how long he would  do--he would come by and visit.  But he had a regular customer and she--I'm sure there were some on our block who would just have been offended by the fact that this guy was coming and would not have had any conversation from him--for him and would not have bought the paper.  But not my mother.  She would enjoy having a conversation with you no matter where you were on the ideological spectrum.  That was, and now that's what I'd do, and so it's very interesting, you know.
Story_ID: 64682
Speaker 1: Okay.  You talked in school, but I would guess you were a real good student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was a very, very good student, you know, always, math, not so much.  Math was always my downfall, but you know, if you could go out on the street right now and touch any three journalists, all of us are horrible math people which is why we did the other thing.  But so I--and I think that was really a function of--that was just something I needed extra help with or a different way of looking at it.  Now they have all of those programs.  Who knows how I might have been able to understand it, but back in those days, you know, it was taught a certain way, and you either had to get on board or not.  And my parents tried everything.  I think I went to summer school for algebra, it was miserable, but that was just never my thing, but other than that--so to the point that math was such a problem for me, or I felt it was anyway, I mean, I did okay, but it wasn't--I didn't excel that when I took the SATs and all those kind of--those tests, I knew I'm going to have to excel on the English to make sure I drag along what's happening on the other side, which was the case and that's fine.  Yeah, but other than that, yeah, you know, honor roll, academic honors, you know, doing extra credit, all that kind of stuff.  And that was elementary and junior high.  Carver [High School, Memphis, Tennessee] was kind of a junior high school, and high school was a different scenario.
Speaker 1: That's [G.W.] Carver [High School, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 64683
Speaker 1: Well, are there any teachers at the elementary level or the high school level that you considered like mentors, you know?
Speaker 2: I couldn't call their names, but there definitely were.  I feel terrible about it, but this is not--I'm always amazed about how people can remember their teachers, I can't.  (unclear) something I can remember.  But I can say just being in the school and--it was another school in there, so I think I split--I was at [G.W.] Carver [High School, Memphis, Tennessee] then I went to Cory [Junior High School, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Is Corey a high school?
Speaker 2: Corey was kind of a, I guess, that would be middle school now, because when I went to high school, I went to Central High School [Memphis, Tennessee], and that was a completely different experience, which I can explain to you but the years at Carver and Corey, and I think that had to do actually with my mother's moving around, because at one point, I was at Corey and my mother was at Corey as well as some educational supervisor thing which was uncomfortable for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is Carver a high school or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Both-
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: --I think I started and then switched is what I'm saying, and then I went--I didn't go to either, I would have--normally would have stayed at Carver and finished, but I then ended up being selected to do something else and went off to another high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, all through school were you doing any writing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know--well, I'd like to tell people, when I was eight, this is how I started my journalism career, I wrote a newspaper, just made up a newspaper, because you know my parents had them all.  So I wrote a little newspaper with different articles in it and I made copies and distributed it in my neighborhood.  I've told you about my neighborhood.  And I learned my first journalism lesson because my neighbor said this is all very interesting but all the articles are about you.  And you know we're just not that interested in you.  I said, "oh, I guess journalism is really about other people."  [Laughs) So, I'm going to have to do that and went on about my business.  But I thought this is great so I was writing little stories and writing that newspaper and when I got to high school, I did a column, I wrote a column, which was a big deal at high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Speaker 2: Mm hmm.
Story_ID: 64684
Speaker 1: All right, so you had a column in high school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was your column about?
Speaker 2: It was about theater and arts in the city, but you have to understand the context of high school, so let me back up for that.  So as I've explained to you, all of my schools at this point have been, you know, all black schools.  At the time it was time for me to either go on to high school, I could have done that, stay at [G.W.]Carver [High School, Memphis, Tennessee] and gone on to the next higher grades, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] filed a lawsuit against the Memphis Board of Education, the name of one student name Debbie Northcross, so the suit called [Deborah A.] Northcross [et al] versus the Board of Education [of Memphis City Schools, 1968].  And this is because Memphis [Tennessee] was way behind in implementing any integration, way--and deliberately so.  As you know there was lots of resistance, you know, for, during and after the intense periods of the civil rights movement toward making these communities comply with Brown versus the Board of Education [1954] and subsequent legal laws.  But a lot of communities just ignored it or flagrantly tried legal maneuvers to delay, and Memphis did both, like many other communities.  And it finally got to the point where the court system said, "Okay, enough, you're going to have to do something."
Speaker 1: So this is in the '60s' [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So the--so the NAACP said let's just do a test case, and what we're going is we're going to identify--we're going to identify students and, obviously, get permission from their parents who will go to the school and be a part of the group that'll integrate the school, and these will be students who will not have any academic issues.  So, they don't want to have that on top of the stress of trying to integrate a school, and it will be in the name of this lawsuit.  So there were nineteen of us that were selected by the NAACP to go to Central high school [Memphis, Tennessee], which until that moment was a predominantly white school, and I would say all white.  I don't even know if there was--trying to even think if there were any--any persons of color there.  So that was just a battleground experience.  It was not fun, it was not a prom experience, it was--it was, you know, it shared the name with the--with the notorious Central High School in Little Rock [Arkansas].  It didn't get that bad, but it was a verbally abusive experience for me for most part.  And-
Speaker 1: Was it just on the part of the students or the teachers?
Speaker 2: --No, everybody was complicit pretty much.  When I say everybody, I mean obviously there were some people who were stepped out of that, but it was difficult for them to do it.  So, here are the two stories that I share with people so they understand what I was talking about.  History was my favorite subject and I had, at that point, thought about, you know, writing about it, becoming an historian and that was because right in Memphis [Tennessee], you know, all of that foment had happened because of the garbage worker strikes [1968], so there was a lot of--you know, I was involved in the NAACP youths council, I was idealistic enough to think this will be resolved well and we'll all, you know, walk into the sunset, and in my lifetime I'm going to see a huge change.  And my parents were a little nervous about, you know, some of the activities that--because we were young, you know, participating in it at that time, but-
Story_ID: 64685
Speaker 1: Now Dr. [Martin Luther] King had already been assassinated?
Speaker 2: --No.  He was assassinated right when I was actively engaged.  So I just got a chance to see him once in Memphis [Tennessee] way up in the bleachers, he was a little tiny thing down on the floor.  And then, I don't know, two weeks later, three weeks later, he was--he was gone.  I was not allowed to go to the ["I've been to the] Mountain Top" speech [April 3, 1968, Mason Temple, Memphis, Tennessee]].  It was pouring rain that night, I mean kind of, I don't even know how to explain it, it was so, it was a thunderstorm, it was pouring.  And I remember stretched across my parents' bed and we had the radio on, trying to get the broadcast to come in because it kept going in and out because it was just being interfered with by the rain, it was so intense, and just catching snatches of it, and of course, not having any idea that would be the man's last speech.
Speaker 1: That's the one where he reflected on, you know, said "Anybody would like to live a long --" (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Right.  And I've done what I, you know, come here to do and all that and it--you know, it was a beautiful speech, but it didn't have as much meaning now as we know it to be because, you know, it was a foreshadow into his death.  What was interesting about this time is that one of my dear friends, my dear childhood friend's father was the only black detective on the force, and he had been assigned to, you know, be around Dr. [Martin Luther] King, because he was the only black one on the force, and yet on the day that he was assassinated [April 4, 1968], he was called off from his assignment and sent across town.  He's never spoken about it, never spoke--never spoke about it.  Many people tried to--you know there'd been a lot of books about the conspiracy and people tried to get him to talk about it, and for a time after Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death, he had protection at his home.  I guess somebody thought maybe they'd come after him.  And I don't know why he wouldn't talk about it many, many years later, but he--but he never did.  But in any case, you know, that was the scenario at the time and a lot of tension in the city and the night of Dr. [Martin Luther]  King's assassination, I remember the mayor [Henry Loeb] saying we're sorry it happened "here" not we're sorry it happened.  We're sorry it happened "here", and I'll never forget that.  At that time I was in a little--one of the few integrated organizations in town.  It was a big deal to have any kind of integration in Memphis [Tennessee] at the time.  So I was in a little theater troop, just we young kids in a little theater troop.
Speaker 1: --Now is this something that Miss Clayton had sponsored or is this something that-
Speaker 2: Xernona Clayton?  No, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: --No, not Xernona--
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: --The lady that's close to Isaac Hayes.  We interviewed her in Memphis [Tennessee].  She was-
Story_ID: 64686
Speaker 1: No.  This was a little theater troop that was sponsored by, for lack of a better expression, the white theaters.  They had a big, you know, they were well known in town, and then they decided to start this little troop.  Maybe troop is too big a word, but it was a little group of kids who were-
Speaker 2: --Erma Clanton is who I'm trying to think of.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, no-
Speaker 2: Erma Clanton.
Speaker 1: --No, this was definitely out of the aegis of this organization called the Front Street Theater Company.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And their point was to bring together some white kids and some black kids in the same space, and this was a very dicey proposition, even without all the other tension that was going on with Dr. [Martin Luther] King's presence, and more importantly, really was a garbage worker strike, because Dr. [Martin Luther] King didn't actually come to Memphis [Tennessee] that often during it, but it was the tension that was just resonant during the garbage workers strike [1968].  So the deal with my parents was, if you're going to be a part of this, and this--now think about this now, this is pretty brave, they said, "You're going to take the bus there and take the bus home."  You know, I got out in the day time, but--you go right there from school and you come back.  We were not going to come pick you up, you going to have to if you want to do it, I said, okay.  So, I'd take the bus.  So it meant that on the day that he was assassinated [April 4, 1968], we were inside, we little group of kids, the ten of us, the twelve of us.  No information.  And just on a whim, when I came out of doing my bit with the group, I thought "Oh I don't want to take the bus, let me just see if I could persuade mother [Mattie Lee Robinson] to come pick me up."  So I called her and I said, "Hi," and she said, "Where are you?"  And I remember her telling, I said, "Oh I'm at the theater; I'm about to get on the bus."  She said, "well just stay right there, I'll come get you."  And I was just all joyous that I didn't have to take the bus.  And she came by to pick me up and she's all tense and my sister's in the car, and I said, "What's going on?"  She said, "Just hold on a minute."  And she had the radio on in the car, and we were in the car when they came on with the announcement that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was dead.  And of course I didn't have any idea, so we were--we started to weep, I remember passing police officers, they seem to not be sad about it, we figured they had to know the same news, so it was just horrible and we got home and we were all very upset, and my whole neighborhood was very upset and it didn't take long for all of us to end up outside because this is a comforting thing.  And then we realized we couldn't call out.  They had actually cut the phone lines around in our neighborhood because I don't--they thought something was going to happen.  And you know immediately rioting started.  There was a lot of response, blah, blah, blah, and they didn't know what was going to happen.  So in those black communities that they could identify, they started cutting the phone lines.  It didn't last long, but I remember it because we ended up outside with - "Can you get out," "No," "I can't get out," blah, blah, blah.  That was a little scary.  So that was--that was, you know, Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death during the time.  So around here--after this is happening then I'm going to apply to be -- where I'm going to be one of these 19 kids, you know, going into this school.
Speaker 2: Now who was the local leader of the NAACP or the NAACP?
Speaker 1: Well Maxine Waters was very active in the youth council and so whoever the president was, I don't remember his name, but it might have been--her husband was active, but I don't remember who the--the name of the person.
Speaker 2: This is another Maxine Waters, not the one in Los Angeles, right?
Speaker 1: Did I say Maxine Waters?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Maxine Smith, sorry, yes, yes.  Thank you for correcting me.
Speaker 2: Maxine Smith.
Speaker 1: [Dr.] Maxine Smith was very active in Memphis [Tennessee] [Executive Secretary of the Memphis Branch of NAACP 1962-1995] and her husband [Vasco Smith] was very active, and she was the one that we kids dealt with the youth council a lot, so.  Who was the head I don't remember who the head was at the time.  But people like--there were people like [Rev.] Billy Kyles and some other people who were involved-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --But he wasn't the head of it, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  A. W. Willis, was he?
Story_ID: 64687
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of those people, but I didn't, you know, I was mostly interacting with her, so I don't remember who it was at the time.  In any case, whoever it was initiated a lawsuit [Northcross v. Board of Education of Memphis City Schools, 1968], we're going to go in--we're going to integrate the school and, you know, this had been an up and down with parents in terms of safety and worry about, you know, (a) my participation in the youth council and then of course that day when Dr. [Martin Luther] King got killed and my mother came to get me, and just I think all of that.  So when I think back on it I think it's really actually amazing that my parents didn't actually flat out stop me.  I don't know why they didn't.  I think they thought it was important for me to be able to do some of this and they didn't want to stop me, but they were--I came to realize how actually frightened they were, and they didn't really express it to me, so they probably talked about it with each other.  But the day--my first day at school, Daddy [Samuel Crossley] drove me, it was a little bit unusual, my mother might have, but he drove me.  And we're, you know, driving along and just having a regular conversation, and I was a little bit nervous, but I have to say that I--at that moment I don't think I was frightened at all.  I remember I had been in this integrated troop.  I'm just thinking this is probably going to be a little hard but I wasn't thinking bigger than that.  And as we pulled up in the driveway of the school and I was about to get out, my father liked reached his hand over and grabbed me on the arm and he said, "Wait a minute," and I said, "What?"  He said, "If anybody puts a hand on you, I want you to shove them into the lockers as hard as you can and run like hell."  And I was startled.  You know, my parents had never, ever implicated violence at any point.  And in the moment I realized two things, "Whoa he's advocating violence," and two "Oh they're really scared something might happen to me." which I had really not thought about in my own little naive way.  So I said okay, and I went in and kind of tense thinking somebody was going to hit me or push me or whatever, and that didn't happen, just went on to class.  It was a little tense, people were not happy to see us, not everybody.  Some people were kind.  So that leads me to then the regular routine of going to class.  So you get some comments from people, other people just wouldn't talk to you, that was mostly what would happen.  But in my history class, which became for me and has become for me, sort of emblematic of a lot of stuff that happened during the time.  My history teacher would stand outside of the classroom.  And I just thought, that's what you do, you know, in the hallway until everybody's in.  I never really thought about why she did it.  It took me a long time to realize afterwards that she stood outside the classroom so that she didn't have to witness the verbal abuse that was coming from one of my classmates.  He was horrible.  And it was very intense.  It was right on the edge of escalating to physicality, but it never did, I don't know why, probably because most bullies are cowards anyway, and he wasn't getting--I don't think he was getting a physical energy support from the rest of the class.  They weren't stopping him, but they--I don't think they were giving him, "okay, it's okay to smack her or try something like that."  So she stood outside the class, I mean and she was out there a long time, and he would just go at me, he would just be--it was horrible--horrible, horrible, horrible, horrible, horrible.  And again, this is my favorite class.  So that was kind of tough.  I became--I often tell people I went into that school rather quiet, a little bit book wormy--wormish and came out very outspoken, very much going to stand up for myself.  In the progression of being in that class, I got to the point where I insisted to the teacher, because I was still wasn't getting why she was out in the hallway, that I was going to fill in the blanks in the history book and there were many blanks, because by this time I'm reading all the books about black history that had just started to come out.  So I said I'm just going to--I want to bring it in and that's going to be--those will be my reports.  It will be the subject matter for all of my reports.  I don't know maybe she didn't want to be bothered with me, whatever, she said, "Okay, fine."  My classmates were bored and hostile as you can imagine.  But it was interesting for me because I learned a lot about history early on that nobody was talking about.  And I was really--I also learned that it probably didn't help that I was so adamant about it as a reaction to his kind of verbal abuse, and you know, how old was I?  I didn't know any better at the time.  It was probably a better way to have--tried to be persuasive or made my case or whatever, but I didn't know that.
Story_ID: 64688
Speaker 1: Now, what books did you use as a source for black history?
Speaker 2: 'They came before Columbus[:The African Presence in Native America' by Ivan Van Sertima, 1976] I remember one of those.  That was one of my favorites.  You named them I could--you know, there's all the stuff now that are antiques or it's - are hard to find.  Their people were just starting to piece together, you know (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --I think that was '74 [1974, actually published 1976]
Speaker 2: --the guy from--who used to work at--he was an editor at 'Ebony', Lerone Bennett, he had done a book-
Speaker 1: "Before the Mayflower[: A History of Black America, 1619-1962,' by Lerone Bennett, 1962]?
Speaker 2: --Yes.  You know those kind of--those kind of books that I really delved into and realized, oh my goodness, look at all this information, you know, not just at this particular period of time that we're dealing with in American history in class, but all this other stuff that informed me.  So, and then I went to the library.  In those days you went to the library and did primary research (laughs).  I was in the library doing primary research, trying to find out about it, because I was bound and determined that there was going to be a fuller description of what happened.  And I knew that the text book was just absolutely lacking.  I could see that text book right now in my mind's eye.  And it was probably pathetic even for what it purported to do, but it certainly didn't have anything that embraced anybody else except, you know, five folks that you would know, Benjamin Franklin and whoever else (laughs).  So that was an interesting experience for me.  And it was rough, those were some rough years.  So in that context, then I fought my way onto the school newspaper and wrote a column.  And now that I think about it, it probably was easier for them to deal with me because there was so much bias going on.  If I had a defined area, see there wasn't much interaction if you were doing a little report about school activity. You're going to have to interact with more people, so this way it was sort of self-contained and it went in and that was the end of it.  But it didn't matter to me, I was doing a column and I did it, and I did it well and that's what was important.  So, I was trying to think if any of us dropped out.  I think all of us graduated, and it was very hard, and most of us went to, what would be described as elite institutions out of that experience.
Story_ID: 64689
Speaker 1: So they didn't cheat you in terms of your grades?
Speaker 2: Oh, they couldn't because we were, you know, we were pretty--I was on that.  Now if they had done that, they would have had my parents up there saying, "Oh I don't think so."  And then of course you had the standardized test which you, you know, they couldn't do anything with that.  Anyway, so it was very difficult.  I think the thing that is always a story I'd like to share with, particularly college students, when we talk about race.  When we graduated one of the women who was very popular in school, the cheerleader types, did everything, knew everybody, blah, blah, blah, was in my history class -- came over and asked if she could sign my year book.  Why, I mean, you know, I'm thinking to myself, didn't really have any relationship at all.  And she said, "Well, you know" (mumbling), I said, "Okay, whatever, I'm out of there at this point."  And she wrote in there that she wished that she had said something and the fact that she didn't, you know, that would be something that she'd have to live with, and she was just too afraid to say something, so.  So it was kind of interesting to know that even while people aren't saying anything, they're observing what the dynamic is and what that means in their life and your life and blah, blah, blah.  And, you know, it's interesting now there is a very strong alumni organization out of Central High School [Memphis,. Tennessee], and they're always sending me stuff, but I don't really participate, because there were certainly a few people who were very kind and I enjoyed knowing, not that many.  And obviously things have changed.  I think a lot of people would love to engage at a different level now.  I'm not particularly interested but I sometimes read the materials, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  It wasn't much social life in high school, per se?
Speaker 2: Not there, you know.  The social life came from the other black students who were there with me in that group.  We got to know each other.  You know these are people I would not have known otherwise because they came from across town.  We just came from all over the place to go to--to descend on that particular school.  So my very dearest friend from high school, whom I've kept in touch with over these years, was definitely not anybody I would have met.  She would have gone to a different high school.  So there are some of those friendships that have endured as a result of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you graduate with any special honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Not any high honors that I can think of.  You know, I had really good grades.  I don't remember, honestly, nothing that's standing out for me.
Speaker 1: Well, you got into Wellesley [College, Massachusetts], now this is something-
Speaker 2: No, I had good grades.
Story_ID: 64690
Speaker 1: --So tell me this, what kind of counseling did the high school give you?
Speaker 2: Well see, here's where I had an advantage because my mother was an educator.  So even when we were growing up and we would come home and not have what my father felt was enough homework, he would ask my mother to assign us more (laughs).  So don't come home and look like you have a little too much time to play.  My father would say, "Are you done with your homework?" and we'd say yes.  Oh, no, no, no.  So then my mother would (laughs) literally give us extra assignment we'd have to do, because he just wasn't having that.  So, my mother as an educator, would step in to fill in these blanks, so I didn't really--I remember getting some counseling there, but she was primary in that and she made sure that I got connected with the people that I should talk to.  I never came to Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] before to see the campus so I was interviewed by one of the folks who was based in Memphis [Tennessee], and my mother had done, you know, a lot of the research about who this is and what's happening and who would be good.  So we were--she was on top of that.  So I had a little bit of an advantage.  Later on in life I watched her as she coached a lot of kids who came from families who had no idea about all this process, what these schools were like or whatever, and she would sit down with them and talk to them about not only just getting the grades part up and dealing with that, but also the social part of it.  So I distinctly remember seeing her sit in our den and talk to a young man who she fought with his family to let him go to Harvard [University, Massachusetts].  He had gotten into Harvard, and they were like, "Why don't you--he needs to work--we need him working."  And she said you've got to invest in this, you really have to.  So she managed to convince them of that.  And then she had lessons with him about social stuff.  And the lesson that I remember distinctly was she's telling him this is how you eat a salad, this is the kind of stuff you're going to run up against when you get in these schools and have this kind of interaction.  She was keenly aware of all of the stuff that was involved in trying to go to school period, but certainly trying to go to an elite institution.  She just made it her business to know, so all that to say that there was some counseling, but it was not primary in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay-
Speaker 2: And I do know though, however, I should say that some of my friends who were counseled were told stuff like, "Are you sure you should be applying to that school," that kind of stuff, "I'm not sure they're going to accept you," you know.  And of course we got accepted.
Story_ID: 64691
Speaker 1: --Now you said you knew a lady at church who was one of the first black-
Speaker 2: Yeah, her daughter--her daughter was one of the, yes, one of the first, the early--black students at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: --Okay.  All right.  And so was this the inspiration to go to Wellesley?
Speaker 2: Well, it was one--I knew--I was determined to go to school in the Northeast, because I had fixated in my mind that if one got away from the South, it was going to be much better, had to be (laughs).  I just need to get away from these people who are so narrow and who just have no vision of what the world could be, and if I just get--and I know it's geographical, and the minute I get passed them, it's going to be okay.  So as I have said many, many, many times, of course, I arrived at--in the Northeast to go to school at Wellesley and you quickly learn that this is what we call 'up south'. (laughing)  You know it's different but it's 'up south'.
Speaker 1: So tell us now, did you go with your parents up to Wellesley [College, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: My dad took me.  We could only afford one parent to go, so we decided my dad should go because my mother would have probably lived with me the first year, she never would have left (laughs).  But my father he came to deposit me and he was leaving on time.  I remember saying to him, "Where're you going?" he said, "Well, it's time to clock."  I go (laughs)-
Speaker 1: And another thing your sister was there already?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My sister came after.
Speaker 1: After you, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  So this was a big deal.
Speaker 1: You were a pioneer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a pioneer, like my mother was.  So he said I'm leaving, it's time for me to go, and I said well, "You don't have to leave right now," and he said, "Yes I do, now this is your time," it's a whole different thing.  And it's amazing I didn't have a complete breakdown because I thought to myself, "I don't know these people, where am I, I don't know this whole part of the country, he's leaving me here (laughing)."  Of course it was fabulous after he left.
Story_ID: 64692
Speaker 1: So it was a good experience?
Speaker 2: It was an excellent experience.  There were just about prior to our coming, my class was the largest class of African Americans ever.  Actually, 'Ebony' magazine did a piece on all the student--black student populations in elite institutions at the time because of what had happened was a lot of the--the folks who were already enrolled and a big push to get more black students and at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] there were about 30, maybe, less than 30 and they had gone to the administration and said this is ridiculous.  Even at a tiny school like this, a small school, you know, there needs to be more diversity here, and there are plenty of folks who can do the work and, you know, how can we work this.  So they really pushed very hard and it, you know, got a big group of us coming in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you mind me asking you what year this was?
Speaker 2: Do I want to tell you what year it was?  That would be, when did I go in, did I go in '69' [1969], '70' [1970], yeah.  I graduated in '73' [1973], but I went--I was young when I went in so.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1969.  Okay, all right.  This is the year after Dr. Martin Luther] King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.  What was your major at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: English.  I started out double major, changed it because I was--it was psychology for a while, but then I was analyzing myself, it wasn't pretty (laughs).  So, I dropped that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the social life better than it had been in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, the social life was great, because all the work that those students who were on campus had done to improve the numbers of students in the area, and everything is so small here, that's one of the advantages of being in this area.  You know, there's 30 colleges and universities in Boston alone.  When you sort of widen out and get to the ones in Connecticut and the ones in, you know, other parts of Massachusetts and all around, it was great.  We used to bus loads of black guys that would come drive to Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] to visit us.  We were very proud of that (laughs), so.  No, it was wonderful and I met so many people and it was great because you met people at so many different campuses, a lot of whom we've kept up with over the years, so.
Speaker 1: So is there a black student organization?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Ethos, E-T-H-O-S.
Speaker 1: E-
Speaker 2: Ethos.
Speaker 1: --E-T-H-
Speaker 2: O-S; Ethos.
Speaker 1: --O-S. Okay.  Did the letters stand for something?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a Greek word and it means something like unity or unique, something, blah, blah, blah, I can't remember and we pronounce it differently than it's supposed to be pronounced, by the way, but anyway, we liked it that way, so that made it all the more unique.   I didn't name it, it was already named-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --When we got there.
Speaker 1: All right.  Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] is a women's college?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: And a very strong liberal arts institution.  More to the point, I feel very strongly about liberal arts education, and it was--it's one of the best you can get.
Speaker 1: --It's almost a classical education?
Speaker 2: Not classical, classical in the sense of, you know, Homer or nothing, you know, (laughs) it was--it was much broader than that, but it definitely emphasized the variety and an openness, remember I came from a house with emphasis on openness, about all of the things that one could learn and the ways in which one could learn and analytical reasoning and all of that, and it was a big emphasizer.  Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] is huge on writing.  Back in the day when people used to try to buy term papers, if you tried to buy a term paper, if you lost your mind and try to buy a term paper, for Wellesley, they would charge you more, so that just lets you know (laughing), that you could not get away with just any old kind of writing.  And we--it's such a good school, we would have--we had an exchange with MIT and just to be superior, we'd go over there and do just humanities courses, just to be superior to those guys who weren't very good at humanities courses.  (Laughing) It was lovely to be superior for a moment.  It was great.  Now they could beat me down in engineering any day of the week, but in humanities courses, we were good.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to pause here for a second.
Story_ID: 64693
Speaker 1: All right, Wellesley, were there teachers there or people there that you considered like mentors-
Speaker 2: Yes.  Don Polk was there.
Speaker 1: Don Polk?
Speaker 2: Yeah, P-O-L-K.  He was in the administration at Wellesley at the time, one of the few black administrators.  He might have been "the" at the time, but he was really a shepherd to us.  I think back on it and think about how young we were, how naive and he just was a rock in helping us navigate.  And I should say--let me pause and say that the class that came in, our class, as large as our class was, it really wasn't so much that it was big, though that was very different from what had happened in the past, but you want to talk about diversity.  So yes, we were all African American, but of every economic strata, education experience, I mean, difference, geographically diverse, it was fabulous.  I don't know that I've ever had another situation in which there was that much diversity every day in my life.  And again, these are all--I never would have met these people except in this particular situation and gathering space.  And there was such an excellent job done in--there was no one model you had to be to be a smart black woman who was, you know, qualified to be at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts].  I just had a couple of my classmates come together because I won this award from Wellesley, and they came up.  And one of my funniest, dearest friends, who was a party girl then and is a party girl now (laughs), and if you saw her in class, I could see why some people might be tempted to challenge her, but she could out write you, out--and she was telling a very funny story--that I forgot about this, and Alice Walker [author, activist, 1944-]was a visiting professor, and Alice Walker had just ripped up somebody's paper who was sitting next to her and she said out loud because she's from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a hard girl from Philly.  "If anybody ever did that to me, well, it wouldn't be pretty."  (Laughs) Alice Walker didn't give her any grief.  But she was also excellent.  You could make no assumptions about it and it just let you know once again if there needed to be any underscoring of this that you could not tell by the outside of what people's capabilities are, all manner of people.  It was great.  So -- and I'm not sure that there has been a class quite that diverse since then, I mean, there is obviously some diversity, but this was really quite something.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the lecturers on campus, did you have interesting people come and speak?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My favorite story about Stokely Carmichael [Later called Kwame Ture] coming, and he was Stokely when he came (laughs).  I'm not misnaming him.
Speaker 1: He hasn't become Kwame Ture-
Speaker 2: Not at that point, but I think he was close to it, but he wasn't there yet.  So he came, and we were so excited because this is one of those speakers that we had organized and brought and you have the whole student funding from the school, and we were just proud, proud, proud, proud, proud (unclear), puffing up our chest, Stokely Carmichael is going, he's coming, he's so smart, he's so sharp, he's so--he is "black power," we're all that.  So, I mean, we went so far as when we went to the auditorium where he was to speak, we roped off the few rolls, it's only going to be us in the front and our friends and whoever we (unclear).  We were just crazy.  So, he came to speak, it was packed.  People came from, you know, the community, from other schools, other students, and there we were with our chests puffed up and he did his lecture and then, of course, he'd be questioned by various academic, some other people who thought they knew more or better, and probably some did or tried to, you know, say that they did.  And they'd ask him questions, and he would just clip, clip, clip, just cut them down.  Oh, and the more he did that, we'd clap, cheer, stamp our feet, it was just ridiculous.  So, after all that, he was coming back to Harambee House, which was the gathering place for black students on campus and it's still is there today.  He came back for a private gathering with all of us.  And we're in there, we couldn't have slap fives higher, we couldn't have, "Oh, did you hear when he said this," oh, we're just so exciting.  So he finally arrives in the house and we're all huddled around him, just proud, proud, proud.  And he starts talking to us and he said that, you know, I think somebody said, you know, "I just loved the way you just told so and so off, you told them and you laid it out about this that and the other."  He said, "Here's the thing, that's what I know.  Now I suggest if it should be what you know, you need to get to the library."  It was dead quiet in the room (laughing).  I mean he put us in our place as he should have in about a half a second.  When I tell you it was quiet, nobody was moving.  Suddenly it dawned on us that, you know, who are we to be appropriating his intellect for us and--go do your work.  And he went on from there saying, you know, speaking on that theme, you have work to do.  If you can get up on the stage and speak back to someone or represent your opinion then you better have some facts and you better know, and you better have done some work.  And so, I suggest you get busy. (laughing)  Oh, my God, I will never forget that.  It was really something, made a huge impression.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he could do it sometimes.
Speaker 2: He was very serious about his scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now, anything else at Wellesley?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, that's--that's the standout.  We had, you know, people, concert people, you know, Gil Scott-Heron [musician, 1949-2011], I mean, a lot of, I would say art, social, critics, artists came through, Haki Madhubuti [author, 1942-], you know, those kind of folks that came through.  It was very--
Speaker 1: Now this is-
Speaker 2: --Inspiring.
Story_ID: 64694
Speaker 1: --Sixty-Nine [1969], when you came out of school, it was around the time that the Nation [Black Nationalism] started.  I guess that's when the Nation started referring to our people as "black" in the news?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We were Negroes before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I think that had happened before, because there was a big--well, you know what, in Memphis was so behind on everything, it was a big thing to get "colored" out of the newspaper, because I remember my parents talking about it.  And they were pretty angry about it for a long time.
Speaker 1: It was about that time when it became pretty much popular to say "black"-
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --Rather than "Negro". It depends on where you were in the country-
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --Between '68' [1968] and '69' [1969]-
Speaker 2: Well, certainly in the northeast, you know, it was way past where I was in Memphis, so.  This was just a completely different experience, and there were a real lot of people (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: I think about that time, the newscasters, when Walter Cronkite was say "black"-- Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Instead of "Negro".
Speaker 1: I suppose that's true, you know.  But-
Speaker 2: And there was a point in time when they actually switched (unclear).
Speaker 1: --Right.  So, anyway, those were the people that come to mind, you know, who came to campus.  But again, this is a very rich area.  So there was so much going on all around and honestly, still today, there's so much going around.  This is a place that draws a lot of intellectuals on a daily basis, so at any given point, you might expect to hear from somebody and that was definitely the case back--the time that I was there and saw a lot of people had a chance to really expand my mind and my perspective about a number of things and as one should do in college.  So it was a very rich experience.
Story_ID: 64695
Speaker 1: Now you were a writer or columnist for the paper?
Speaker 2: No.  I did a couple of things.  That's when I started to get interested in broadcast.  Because before it really--it never occurred to me to do anything but print, so I did a tiny bit, but not much.  Actually, was having big fun being in school and enjoying my experience in other ways.  So it really was--it didn't--it was beginning to crystallize for me that I don't think print was going to be where I was going to go, that I recognized that I had some other performance skills that I could use and broadcast might be interesting to me.  I became aware of it and tried to get work right out of college, that didn't work, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing.  Now, this was tough because all my dear friends at Wellesley [College, Massachusetts] were going either on to graduate school or my best friend, we call her "Doctor" from the first semester, and she is a physician today, so she knew exactly where she was going.  She had been accepted everyplace.  So I was feeling kind of in between, and I didn't understand how to access where I wanted to go.  There weren't the kind of internships and possibilities that a lot of kids have today or graduates.
Story_ID: 64696
Speaker 1: Now, were you trying to find work as an English instructor?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  I was trying to find work in the media.  I wanted to be a reporter.
Speaker 1: Were you on the radio at Wellesley?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  I didn't do a whole lot, but I was thinking that I have a good degree, I should be able to--wasn't that strict about some things.  However, I quickly learned that as any naive about to be graduated senior, because I didn't really concentrate on looking for a job until it was time to look for one, which I do not recommend (laughs).  So when I did that, I had a fairly high level of panic, realizing, oh, my God, I'm not getting an answer.  I'm going to have to go home.  And I went home and my father said to me, "You're welcome to be here, but in three months if you do not have a job then you're going to have to at least get a paper route, because anybody can get a paper route."  He said, "Now I would not suggest you do that since you're a highly educated woman, but there will be some work going on here.  You'll not just sit here."  And my mother co-signed that, so.  I should have been in more panic about it than I was.  I kept sending out resumes and stuff.  I did it all wrong.  That's why I talk to students about how to do it better now.  But in any case, tried, tried, tried, tried, tried, tried, tried, didn't work, didn't work, didn't work, and now we're coming upon the three-month deadline.  I was a little bit freaked out about that, and I hatched a plan for myself.  So I did,  using some Wellesley initiative and just some gall, had identified one of the local television stations, had done all of my research about it, the folks who were on air, how they got a job there, how long they'd been there, blah, blah, blah, and I remind students today that I did this in the library.  There was no Google (laughs).  So I got all this information and then on a Friday afternoon, I dressed up as if I was going to an interview and I went down to the station.  And I went to the office of the top guy at the station, the general manager, and I asked to see him and his assistant said, "Do you have an appointment?"  "No," I said.  She said, "Well, you're not going to see him."  Now I timed this to be quarter of six, figuring, quarter of six on Friday, she's trying to go home.  And her levels of intensity are going to be off because she's trying to hit the door, which is what I was hoping for.  So I said, "Well, do you mind if I just sit here?"  She said, "You could sit there all you want to, but if you have no appointment, you will not be seen here."  And I said, "Okay."  Now today they will throw you out, because you could be a crazy person.  But then, whatever reason, I think it was Friday afternoon, quarter of six, she let me sit there and I looked, you know, how bad can I look, I looked pretty innocent.  So I sat there and for whatever reason, I mean, he could have called her on the phone, they had an intercom and all that, he opened the door at about five of six to say something to her.  Obviously she's packing up to go.  And when he opened up the door, I jumped up and said, "Mr. Brakefield, I'd like to talk to you," because I knew his name, I'd done my research.  I don't know, boredom, whatever, she was leaving, he said, "Okay."  (Laughs)I went in, sat down, had my little spiel altogether, started going through it, going through it, and the only thing that I remember that he said to me, that I will carry with me, he said, "Slow down, you're inside now."  (Laughs) I said, "Oh, yeah, okay."  So I slowed down, gave him my slower spiel about why I should be hired, how long so and so had been there, where they came from, they didn't have experience either, blah, blah, blah.  I'm from Memphis [Tennessee], this is a Memphis station.  And so he said, "Hmmm."  So he called the news director, the same guy I had been sending resumes to who wasn't interested in me because I didn't have anything to offer frankly, and he called him over, because he had to come because that's his boss.  And the news director came over and he said, "Here's Miss Crossley, she just graduated from Wellesley.  Don't we have some part time job opened?"  He said, "Yeah, yeah, we do."  So he said, "Well, put her in the pool."  So I--the guy put me in the pool, told me when the audition was, and I knew it was going to be on camera, I never done that.  I worked with a friend of a friend who was in radio that sort of get me to a level of being poised because my figuring was, if I could make it through and look poised, even if you're horrible, poise'll carry you a long way.  So that's what happened.  I went to the audition, I'm sure I was perfectly dreadful, but I was poised and I got the gig.  I was part time for three months and then I was full time and then I was on my way.
Speaker 1: So what did you start off doing?
Speaker 2: Reporting.
Speaker 1: Reporting?
Speaker 2: General assignment reporting.  I was perfectly dreadful at the front end, I had many things to learn, and thanks to the people of Memphis [Tennessee] for letting me learn on them (laughs).
Speaker 1: What's the call letters of the station?
Speaker 2: It was WREC and then it changed years ago to WREG, and which it's what it is now.
Speaker 1: REG, this is TV, right?
Speaker 2: This is TV.
Speaker 1: And were they affiliated with a network?
Speaker 2: CBS.
Speaker 1: CBS, okay.  All right.  So you start off a part time reporter?
Speaker 2: Right, three months.
Speaker 1: Now this is all in 1973?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And then became a full time reporter?
Speaker 2: And then went on from there.
Story_ID: 64697
Speaker 1: Now did they--we see often parodies of newsrooms in the '70s' [1970s] where women are assigned to cover, you know, baby chick's hatching and all that kind of stuff, I mean, you know, was-
Speaker 2: Our newsroom was too small for that, I mean maybe they would like to that--they didn't.  And this was very unusual.  There was another black woman reporter there.  I learned moving on from there that that was just highly unusual.  From then on I was the only black person in the newsroom.  So she had been there and she was also from Memphis [Tennessee], much different personality from me.  It was clear from the beginning that she wasn't playing to go anywhere, she wanted to stay right there.  She had a very good job, now don't get me wrong, she was very good, but this was her hometown, she was going to report here, do that well, but I had aspirations from the beginning.  The minute I hit the door, I'm already looking to, "How am I going to go to the next stop?"  So, there was the two of us and there was a black camera man.  I didn't realize the way I started off was so highly unusual, and he had been there a long, long time.  He had been an engineer and then taught himself the camera work and moved over and--so that was different.  And, so saying all that is that we just did--I did everything, I did all the fires, all the wrecks, all the--you know, all the stuff that is often affiliated with a local news, but I also did feature stories, no particular, you know, there was no--they weren't seeming to give me just the baby chick stories, no, I got everything else as well, too.  The advantage I had were, there were two guys, both anchors, black men, working on the opposite stations.  There were three main, you know, CBS, NBC and ABC before cable was a presence and all of that, who were ostensibly my competition, but they took a liking to me and they were my mentors.  The both of them would say to me, "You got to stop doing this, no, do this, sentences are too long," blah, blah, blah, all the stuff that, you know, you would get in any other situation.  There was virtually no feedback from my bosses at the station, that's just the way it was.  So they were the ones.  And my proudest day was the day when, just by a fluke, the two of them were assigned to a story, because as I said, they were both anchors, so they didn't do that much field work, and I was assigned to the same story, and we both did our pieces and they both called me and said mine was better, so I knew I was on my way at that point (laughs), but their help was invaluable.  And I was home during the lecture about three months ago, and both of them came to hear it and, you know, we laughed about how bad I was when I started out, what they had to tell me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That's good that they helped.  Now, how long were you at-
Speaker 2: Three and a half years.
Speaker 1: Three and a half years?
Speaker 2: And then I-
Speaker 1: So this is like 1976 or seven, 1977?
Speaker 2: --Now, now, we're getting into--I have to go look at dates.
Story_ID: 64698
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1977?
Speaker 2: And then I moved to Indianapolis.  I was determined to get into the top twenty.  Memphis was thirty-fifth, market size, at that point, and as you know, the prestige and the money and all that increases as you go up the ladder, so I spent almost every waking hour trying to figure out where a guy could land in the top twenty and Indianapolis was nineteen.  (Laughing) And really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I was just going to say it's not that different from Memphis, I guess, in terms of population and then --
Speaker 2: --But it was in terms of, you know, how it was regarded as a market size, it was nineteen.  And later on I realized developing my professional posse, most of my friends started at two hundred, three hundred.  To start at thirty-five is really unheard of.  I should say that one of the advantages I had from the beginning even as bad as I was as a reporter is that when Charles Brakefield, who was the general manager, asked me what I had been doing, you know to--when I was in that room giving him my spiel, and I said I had just graduated from Wellesley [College, Massachusetts], that carried a lot of weight for him.  I never had to take a writing test.  Most every friend I know in the business had to take a writing test.  I didn't have to do that.  So my college education paid off right away, which was good.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the call letters of the station in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: WTHR.  And that's where I really, really developed a production sense.  They were--it was a perfect place for me to go because 19 or not, they put a lot of emphasis on craftsmanship, so the writing had to be really sharp, it was just not enough for it to be okay.  They wanted structure of the story to be well thought out, and the photography was incredible.  They had a rule that if you were a new photographer and you came to [W]THR, you could not take any move, you could make no move, you could not do any switches, you could not do any pans, you could not do any tilts.  All they wanted from you was a very well-defined close-up, medium shot or wide shot, and you had to do that for six months.  So that what they meant for you to do as a photographer was to think like a producer, and now how are you going to frame what you need given these limitations to tell a story well.  So really at the time--by the time the six months were up, you know, you really thought carefully about did you ever need to move?  You were very judicious with the move, which was the point.  Beautiful photography and there was some exquisite writing going on there.  So my skillsman and--skillsmanship--craftsmanship, took an exponential leap when I went to WTHR.  In fact the very first story I did for them was the Strawberry Festival which is an annual big deal in Indianapolis [Inidana], and remains so.  So my assistant news director sent me out and remember I told you there was virtually no feedback in my original station, you know, I got that from other places, I got my mentorship outside of the station, really.  So here I am in Indianapolis, and I didn't know any different, I'd go to do the Strawberry Festival, I come back and there is--very much a line of commands, so the first thing I had to do is show the script to my assistant news director, and he looks at it and he goes, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no.  Fact, fact, fact, fact, where is the story?"  I was completely startled.  "What do you mean, it's right there."  "No it's not."  I have a lot of facts about strawberry (unclear).  There's no story here (laughs).  And so you could see from the beginning, I had to reorder, it's not enough to just give me the "who, what, where and how".  How is this framed, how am I expressing this to the audience, where is the story?  That was really important.  So I learned so much there.  And I left there and came to Boston [Massachusetts] and I was just a whole other professional.
Speaker 1: Now how long were you in-
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: --In Indianapolis, three years?  So, this is about 1979 or '80' [1980], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 64699
Speaker 1: Now during the mid '70s'[1970s] on a national level, Max Robinson becomes an anchor on ABC Nightly News, I mean ABC, whatever they call that-
Speaker 2: Yes.  No, Nightly, yeah, uh-huh.
INTERVIEWER: --With Peter Jennings and-
Speaker 2: Right.  That was a big deal.
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  I think it was somebody with him.  It was Peter Jennings-
Speaker 2: Frank-
Speaker 1: Frank-
Speaker 2: --I'm looking right at him, can't call his last name, but yeah, that whole round table, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, because Max Robinson reported out of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: New York, I think, Washington [DC] and Chicago [Illinois], I think?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And so any rate.  So, that was a break right through the-
Speaker 2: That was a huge, yeah (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --First black anchor on national TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I should back up and say that during the time, you know, as I said in Memphis [Tennessee], it was so unusual, I didn't realize it at the time to have (a) another black reporter in the newsroom and a black cameraman.  I didn't understand how unusual that was.  So I get to Indianapolis [Indiana] I am the only black person in the newsroom period.  And that really was the scenario for most places around the country.  And what would, in fact, happen was somebody would have to leave for them to then hire the next person so they never expanded the staff in terms of person's color, you were just replaced.  And that's what happened to me in Indianapolis [Indiana].  And I was fortunate enough that when I first saw that the job was opened, I could look back and see who the reporter was who had left, and it was Renee Ferguson [journalist, 1949-], she had gone on to Chicago [Illinois].  She went on the network, she did some other things.   And I called her, and I said, "Miss Ferguson, you don't know me", we laugh about this now because we know each other very well.  I said, "You don't know me but I'm applying for this job in Indianapolis and I wonder if you have a few minutes to talk to me and if you might have some suggestions about how I might land this job?"  And she talked to me for 45 minutes, and she didn't know me from the wall.  And I was shocked, and I said to her, "I just came" -- and I couldn't write fast enough with all the notes she--everything she told me to do was absolutely correct and then she said--I said at the end, "I really am so appreciative, you know, and what can I do to thank you," and she said, "You must do it for someone else."  So I said, "Okay."  And that's--I am absolutely certain that made a difference in how I approached applying for the job and help me cinch that deal.
Speaker 1: Now that's also the same station that David Letterman was at and was fired for shooting firecrackers-
Speaker 2: Was he there-
Speaker 1: --Fireworks--
Speaker 2: I think he might have been at the station across town, was he at [W]THR, are you sure?
Speaker 1: He was at the same one Renee Ferguson was at, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, well you remember--while she was in Indianapolis [Indiana], okay.  Well then I guess, I guess, yeah that would have been long before my time, yeah, because he was doing something crazy on the weather channel.
Speaker 1: He shot some fireworks off the roof or something at somebody's house, or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did something crazy, I can't remember, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and she told that story when we interviewed her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Renee Ferguson, okay.  So, it's like a supreme court when Thurgood Marshall leaves -- puts Clarence Thomas on-
Speaker 2: Something like that.  And they were very clear about it.
Speaker 1: Not to say that you were Clarence Thomas.
Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you, because I'm not.  (laughing)  No.  She was great and that made a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what was Indianapolis--was it different than you thought it was going to be?
Speaker 2: Well, some of the difference was just understanding, you know, how--what it meant to be in a shop where craft and feedback were paramount.  I just not had that experience.  And it was--the Midwest was totally different for me from the South.  So that was an interesting thing.  I remember, you know, corn was everywhere, going to the Orville Redenbacher Popcorn Factory, that was very exciting (laughs).  It was different and I enjoyed it. I didn't enjoy the snow, but we had a lot of a few times there, but the great people, good experience--it was an all-around good experience.  I mean it was hard, but it was a wonderful experience.  (Simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 64700
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)  Now in the mid-'70s' [1970s] NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] was formed.  I think it was in '74' [1974] or '75' [1975] or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm trying to remember when I first went to a NABJ convention, was I--I must--had to be there because I remember hearing about it and convincing my friend to go with me.  And I'm not sure when my--when the first one, and we went-
Speaker 1: It was formed in '75' [1975], so it wasn't that much (unclear).
Speaker 2: --Yeah, and I went to--my first one was in Louisville.  And DeWayne Wickham [columnist, 1946-] carried my bag from the car--we took--we drove--a friend and I drove to the hotel.  I remind him of that frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay.  DeWayne Wickham.  That's right.  All right, so what did you think of NABJ?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, it was just the most exciting thing I could ever have imagined.  My friend and I were just over the moon.  First of all how unusual to be in the room, remember there was only one of us at each of these stations I so learned (laughs), you know, after I got to Indianapolis.  So just to be in a room where there was more than one person having the same experience in different cities was exciting.  Talking about not only just issues of trying to be the only black person in a mostly white newsroom and deal with the racial ramifications, but also being able to talk about craft issues and research and journalism and all of that and also an issue that a number of black journalist have to deal with which is, you know, the people from the community think you're an advocate for them when you're trying to do your job as a reporter which means you're not an advocate, you're just reporting what's happening.  And you're feeling the pull of the community because you know what they did to in the aggregate to get you there or any of us there.  So to be able to be in a space to talk to other folks having that same experience was really important.  And to realize the importance of having a group voice about some of these issues was wonderful. It was incredible, it was very thrilling.  I remember being so excited and it was a small group of us, and also meeting people from all around the country.  And in fact when you understand that in this business the way that you move up and move on is knowing people in different places.  So now to look out and think about all the people I know, some of whom have retired now, but lots of folks in different places and that was because they came from different places and so you have a--you had a contact there which made a difference as you were thinking about things or just wanted to have a different take on something, was really important, and remains important to me.  I still go to conventions and there's a lot of seeing folks you maybe only get a chance to see once a year and it's worth it.
Story_ID: 64701
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you leave Indianapolis [Indiana] in 1980, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Now, is this is when you started working with Blackside [Inc., media]?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  No, I left to go, well when I came, I was not quite--I thought I had a job, I wasn't quite settled on that and came--ended up working at W--well here at WGBH [Public Broadcasting Service member station, Boston, Massachusetts], it's my first incarnation of working here.  I've had several incarnations of working here.  But then at that time, WGBH had the only daily live non-commercial newscast.  That just didn't exist--to my knowledge it has never existed anyplace else.  It soon became just too expensive to maintain and it lasted for maybe ten years.  I wasn't here the whole ten years.  I went off to do some other things.  But when I came there was much excitement about it, it was called the 'Ten o'clock news'.  Nobody had a ten o'clock news, that was unusual.  And the approach was unusual.  Now, we wouldn't think it was so odd, but I had come from commercial stations where a minute and a half piece was long, two minutes you were doing a documentary (unclear) news directors were concerned.  So here, six minutes or so, you had time to explore it, and that's a different rhythm, trying to figure how to tell a story that's not a minute-story stretched to six, but really is a six-minute story with gradations and highs and lows and different information that all comes together under one umbrella, that was important to do, and I learned that here [WGBH Boston, Massachusetts].  And also, talk about feedback, had a system at the ten o'clock news where the news director would write up his feedback and post it so everybody could see what your critique was which turned out to be something that, it was a little frightening at first, but it was great.  I mean it was never mean, but it was very constructive and you could compare what you did with somebody else and have a good discussion about it, it was all of a part.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here, again.
Story_ID: 64702
Speaker 1: Okay.  So WGBH [Public Broadcasting Service member station Boston, Massachusetts] 1980, you're doing the news, long news casting.  Is it similar to the 'PBS Hourly', I mean the nightly news?
Speaker 2: I suppose, except it was a very much a local--it was a local show.  I mean it was focused on local news.  What's interesting now is a lot of that reporting that we did back in the day is archived and many other places, local places here, around the country and network, have tapped into it, because we were covering some events that have--of course, so much that happens in Boston [Massachusetts] has a national impact, and we were doing a lot of that coverage.  So we did some of the first stories on, you know, HIV, on, you know, a lot of the bussing stories, I mean, just name it-
Speaker 1: Is the bussing issue still real hot here?
Speaker 2: It was hot and--so there was, you know, a lot of the stuff that we covered just as a matter of fact is now in our archives and is accessed by many scholars and other reporters and whatever.  So when you ask is it like the 'PBS News Hour', it is to some degree in that there was a long look at many stories.  We rarely went out to say there's a bad smell in the neighborhood.  That piece would end up being, here's where the smell is emanating from, the policy is that created it has allowed these people to dump this in here and here's what this means and here's who created the policy and here--they're connected to this, and there was just much more layers and texture, which of course, was comfortable to me because I was--for me, because I was coming from Indianapolis [Indiana] having done short pieces really well.  I was very on top of my production skills.  So it was just a matter of understanding how to do a piece that had two or three moments in them as opposed to one.  And that took a minute, but it turned out to be something I needed to know for the work that I was going to do later in my career.  But that was my first experience with long form of any sort.
Speaker 1: Now, it seems to me, as I reflect back on it, 1979, '80' [1980] period was a time when public radio and television were feeling their cheerios in some ways.  They were--reporting was in depth and a lot of public officials were calling out on the carpet because of things which ended, you know, shortly, a couple of years later Ronald Reagan was sliced a funding for public radio-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And public T.V.[television] -
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --As much as he possibly could.  He tried to eliminate--he eliminated like 80 percent employees public radio?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's always been a ready target for folks.  When I think, well to some degree, always be a ready target.  I think what actually has saved public--particularly public radio in the last few years are those folks, those representatives from areas where this is the communication, where this is the communication link for a lot of their communities, particularly in the rural areas, or hard-to-reach areas and it offers a variety that people want.  So, they've been able to stand up and say, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, wait a minute, you know, this is something that my community very much enjoys and appreciates and we're not just going to do away with it at some"--or do away with the funding as some would like to have happen.  So that's really been the mainstay I think in the last years when public media has come under attack.  But I think you're right during that time, there were so much variety and there was--I think anything you could have picked would have been ticking off somebody in some way {laughs).  But there was a lot of variety, I think, got more independent filmmakers had accessibility though not as many persons of color as filmmakers, but certainly they're just, from a topic perspective, from subject matter perspective, from--there was a lot of diversity.  And they were definitely for many topics that other folks just wouldn't touch, either because they didn't have the resources to touch them or didn't think of them as important or just didn't think something the audience would watch.  So to that extent there was a real intellectual diversity about what the offerings were and it allowed for the folks that did have the opportunities to create to have much more leeway in their creations which was a good thing.  I mean whoever heard of--I mean, now it seems crazy, a live daily (laughs) non-commercial newscast, it happened here.
Story_ID: 64703
Speaker 1: Okay.  And WGBC was producing locally 'Say Brother' [later 'Basic Black'] at that time, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.  And many other programs that I couldn't even name.  There were lots more arts programming coming out of here, and this has also been a place where good children's program that had an edge came out of, so [W]GBH [Boston, Massachusetts] is known for those breakthroughs in production and thinking about ways of--innovative ways of attracting children and audiences that had something to offer.
Speaker 1: Now, what did [W]GBH [Boston, Massachusetts] produce then in terms of children?
Speaker 2: 'Zoom' is one that comes to mind, but there were many others that now I'm blanking on, but they did a lot of children's programs (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: That's a program for older children after school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they did, there was tons of really wonderful--I would say, and this is without much knowledge, I don't have the documents in front of me, other than 'Sesame Street', which was done in New York, I think any other kind of program that you could think of that was aimed at children came out of [W]GBH in terms of creativity and longevity and impact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But on the radio side, I know, the most popular show 'Car Talk'.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that wasn't here, that was at WBUR [National Public Radio member station Boston, Massachusetts] across town.  There's two NPR stations here in Boston.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you're just -- Yeah, you're right.  I didn't think about that.  That's right.  WBUR.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What is the difference in the affiliation?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?  Well, BUR is connected to BU [Boston University, Massachusetts].  It's an arm of Boston University.
Speaker 1: Boston University.
Speaker 2: [W]GBH [Boston, Massachusetts] is not connected with any academic institution.  And many years ago, [W]BUR was doing what we consider top programming and certainly, information programming in a way that WGBH wasn't doing.  As I said, [W]GBH was known on the TV side for children's program, but on the radio side was more artistic, music and artistry.  And we did the flip here three, now almost four years ago, to move away from taking all national NPR [National Public Radio] programming to talk done in a public media way, and other kinds of programming that are centered around talk subjects.  That's a new thing here at WGBH, on the radio side.
Story_ID: 64704
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite story from your first stint with WGBH?
Speaker 2: From my first stint as a reporter for the ten o'clock news.  Gosh.  Basically, really my stories have to do with just the dynamic in the newsroom and thinking about that feedback and really wanting to do a good job.  I recall doing one of the first stories about trans-racial adoption which you know now, is everywhere.  I certainly did some of the early HIV, because we didn't know what that was, you know.  I did a number of stories because we have such good medical sources here.  And one of my stories and still, unfortunately, is a story today, and the guy who was an advocate for this or really trying to be an evangelistic to get people to think about it is here at Tufts [University, Boston, Massachusetts], and he was saying many, many years ago that there is an overuse of antibiotics, both in foods and in the way that we ingest them.  And now, of course, we're doing it with hand gels and all of that.  And he predicted then, it was scary then that the result will be that people will be less resistant to these horrible bacteria that just get acclimated to what's already in our system.  And that's true.  And I've seen him now interviewed many times and just--I think, last year I saw him interviewed again.  But that was one of the stories and I did and I remember being scared after talking to him (laughs).  I'm thinking, oh, my God, this is awful, so.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 64705
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were at [W]GBH [Boston, Massachusetts] the first stint from '80' (1980) to when?
Speaker 2: You know, I applied for a Nieman [Foundation] Fellowship [in journalism at Harvard University, Massachusetts] --maybe I was here three, four years, because I applied for--I did one of the--you know what, yeah, I left and went to--for Nieman [Foundation] Fellowship, I applied for--I had done what I thought was an extremely special series on midwives, which is now--everybody's talking about it, but then it was, you know, a big deal, so I did it, a special series on midwives, thinking it also sort of led me to an interest in doing some more health reporting and not--I done a little bit in Indianapolis [Indiana], I done some in Indianapolis, it kept coming up, but here I definitely returned to that, did that series, because that's what I used as part of my application for the Nieman [Foundation] Fellowship at Harvard [University, Massachusetts], and I got that and I went away for that academic year.  So it's a sabbatical for professional journalists.  And while there had an opportunity to meet people from around the world, my colleagues from around the world, and America, it's an incredible program, twelve domestic fellows, 12 foreign, all kinds of different work, we come together.  What I came away with after that year was a couple of things.  As they say by the time you apply for a Nieman [Foundation] Fellowship, whether or not you have acknowledged it to yourself, you're starting to ask questions about where am I going next in my career or what do I want to do with this.  And in fact, what was nagging me and I hadn't fully articulated was, is this all there is, you know (laughs) at the end of the day, is this six minutes or four minutes or two minutes on the air, that's it, it seems to go away in the air.  At least people who work for print, I remember thinking to myself, have a yellow copy of something at the end, but this feels like I have nothing to show for it.  So I had that in the back, didn't realize how much it was there, and did my fellowship with the other folks who were doing these interesting projects, using the same set of portfolio skills that I have.  And I thought, "Well, you know what, you don't have to just do a daily news show, there's other ways of looking at this."  And at the end of that year, I was starting to think about what else I might do.  Nothing concrete came back to [W]GBH [Boston, Massachusetts] afterwards, was sitting in the newsroom, and by that time, the ten o'clock news was no more, but there was another kind of show, it was a weekly show that was a news program, so I'm working on that.	And on the desk was a copy of 'Current Magazine' I never-'Current Newspaper', which is all about, covers issues and public media.  I'd never seen it before.  I think it was the magazine, actually.  Never seen it before, never read it before.  There it was, picked it up, flipped through it.  They were talking about future projects and one line or two, it said, some guy is trying to do a series on the Civil Rights Movement, and I just locked right in on that, and I thought, "Now that's something I would be interested in doing.  Who is doing this?"  No name, no town.  I used my reportorial skills to go back, I don't know if I contact somebody on the magazine or whatever, I found out it was Henry Hampton [filmmaker 1940-1998].  He was here in Boston [Massachusetts], meant to be.  So I called him up.  Said, "Hey, I just read about your project, I'm really interested in it," blah, blah, blah, gave him the kind of spiel that I gave Charles Brakefield [general manager WREC later WREG Memphis, Tennessee], lo those many years ago, trying to get my first job in television, and he listened very patiently and after I had gone on and on, he said "That's great, I'm so glad you're interested.  Well, I don't have any money."  I said, "It's been lovely talking to you."  Then I went on about my business (laughs) and thought, oh, well, really never thought about it again.  And about a year later, he called me, and he said, "I don't know if you remember me, you called me you were interested in a project", blah, blah, blah.  "Well, now, I have some money."  I have never been in the world of independent documentary production, so I didn't really understand what that meant, so.  But still, he said, "So, I'm interviewing people.  Would you like to be in the pool?"  And I said, "Yes, I would."  Went for the interview and realized going in, you know, I'm one that likes to do all my research about it, gee, I am not as credentialed for this job as one would like to be because the kinds of people who are applying, it became clear to me, would be those who have a rich history of documentary work.  I had never worked on a documentary.  But what I understood was that this was an opportunity for me to use all of those skills in a different way, and I was really interested in doing it.  So at the interview, and we laugh about it now, senior producer, Judith Vecchione, who still works at WGBH [Boston, Massachusetts] here, she'd been named the senior series producer with Henry [Hampton], so she's sitting on his side and he's facing me head on.  He's asking me questions and she is demonstrating her complete lack of interest in the interview and me.  "(Sighs)" she said several times, loudly, then she does this, look at her watch like, how long are we going to talk to this woman.  I mean, really.  I mean it couldn't have been any clearer that you are not the one, you're not on my list, and if I have anything to do with it, you're not getting this job.  But why are we here?  So this went on for a while.  And it was interesting to me that Henry [Hampton] had such a focus that he just ignored her kind of histrionics on the side.  So finally after half hour, forty-five minutes, he says "Well, is there anything you'd like to say to us, you know, we've asked our questions, or I've asked my questions," she wasn't asking any.  So is there anything you'd like to say.  And I thought this is it.  I said, "Well, let me just say this.  I realize I don't have any documentary experience and that probably is a big mark against me.  But here's what I know is I look at what it takes to do a documentary.  You have to have really good interviewers.  I'm a damn good interviewer, and if you don't get it, you can't cut it."  At which point she looked at me, and I got the job (laughs).  So, you know, I've talked my way in a couple of jobs in my career.  And that was a fantastic--that was--still remains the highest and best professional experience of my life.
Story_ID: 64706
Speaker 1: 'Eyes on the Prize' [by Henry Hampton, 1987] was such a revelation.  When Civil Rights are done on television it's not always done right-
Speaker 2: Tell me about it.
Speaker 1: --But this was just something that-
Speaker 2: And how could it not be.  The way in which we did the series was so carefully done.  Henry [Hampton] borrowed from a system that had started to become typical here at WGBH [Boston, Massachusetts].  Again, you know, this is a place where innovation is happening all the time.  And Judith [Vecchione] had just finished working on the Vietnam ['Vietnam: A Television History', 1983] series which was many, many hours across three countries, very detailed.  This was a monumental, and still remains, a monumental series trying to unravel how we got into the war, what it meant, the impact on all these countries and people and all of that.  So she'd come from that. She was primed to start what was going to be a six-hour series.  Henry [Hampton] had not done a series.  He'd done individual hours, he'd done a lot industry work, but he'd not done--and so PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], which is where it was going to air was a little nervous.  It was going to be an independent production, so he would govern it, but whether or not they aired it, depend on many things, and they felt more comfortable if he had somebody coming from quote the system, and that was Judith [Vecchione].  So she brought all of that experience and she instituted something we call "Civil Rights school'.  So after he had hired all of us, we spent a week, very intense week, in school, eight hours a day or longer with historians, musicians, not all people that agreed with each other, but all manner of folk who could bring scholarship to the period and put them before us, they'd speak, we'd ask questions, and we'd, you know, take copious notes.  And at the end of that, and only at the end of that, Henry [Hampton] told us which were our hours, because we knew--each team knew that we'd do two hours, but he wouldn't tell us before, and he said, "I'm not telling you before, because I want you pay attention to every piece of this, you know, if you know just what your hours are, you'll dismiss everything else.  And this has to be so integral in the way that the hours stand alone, but also interact with each other, and you need to know the breadth and the depth of all the other information.  Now after the week and after you're assigned, of course, you can focus on your own area, but you'll come away with having a strong foundation of where it fits in the whole context," which was a brilliant move, of course.  So my head was full of everything at the end of that week then he assigned the hours and the fourth hour, the sixth hour were my hours, that's the fourth hour was Albany, Georgia, and Birmingham [Alabama], March on Washington [1963] and the sixth hour was Selma [Alabama, voting rights march, 1965] and the voting rights campaign.  But as a result of having been there through "Civil Rights school" and of course working so intimately together and working really collaboratively, as it turned out, I ended up doing some interviews for other people's shows.  So I did the Rosa Parks [activist, 1913-2005] interview, but she was not in my show, and I couldn't have done that without having some real understanding of what happened.  But before the interviews, we did treatments that were detailed, revamped several times under both Judith's guidance and also John Else who was our director of photography, but also teaches documentary at [University of California] Berkeley and has many Oscar winning documentaries on his credits.  And he had just come from working on the Harvey Milk documentary [The Times of Harvey Milk, 1984] and knowing about that, interacting with those folks who did it.  So we had all of this talent of people, and again, none of these people would I have met.  There were in a completely different world from me.  I was in a daily newscast world and they were in the documentary--independent documentary world.  It was mind-blowing for me.  And just exactly the experience I was looking for without being able to articulate it coming out of the Nieman [Foundation] Fellowship [Harvard University, Massachusetts].  I wanted to be able to do something that was lasting.  I didn't realize how lasting it was going to be, but this was going to be important for me, plus coming from Memphis, Tennessee, having that interest in Civil Rights, having that history interest, this all came together for me.  Having worked then even in my last newsroom in a place where longer pieces were--what was valued was important to me, good writing learning that from the last two sessions all came together in a way that was perfect for this experience.  And we--because it was, you know, very low budget, we worked together closely.  And Henry [Hampton]'s idea was that he was going to get as much feedback as we were putting it together.  So, before we went out in the field, and after the treatments, we did about six months, I would say, of nothing but research, paper research, working with our academic advisors.  That was intense.  We really knew that material.  We knew that material, which turned out to be incredibly important.  When people would mention something in passing, and because we knew our materials so well, we could understand what its importance was and pick up on it.  We were able also, because we knew the material so well, to convince people who had never spoken before, and in fact, had refused to speak because they had seen these bad attempts at telling the story and were insulted and embarrassed by it and they didn't want anything to do with it.  So people would literally be--about to hang up on us and we'd say, well, what about the day that you. . . they'd say, "Oh, wait a minute, you know about that."  And then we'd have a conversation then they would feel more confident in talking with us.  As I think about it now that was--even with that, that was still a leap of faith.  'Blackside Incorporated' [production company] was not a known entity.  I think I'm calling these people these icons of the Civil Rights movements.  Who the heck were we to call these people, they didn't know us.  So we really had to get to a point of trust that we were going to tell this story right and well.
Story_ID: 64707
Speaker 1: There were some people, I understand, Judy Richardson [filmmaker, 1966-] is one that actually was in SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee]-
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --Worked as a producer on the project.  Were there many others like her that really-
Speaker 2: No, no, because Judy [Richardson] had a very, you know, deep and abiding, but never many people that had experiences like I had, you know.  I came from an experience of understanding, you know, where [Martin Luther] King was and the whole--the long-term, the overview of the Civil Rights Movement or understanding that it really wasn't about his story, there were so many unnamed people that we wanted to focus on.  So all of us, I think, brought some of that.  And then we had people who were just pure documentarians and who--for whom this kind of story was just exactly what they wanted to do.  Other people with exquisite skills in film research which helped us tremendously because, as we began to do the research, a lot of the stuff that we found was mislabeled.  People mislabeled, couldn't find it.  This was not a period that people thought highly of at the time.  So stuff was all over the place.  What we did to bring hugely important archival material together, label it properly and get it available for general public use is really a whole story in and of itself, aside from the series, I mean, that's really important.  So it was an incredible, intense, emotional experience.  We were all so focused on making those films good.  There was no political jockeying for, "I hope Henry [Hampton] likes me best," that kind of stuff.  We fought like cats and dogs, now don't get me wrong.  We were like a little family and we fought all the time.  But the focus was completely on making these films good.  And we were so concerned as we got more and more into the shooting of it and the telling of these--the stories of these people who sacrificed so much of screwing it up that it was, for me, and for others too, kind of a living nightmare.  We just didn't want to screw it up.  My living nightmare was Tom Shales who's a critic at the 'Washington Post' and (unclear).  Yeah, and I thought I was going to wake up after it aired and it was going to say, 'Eyes on the Prize, No Prize'.  And in his story he was going to say, I was the one that had cause the horribleness on the whole series.  So that was my nightmare, and I was determined not to do that.  But how wonderful it was to work with a group of people so focused on the excellence of the project and in working with each other to make it happened.  I've not had that at that level since then.
Story_ID: 64708
Speaker 1: Who thought of the idea for the title from (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That was definitely Henry [Hampton].  And we all, I remember--I could see the meeting when he announced the name of it.  Most things that he talked to us about ended up being collaborative decisions.  He had the final say, don't get me wrong, so you could--we'd all might discuss something but in the end, if he disagreed with that, he would--we would make that decision, but most times when we had these big consensus, discussions, if he happened to be on this side, he'd move to our side, but on this one from the beginning he said the name of the series will be 'Eyes on the Prize'.  And we're all like 'Eyes on the Prize', what is that?  (unclear)  So he said, well, it's going to be "colon" Civil Rights (unclear).  And then we all said it's not going to fit in that box and the TV Guide, what do you mean, nobody's going to know what that means.  You're just going to say, 'Eyes on the Prize', it's not going to say Civil Rights.  You better changed this.  Oh, we tried.  He said the name of the series is Eyes on the Prize, and the second thing he said, he would not discuss, and we couldn't figure it out.  Julian Bond [activist 1940-] will be the narrator.  Julian Bond?  He's never narrated anything before (laughs).  Julian Bond will be the narrator.
Speaker 1: Actually, I've heard him narrate before.
Speaker 2: You have, but we hadn't.
Speaker 1: I have heard him narrate.
Speaker 2: Are you sure before 'Eyes [On the Prize']?  I'm not sure that he had ever narrated anything before.
Speaker 1: He had narrated something before because I had a positive--when I found out that he was going to narrate, I said, oh, Julian Bond is going (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, we were unaware of that.  So, Julian Bond, that's an odd choice.
Speaker 1: --I think when people heard that song, "The one thing we did right was the day that we-
Speaker 2: "Started to fight, keep your eyes on the prize, hold on-"
Speaker 1: --And that kind of set a tone for what it was going to be like.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but if you didn't--you may have known the song, but most people never heard of it.  The one thing that Henry did not do right, that he wished that he had, was he really should have copyrighted 'Eyes on the Prize' because it became used in the way that it's appropriate to use it saying, "Keep Your Eyes On the Prize" for other things, you know, I can't mess around here, I got to keep my eyes on the prize.  How many times people have used it, and I don't know that a lot of people know that it really came from the high exposure of this series.  Some people do but most people don't.  And because it became so colloquially used that was the one thing he talked to me about, he said, I don't know why I didn't--yes, it would have been great, but that's the one--if that's the only mistake, oh well.
Speaker 1: He's thinking about the message more than-
Story_ID: 64709
Speaker 1: He was.  And again, none of us had any idea that this was going to be--blow up as it did.  We almost shut down in the process, literally, it was like a bad O'Henry story at Christmas time.  Henry brought us together and said I don't have any more money.  I've tried not to tell you, I've tried to figure out how I can do this, and he was a phenomenal fundraiser.  And we're standing there silently looking at him.  It's Christmastime, it's bad.  And I thought this is what I get for working on an independent production.  I've always had a regular check.  He said I don't know what to do, said, I've tried everything.  I just wanted to let you know, I'm going to try my best to try to raise some money and bring you back, but you know, essentially, you're going to be furloughed until such time, I hope it's not for long that I can raise some more money. So we all sort of slunk out of the room thinking, oh, my God and then literally, like little angel of mercy, Lotus Corporation sent a check and that bridged us and that saved us and we didn't never have to shut down.
Speaker 2: You worked out of here?
Speaker 1: Yes, out of a brownstone in the south end, which was in a kind of changing neighborhood.  You wouldn't believe the building now, it's exquisite, it's fabulous.  But when we were there, there were three levels, and we were on the bottom level and on the top level.  Henry [Hampton], I guess, didn't want to kick out the Vietnamese family in the middle, so they had to listen to us singing Civil Rights songs going up and down the stairs at all hours of the night.  It was kind of an interesting experience because we had steam-backs upstairs and the offices and stuff downstairs, and he owned the building.  So after he died, his sisters decided to sell the building for I'm sure, you know, something that was very valuable.  It was even valuable at the time in the dicey neighborhood.  But now, it's one of the seriously fancy neighborhoods in the south end.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We'll pause here.
Story_ID: 64710
Speaker 1: Okay.  I hate to ask this question.  It always seems so trite to ask.  What was your favorite part of this and that, but did you have a favorite segment that you produced?
Speaker 2: On the 'Eyes' or-
Speaker 1: On 'Eyes on the Prize'?
Speaker 2: --A favorite part of it.  Well, maybe.  I don't know that it was--actually, it's very hard for me to say "favorite" because I pretty much enjoyed all of the experiences.  So I'll share two.  We--for budget reasons and it just made sense logistically would bring together groups of folks to do long interviews.  So, for the folks that were in Albany [Georgia], the main characters were Sheriff [Laurie] Pritchett and then also the leader of the Civil Rights organization, Dr. [William G.] Anderson.  So we brought them to Atlanta [Georgia] because we were doing some other interviews.  They hadn't seen each other in a hundred years.  And so we did their interviews separately, and I remember Sheriff [Laurie] Pritchett saying at the end of his interview, he said, "You know years ago when we were in the middle of I'm jailing all the people and Dr. [William G.] Anderson is protesting," I said to him, "You know one day, many years down the road, we'll probably sit down and have a beer together."  And it just seemed fantastical at that point.  That was just not going to be happening.  And sure enough after we finished both of their interviews, they went off to the bar and shut the bar down having a conversation about, you know, I'm sure those days and this time and all that.  So that was a favorite memory of mine.  I also--well, interviewing Rosa Parks just because she was Rosa Parks was great.  I mean she was a little bit bored with her telling her story over and over again, but understood why she had to tell it and why it was important that she do it but that was an exciting moment for me and actually interviewing Amelia Boynton in Selma [Alabama] who was a teacher that got--who's being beat upon on by the sheriff, got the middle-class community interested and excited in taking part in the voting rights campaign more actively.  They were kind of, I don't know about these people, these organizers, this [Martin Luther] King, I don't know and she was one of the early ones to sign on representing middle-class community.  And it really inspired other people to jump in afterwards.  And I remember I was staying in a little motel that was attached to a gas station, and she--the interview with her was the next day, and there was a knock on my door and I opened it and there she is.  And I just about lost my mind, oh, my God, oh, my God!!!  And she said, "What, what?"  And I said, "It's you".  I was just really star struck, if you will, about--to talking to some of these people.  Same way with Fred Shuttlesworth.  I said, "I'm so excited to meet you," and he said, "You are," I said, "I am, just knowing, you know, what you've done."  So that was really--if nothing ever else happens just to be able to interview those folks was really quite meaningful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Some of these stories like Fred Shuttlesworth being blown up in his bed (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Exactly and walking away without a scratch (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (sentence unclear)-
Speaker 2: --Yes, yes.  And you see when you worked on 'Eyes on the Prize' as long as we did and hear some of the stuff over and over again then you can do the quotes.  So, Fred Shuttlesworth says, "I said to the Klansman [Ku Klux Klan], then 'You go tell your Klansman brother,'" (talking to the policeman), " 'If God can bring me through this, there is nothing you can do to harm me'."  (Laughs) So these are the quotes that are emblazoned in my mind forever and ever.  Now, I will say from a protection standpoint, I had an interesting discussion with Henry Hampton, the executive producer, and we disagreed about it.  And two things, one, he gave in on and one I had to give on because he overrode me, and they were both in hour four.  So one was with an interview with Charles Sherrod, who was very much a activist in Albany, Georgia, and there was a quote that he had and he said, "If you don't mind, then I don't matter." he was referencing Sheriff [Laurie] Pritchett.  And for whatever reason it just didn't do it for me, there was another piece of the quote that I thought was more interesting and Henry [Hampton] and I went around and around about it, and he said, "I don't care what happens, that stays in."  And afterwards when we would go speaking together and somebody would say, you know that part that really got me is when Charles Sherrod said, "If you don't mind," and Henry [Hampton] would just look at me.  He would just be delighted to prove his point.  And I'd say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, whatever."  The other one--so I lost on that one and glad I did because he made the right decision.  He also made the right decision, though he did not agree with me at first, the very end of shell four, we're at the funeral of the little girls who had been bombed in the church, the four little girls, and I said to Henry [Hampton], "I want to take the sound out after we hear the siren and we understand that all the cops and the ambulances are rushing to the church because of something horrific has happened, and I want it to be silent when we look at the faces of the people who got to the church and were shocked about what they found."  So there's a section where it's completely silent and you just look at people in agonizing pain.  The sound does not come in again until they're taking the casket down the steps of the church, after the funeral.  And Henry [Hampton] said people are going to think something happened with the sound, something is wrong with their TV set.  I said, "I think there's power in silence at some point, and I would just like this horrific moment to be echoed to be underscored by silence, and I think if you bring back when the caskets are coming down the steps that the point will be made and people will get it."  And he reluctantly agreed with me, and of course, much later said that was a really good idea.  So I'm very proud of that idea and I'm glad that it worked and nobody thought their sound dropped out, they got it.
Story_ID: 64711
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 'Eyes on the Prize' was released in 1987?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the reason it was eligible for an Oscar [Academy Award] is because it first premiered at the Film Forum in a theater because that's the rules of the Oscars is that you can't be eligible if you're on television first.  So it was in the Film Forum and then later went to television the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it is nominated for the-
Speaker 2: Academy Awards.
Speaker 1: --Best documentary feature in 1988-
Speaker 2: The 'Sixth Hour' was.
Speaker 1: --Sixtieth Oscar - Academy Awards and didn't win?
Speaker 2: It did not win.  I remember sitting there in the audience with Henry [Hampton] and the guy sitting in front of me, when they announced whomever, I don't remember, I blocked whoever won and my comment about that is the person that won that year nobody remembers, but they remember 'Eyes on the Prize'.  And then we got the revenge though I would have liked to have the Oscar.  But the guy in front of me was a member of the voting academy and he whipped around and said, "I cannot believe this."  He was just so shocked.  I said, "You can't?!"  And Henry [Hampton] said to me, "Be nice."  I said, "I don't really want to be nice," because I just couldn't imagine that we would not get it.  But here's the revenge, you know, and what did Shakespeare say, "Revenge is a dish best served cold."  'Eyes on the Prize' is in every school and university in the world.  It is used in every class that you can think of, not only history, but filmmaking, writing, sociology.  I've been invited to speak about it from all of those aspects, and it remains one of the most honored and awarded film series, and it's still vibrant today.  So, that's our revenge.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have anything to do with the second series?
Speaker 2: No, I did not work on the second series.  I was afraid frankly that I would not be able to replicate the experience that I had on the first series.  I just was afraid to test that.  I was very tempted, but I didn't.  You know, second series is fine, it was a little tougher getting closer to the '70s' [1970s] and '80s' [1980s] trying to portray that because not many years had passed, and there were tougher issues.  So it worked out to be a better decision for me in the end.  But I think I'm proud of the whole fourteen hours.  If you put it altogether, I'm glad that was done, and I'm glad Henry [Hampton] pushed for it.
Story_ID: 64712
Speaker 1: Okay.  After 'Eyes on the Prize' you joined ABC Television?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  After 'Eyes on the Prize', I didn't have to look for work.  Everybody came for me which was fascinating.  And I had always wanted to go to network television though I had thought--I had envisioned myself going as a reporter, not as a producer.  But of course I had just finished producing two hours on this acclaimed documentary series.  So ABC news, '20/20' was one of the many job offers on the table and I thought, "Well, let's try this."  And they actually circled back to my earlier experience covering health and medicine as I had begun to do in Indianapolis [Indiana] and had done some here in Boston [Massachusetts].  And they had a job that was specific to that.  So they thought this would be good, I thought it would be good, and I went to work there and was there for thirteen years.
Story_ID: 64713
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what were some of the memorable stories?
Speaker 2: Well, I did one of the first stories and as a result ended up as a joke on Jay Leno ['The Tonight Show'] about lack of, what was called then, male menopause, lack of testosterone for men.  I went to London [U.K] to shoot part of it.  And that was interesting.  It was a big joke about it.
Speaker 1: What was the joke?
Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot what he said, you know, something about men and lack of testosterone, but it was an interesting story, nonetheless.  At the time the guy in London [U.K], the researcher, was thought to be somewhat kooky, because you know the lack of testosterone really couldn't have an impact, and you know, of course he was proven right later on and all of that, but it was much more comprehensive just him, but it was just an interesting piece.  So that was--that was interesting.  I pretty much all the stories I did were fairly heart-wrenching because people are talking to you either after something tragic has happened as a way of offering up their stories as a way to prevent somebody else from making the same mistake or they've been harmed in some huge way.  I mean another one that just really got me, because everybody in--all the characters in the piece, the main characters in the piece were dead, and this was the story--we did a story, one of the first about differences between the regulation that happens in a hospital for anesthesiologist and a complete lack of regulation outside of a hospital setting.  So as we discovered, I would have thought, maybe you would have thought, most people thought that wherever an anesthesiologist works there must be some guidelines in place for it, it turns out not to be so.  So if you were to go into a walking clinic or you know a cosmetic thing or any of those "doc in the boxes" as we called for a while, and have anesthesia, it is not regulated.  There are some voluntary guidelines that any place could follow, but as we learned in this, most places didn't even know what those voluntary guidelines were and they didn't bother to follow them.  Well, how does this play out.  Certainly in the kind of anesthesia that you get where you were injected we had stories about, you know, tragic stories about the--my main character is dying from that.  But the one that just even today just takes me out there where there's a woman just happens to be a black couple whose daughter was having a problem at night and she and her husband got up in the middle of the night and drove to one of these independent, you know, doctor, clinic places and went in and whoever analyzed her said, well she has this and gave her a dose of anesthesia, it's kind of light sedation.  Well, somewhere in the confusion of whether the doctor actually ordered this or the tech, it didn't matter, but it ended up being ten times the adult dose was given to the child.  This stuff is not regulated.  So, of course, they don't know this, and of course they take the child home, they're watching her quite closely, she starts foaming at the mouth, they rush her then to a hospital in which case, you know, she's pronounced dead.  And then in backtracking they figured out what's going on and her lawyer was one of those guys who was huge in Texas, this was happening in Texas.  A legislature, one of the legislatures had decided to introduce a bill about regulating this, and she was one of the test cases on it.  And I talked to her.  And then shortly after that, that wasn't bad enough, so she lost her child about five, six months later, her husband dropped dead of a heart attack, and most people agreed including her that it was just heartbreak.  So when I called her I was hoping to get her as an interview and the attorney said to me, "She's not quite--she won't interview."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "And I only have this one picture of the child."  Well if you know anything about doing the kind of fine production work that we did on '20/20,' one picture limits you and how you can really make this a beautifully looking piece.  He said, "I know they're plenty others in her garage, and I have the key to the garage, but she would have to give you permission, and I cannot call her with that, you're going to have to call her."  I said, "Okay."  And in my shop, I was known was the closer, I can get anybody to agree to stuff, so I wouldn't bother by this.  So I called this woman, she's perfectly calm on the phone.  I said who I am, what I want, your attorney has given me your number.  I would like to have other pictures to tell the story.  And she began by saying I think this story is very important.  I want you to tell it, but no.  I said, "I don't think you understand you don't have to go.  And in fact your attorney is willing to go in with me and he'll be there with me the whole time, and we'll find some other pictures" and blah, blah, blah, so you never have to do anything.  She said, "I don't think you understand."  She was completely calm.  And she said, I've lost my child, the only child I'm probably going to have and I've lost my husband.  No, you cannot go in that garage.  I'm just not having it opened up, period.  And I really do wish you well, and I understand why you're calling me.  It was something about the timber of her voice, the tone of it and the pain that came through.  I started sobbing.  I started sobbing on the phone.  She ended up calm--she tried to calm me down.  She said, "Listen you're just doing your job, I'm not offended that you called me, but I just hope you understand you're not opening the garage, I'm not talking about it, that's just as it is."  So I got off the phone with her, and I'll never forget that.  And we did the piece and it was perfect, it just meant for me to be more creative with the one photo, which I was.  It was extremely powerful, had a lot of reverberations, it did what it was supposed to do, the legislation got introduced, all of that.  So that's one of the most memorable pieces I know, that I had a chance to do there.  And there is an impact that you can make on a national program, because our average audience was 19 million people, that's average.  And this got talked about forever, because as I said all the main characters were dead, it was very powerful.
Story_ID: 64714
Speaker 1: There's something else I remember and I think this is the video tape we used to use at a place where I worked called 'Black in White America' [1989], I believe?
Speaker 2: Yes, I worked on that.  That was a total--that was a primetime series that was separate from '20/20'.  So this was an interesting experiment.  The head of the network at the time, I forgot his name, decided, "Why don't we try to do, really do an in depth look at race in America right now, really racism."  And why don't we do that really through the eyes of the folks who would know this experience.  So they sort of went through the network and hand-picked folks, some of us (a) didn't know each other to work on the series, some persons came from this show, some persons came from that show, you know, I was named a senior on it, another person was named--a couple of seniors were on the project and then we had to decide, what will we cover, how will we do it, all of that.  And the name of the piece became 'Black in White America'.  I think when I did that, I was expecting it to be kind of a "Blackside" [Incorporated, media production] experience, kind of an 'Eyes on the Prize', "Blackside" experience.  I was hoping for that.  And while it was very interesting, it was nothing like that.  Working in network television is a whole other world.  First of all the whole independence that we had been promised went away very quickly.  So you're cutting a piece and turning it in and then somebody who's not lived the experience and is questioning whether or not this is the emphasis that should be there for the experience.  I would say that was one of the--my worst professional experiences I had.  I walked away from that.  I didn't really care for the piece.  In the end it was okay, even though there were some extremely talented people working on it.  And I was reminded that proximity does not mean friendships and that everybody is not always going to be on the same page even those of us who may have shared common experience.  So, it got on the air, and I'm sure for some people, it was eye-opening.  For me I felt it was a little bit of pablum but it got on.
Story_ID: 64715
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how long were you at ABC?
Speaker 2: Thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Thirteen years.  And then you come back to WGBH [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Not right away.  I left--when Disney bought ABC, when I started Cap Cities, or Capital Cities on ABC--when Disney bought ABC, I knew the day they bought it, this is not going to be good (laughs).  And what we heard from other people who had been employed by Disney didn't sound good.  It also wasn't good because we did--they did a major announcement, had an in-house broadcast set up so that you could ask questions.  Peter Jennings was alive so he was, you know, one of the persons there.  They had other people throughout the network there you're supposed to be able to ask, you know, the Disney folk, the ABC folk any questions you wanted from wherever you were, what ABC office you were in, I remember being in New York, and when they did their presentation, when the Disney folk just first did their presentation, it was yammering, yammering, yammering, yammering about ESPN, about this, about that, not one word about news for news programming, not one.  Right away you know there's an issue.  You got Peter Jennings sitting here and you're not at all--because that wasn't their interest.  They really bought it to get ESPN.  And that's where their emphasis was right away and then when things started changing and they were laying off this one and that one, belt tightening and whatever, and maybe that's something that any company would do, the emphasis seemed to change and I thought, you know, this is just not going to be good.  So at a certain point they--I think we had gone through two layoffs, I had survived two, and then they offered, before they went to the third layoff, it wasn't right away, it was over a period of time, they offered a buyout.  And I thought about it and thought a couple of things had happened.  I had been doing a lot more speaking, a lot more public speaking, and I wanted more freedom to do that.  As it was under an ABC contract, I'd have to go back to them, and you know, get permission to do certain kinds of things.  Certain things they didn't care about, but other things, just to be arbitrary, they would say, "No you can't do."  I asked permission for them to do a piece about the black church that ended up being a series that I worked on at "Blackside" after Henry [Hampton]'s death, and they said, "No, you can't do it."  I said, when are you people going to do this.  Honestly, this is not a conflict.  And just because I could.  And they said, "Well, we don't know, you're probably right, but that's--that's not the point.  If you're signing this contract, we say you can't do it."  So I thought I got to get out of here.  So I decided to take a buyout, which now, looking back on it was an extremely brave thing to do, because I did not have another job and people kept thinking I did.  Lots of people who decided to take it did have other jobs, but my goal was to piece two or three things together and really work toward building a career around commentary, because I had decided that that's something I wanted to do, not the sort of under your armpit, say anything, but based in fact commentary.  And so I took the buyout and have never regretted that.  I had some rough times afterwards from a financial situation, but never regretted making that move.
Speaker 1: So that was in 2001, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the exact right move for me.  Now, unfortunately the timing wasn't good in that September 11th happened as I was exiting and a lot of stuff that I had counted on happening went away as companies tried to figure out, "Oh, my God, how are we, where are our priorities, how are we going to sustain?"  So I thought I'd have certain kinds of freelance work that would be easy for me to do and sustain me economically and that went away, so I had to reframe, reframe, reframe, but I did, weathered it and made it to the other side and then ended up coming back to [W]GBH [Boston] to do a few things.  That's when I came back.  That was another one of my iterations of coming back.
Story_ID: 64716
Speaker 1: Now there's a piece called 'All Our Sons'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was a consultant on that.  Lots of people ask me to be consultants on documentaries and I have done that on a number of pieces.  So I had to cut that, that was a consultant.  But mainly I stepped out and did the last series that came out of "Blackside" [Incorporated] which is called 'This Far By Faith, African American Spiritual Journeys' [2003] and that brought together sort of a second generation of "Blackside" folks.  So the folks that were working as associate producers, production assistants in some cases now had worked to the level of being producers so I was a senior on that project along with June Cross and the folks that we had worked with at a different level back when we were doing 'Eyes [On the Prize]' took the lead as producers, and we decided to come together to do it because this was the last project that Henry [Hampton] wanted to do and this was sort of our tribute to Henry.  And that was rough because his sisters were then in charge of "Blackside" and they were not people in production at all.  So that was an uphill climb.  And, you know, there's always the challenge of fundraising.  So we managed to get three quarters of the way through it and then it looked like we weren't going to be able to air it because we'd run out of money and actually June Cross really came through in the end, and tapped some folk, figured it all out.  She just kept going and kept going because I was frankly exhausted and said, okay, this is not going to work, I can't put more energy into it, but she did it and it aired, and it was okay, and we were glad that that was done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 'This Far By Faith'-
Story_ID: 64717
Speaker 1: 'This Far By Faith'.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'This Far By Faith'.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'This Far By Faith' was produced in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can easily find that date.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's in there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's after 2001.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, also at WGBH [Boston] that you--now when did you--you started doing your radio show in two thousand- [2010]
Speaker 2: That was almost four years ago.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: So at that point, after I had finished doing 'This Far By Faith' I was doing, and I was really cranking out my commentary work, you know, piece by piece, so I guest here, guest there and I had been a frequent guest on radio programs, both national and local, but I--I really never even thought about hosting on a radio because radio was not my first place and broadcast television is.  So still even after producing most of my time in television,  was really on air in television and I didn't think about radio.  So I was approached by my now boss because WGBH decided in 2009, the show didn't actually start until 2010, in January that they were going to flip formats.  So the format here at WGBH was a lot of national NPR [National Public Radio] programming, one international program, which is based out of here however anchored here, called 'The World' and a lot of classical music.  That was the format, whereas [W]BUR had a lot of news and information program and, I don't even know if they have a music program, so that's--and they had made that change many years ago.  People just didn't even think about coming to WGBH for news and information except for, you know, breaks in between the music.  So what WGBH decided to do was to buy another radio station, take all of the classical music and move it to that station, that's 99.5.  And on 89.7 to reformat reprogram what was there.  And their original thought was to reprogram it with various national NPR programs and of course 'The World' which is produced out of here, but my, not my boss then, but my boss, the guy who is my boss now was a consultant in this and he said at the time, it makes no sense to change your format if you're not going to put in some local programming.  And that was not something that the folks here were actually prepared to do.  They weren't thinking about that they in fact had just bought another station to put classical music on.  So now we're talking about another expense.  And he really strongly pushed and said it will be harder to institute a local program later.  And about the time that he was saying that, WBUR had started one local program called 'Radio Boston', but it was weekly.  And he said, "You know, this is a town, this is crazy not to have local radio program of the type that a public media outlet would do."  There was other commercial stations and talk, there's lots of AM talk shows here and even at that time some FM talk shows, but he said not the kind of talk show we're talking about which is going to be, you know, interview base, have a pacing, allow people to talk, all of that stuff.  And so he was able to convince them, and in doing so he came to me to ask if I would want to host one, which was something completely--I had never saw that coming.  And I said, oh, didn't know much about radio except as a guest, but he said I think you'd be able to figure it out.  The only problem was that he wanted a very fast turn-a-round.  It was extremely fast.  He said, "Because in order to make this work, because I just convinced people to do it, you're going to really have to turn this in about two months."  So I had about maybe a month and a half before I'm on the air hosting a daily live show.  So, first of all it's daily and it's live.  I've not done either of those.  But it started in January of 2010, and I hosted that show for about two and half years until about now-
Speaker 1: This was the Callie-
Speaker 2: Crossley Show.
Speaker 1: Crossley Show.
Story_ID: 64718
Speaker 1: How big a staff did you have working with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it started off with one person and then we eventually got two--three which is still significantly smaller than any program that might be on WBUR, but it was actually a very good working team.  We managed to do a lot of very good work and develop some signature pieces in that we were aided as I said, my current boss stopped his job as a consultant and went away, they had another guy as an interim and he eventually got let go.  So there was a period of time where we were "sort of lightly supervised", if you will, and it turned out to be an advantage to me because we were able to institute some segments, some programming and start some precedents that I was very happy about.  My goal has been always to make certain that there is a diversity of voices, and in fact, when I was approached about doing the show, I said, "You know, you need to know that I am really going to emphasize diversity in an active way if I'm doing the show."  "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah," he said.  I said, "No, no, I want to pause here because people say that all the time and what they mean is maybe one new face in a group of six faces we see all the time," and the problem with Boston is the usual suspects are quite good.  The usual suspects are the people that everybody wants all over the rest of the country.  I understand that, but what I also understand is just like you have those usual five suspects that everybody wants, there's fifty, a hundred, two hundred more great persons who never get a platform because nobody reaches after them because they always go to the six usual suspects.  And so I said I'm not going to do this.  So the instruction to my team from the beginning and our personal mission in life was to find those folk who were excellent and had not been heard from before.  And that was the signature of the show.  People said I never heard of so-and-so.  And then it was really great signature when other people tried to steal them, including [W]BUR.  You know my regular contributors.  And I was delighted to say, you know, they've been here the whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 64719
Speaker 1: Okay.  So '[The] Callie Crossley Show' lasted for two years.
Speaker 2: Two and a half years.
Speaker 1: Two and a half years.  Okay, and now, at the same time, are you doing these other-
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still doing, I mean, I determined when took the buyout from ABC and, certainly, when I took that hit right away after post-9/11 and realized, oh, everything I could count on then is not going to happen, I decided I'm always having multiple strings of income.  And, not only as a security blanket, if you will, from an economic standpoint, but also because I think it's really important to be on different platforms, just as I'd like to get fresh voices on any show I'm on, I think it's important for me, as a commentator, to be heard and seen in a variety of platforms and so that was my goal.  So, I've been doing the Fox Local Morning Show once a week appearance for I don't know how long now, maybe it's been five years, four or five years, I don't know when I started, I could look that up.  And as I said I occasionally pop up on these other formats.
Speaker 1: This is Fox morning show television?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've been on the media criticism show here which is called 'Beat The Press' for more than ten years, it's probably closer to 15 years, and that's a weekly show, and we do that (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: We criticize the media, thusly, 'Beat the Press' instead of 'Meet the Press'?
Speaker 2: --Exactly.  So we look at the week's local and national stories and issues.  And it's a cult favorite, it's won, actually, two--three national awards and--so it's known in media circles outside of Boston [Massachusetts], but around here it's very much a popular show.  I was once in downtown Boston and a guy driving one of those big 18 wheelers backed up in the middle of the street and screamed out, "Hey you, 'Beat the Press'".  (laughs) Okay.  And I always get recognized by the TSA people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know why, but-
Speaker 1: Now 'Basic Black' now this is the continuation  of-
Speaker 2: 'Save Brother' yes.
Speaker 1: --'Save Brother'?
Speaker 2: So I do--I alternate with another woman in hosting.  When the current executive producer of the show decided to move back to live programming, for a while it was hosted by a couple of other people, and it was taped, and it had kind of a mix of arts conver--it was still conversation, but you know it was arts conversation that was, maybe it might be current events, but not much.  It was kind of ongoing, evergreen topics and then both she and the station decided it would benefit by having a very current focus.  And when that changed, at least one of the host who was doing the tape program was not comfortable with live so they came to me and said would you host. So I do most of the--I host most of the programs.  Every now and then there's another woman who sits in.
Story_ID: 64720
Speaker 1: Okay.  But 'The Callie Crossley Show', itself, is not in production now?
Speaker 2: No.  After two and a half years and my boss decided that, because I was doing an hour show, and there's another woman here who was doing an hour show, he decided that hour shows are old fashioned and he wanted to be with the forward movement, which he said was two hour shows.  So he wanted to mesh the two shows together but not use anybody's name on it, call it something completely different, and I would host that show.  So that show was--the two hour show was named 'Boston Public Radio' and I was hosting that for about seven months.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Then he made another choice, he made another decision.  He came from a commercial radio sta--he's done some--worked at a couple of public radio stations, but he also worked at a well-known commercial radio station here which was all talk, mostly conservative talk, with one show that was middle of the road and the two hosts of that show, and he was particularly fond of the two hosts of that show.  So a couple of months ago, the owners of that station decided to eliminate all of the talk programs.  I'm talking they did 24-hour talk, weekends, all day, every day, you know live program-
Speaker 1: This is conservative talk show?
Speaker 2: --Yes, except for this one show hosted by the two people and turned it into music.  So they did that.  That meant everybody would hit the streets, they don't have any jobs.  He had worked with the host of this one show, he was particularly fond of them, they had been on the air for thirteen years, he thought they would bring over their audience.  Remember we started from no audience here, because we didn't have any audience for news and information programming here.  People went to [W]BUR for that.  Did a very slow change while I was in the hosting chair, we double the ratings, but they were small.  So from his vantage point, if you bring people that have thirteen years, a thirteen year following, you'd get a bigger boost faster.  So he made the decision a couple of months ago that he would replace me as the host of that show and put them in as host, and I would have a different role.  So I host a show but it's not live, it's a taped show, and it airs on Sundays, and I do commentaries.
Story_ID: 64721
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, some of the guests that you had on the Callie Crossley show, was a really interesting list, Howard Zinn, the historian.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  In fact, I did the last interview with him before he died.  Nobody knew he was--so that interview got a lot of play, actually, after his death.
Speaker 1: He's really an unsung kind of hero in history.  Anna Deavere Smith, Leonard Nimoy, Bill T. Jones, Wayne Brady?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was funny, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite guest?
Speaker 2: You know, I would have some favorite guests, but they were not named people.  So one of my favorite guests is a guy whose written a book called, 'How to Sharpen Pencils'[2012, by David Rees],  and he makes his living sharpening pencils, and he was just the kind of quirky interview that I love.  And he came on we had an in-depth conversation about the return of enthusiasm for pencils, the high-end pencils that are out there now, "Blackwing" and the rest, how one should sharpen a pencil, what kind of sharpener to use.  I mean people just went crazy.  (Laughs) They just loved it.  And he was really interesting.  So I liked sort of off the beaten path stuff like that.  And any number of novelists I've had on or writers, I've always enjoyed those conversations and just, you know, it was a real good mix of everything that I'm interesting in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Boston is full of people.  I would guess you would never run out?
Speaker 2: Never run out.  And again, we're not using the usual suspects so that made it even richer.  And people looked forward to it, I appreciated that.
Story_ID: 64722
Speaker 1: Okay.  You received numerous awards, Girl Scouts, the George Coleman Award from the Ford Hall Forum.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: That's-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those are both big.  The Girl Scout Award is from the Regional Girl Scout Organization, and every year they pick six women they call leading women and I was one.  Included in that group is the woman who started a flower bakery who has a national reputation and that was very flattering.  They were looking for people who had accomplished something significant in their careers and also who have been role models in leadership for young women, so there was that.  The [George] Coleman award was about volunteer service, you know, at a high level, which I was very appreciative of.  But the one that--award that I have recently gotten in February, just in February is one I never thought I would get and that's from Wellesley College, the Distinguished [Alumni] Achievement Award [2013].  And they pick three to four alum each year who have demonstrated a high level of achievement and listen when you go to a school where Madeleine Albright and Hillary Clinton are well known grads, you never think, I certainly didn't, Madame Chiang Kai-Shek is a graduate, that I would be selected for this award, and it was just a completely, still is a complete thrill.  So, I'm just delighted, it was great, and I'm still enjoying it.
Story_ID: 64723
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have a new show that's-
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's my new show now called 'Under the Radar'- --'Under the Radar'-
Speaker 1: --[Under the Radar] With Callie Crossley'.  It was a segment on my show--on my name show '[The] Callie Crossley [Show]' and I also did it under Boston Public Radio.  We wanted to find--you know what happens on Fridays is that people do a weekend review, kind of look back on the stories of the week and in following my mode of not wanting to do the regular thing.  Try to figure out, well what's a way to look at some news of the week but not the same news.  So if you turn on any, certain public media radio show, they are necessarily talking about the same stories of the week because that's what you talk about.  So what happens to all those stories that don't get talked about?  And there are alternative presses, there are community news papers, particularly, they're online websites that have a community focus that deal in these small stories that actually have a high impact, not all in just their communities, but often then become the big stories on the front page way down the road like two or three months later.  So we focused on those and developed a cast of contributors who could come to speak to us to, could (a) identify those stories and come to speak to us about it and we called it 'Under the Radar'.  So we expanded that and turned it into a show which I host and I am still able to use my contributors and add some more to the mix and that's what the show is and it's great.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You're exposed to so much information and you have to be informed to do these shows-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 64724
Speaker 1: --Here's a question we always ask.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American Community today?
Speaker 2: Survival, I guess.  I'm concerned about this whole public education crisis is one that impacts the African American Community straight on.  And I know how much having that educational opportunity meant for both of my parents and I know what it meant for both me and my sister.  And I see so many students now it seems to me not through any fault of their own, but because they're just--the opportunity is not there or is a result of, you know, lack of will, lack of caring.  There are people working very hard to make sure that people get the education that they need, but I think the public education system is completely broken.  And it distresses me that there seem to be no innovative ways to, or if there are some, they're not the ones that are implemented across the board.  And it's all because of bureaucracy and politics.  And the only way that I see that this may change in any kind of fundamental way is when business gets involved and that would mean business saying, "Okay, we're tired of looking for people overseas to do this work, and we're going to invest right here, because these people can do it, they just don't get the opportunity."  And if folks get serious about that in the way that some of these community college initiatives are supposed to do and some of the public education initiatives that we hear about is supposed to do, but I'm greatly concerned about that because once that link is broken, I don't know what happens to us, because that's been our way out and up for decades, centuries, that's been it.
Story_ID: 64725
Speaker 1: Now, if you had the funds to work on a project of your choice is there a documentary project or radio project that you would launch if you had the resources to do it?
Speaker 2: Well, I probably, I mean, I really liked what I was doing on my own name show, so I wouldn't mind returning to that because it was great, and having got a taste of that and a taste of really being able to bring in a lot of information and do stories that people haven't heard of with folks they've not heard of before with having my own voice in that mix, to raise the kinds of issues that I always raise in a conversation that often don't get raised if I'm not there, I would love to have that opportunity again and maybe I will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 64726
Speaker 1: I was reading the material that we have about you and you made some interesting comments about whether we're in a post-racial America or not?
Speaker 2: Oh, please.  No, we're not in post-racial(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Since the election of-
Speaker 2: --No, we're not in-
Speaker 1: --President Obama?
Speaker 2: --No.  I do a lot of speaking on college campus, specifically--college campuses, specifically, talking about race, racial issues, diversity in general, all of that stuff, and I know everybody wants to believe that we're in post-racial America, and that would be great if that were real, but it just really isn't.  And so I spend quite a fair amount of time finding examples of it sadly, and they're plenty of them, particularly, when you're talking to college students who, at that age right now, are often challenging those of us who know better.  And I say that advisedly, who know better, saying, we're just not like your generations, we're not concentrating on that, that's not a part of our world.  And then, you know, I look at what is a part of their world in terms of the arts, in terms of sports, politics, whatever, and I point these things out, and they go, well, well, maybe, you know.  So it's just that they don't have anybody to talk to them about it and so many of them are completely a-historical.  So it's like they've started all over again from a place I thought we weren't going to go back to, but if that's what it takes for people to get the message, I guess that's what it takes, and there's a few of us around to tell the real story, but no, there's no-post racial, and it doesn't mean that I would be unhappy if there really was one, but there just isn't.  So we need to deal with the situation as it is, understanding what the reality is.
Story_ID: 64727
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done at this point, are there any major changes that you would go back and correct or make?
Speaker 2: Well, I probably would have moved faster, move from some places faster than I did.  And I certainly had a moment right after 'Eyes on the Prize' and I didn't even realize it, that thing that--the buzz word now for everybody is branding.  And if I had taken that experience and branded myself in the way that I could have, at that point, I think I would have been able to create some opportunities for myself or at least create other options for other opportunities for myself, which I think would have been extremely important for me in terms of determining my own direction.  Nobody was talking about that, I didn't even think about it, I was just so thrilled in the afterglow of having done good work.  But there was a moment in time, and some people who actually were on the fringes of that experience, managed to do that quite well, and I just didn't.  And I wish now, looking back, I might have done that.  It would have opened up, I think, some other avenues.  But having said that, it's been pretty good and I'm looking for even more new directions now and because I work on so many things at the same time, I'm aware that there can always be another opportunity.  So as long as I have that as an awareness and a focus and have my eyes opened, I expect to be doing something else that will be just as fulfilling down the road, keeping my eyes on the prize.
Story_ID: 64728
Speaker 1: Okay.  In that regard, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: 'Eyes on the Prize'.  There's no question about it. That's my--I feel that's my personal legacy, too.  In fact, several years ago a friend of mine who's a great facilitator was doing a kind of woman's leadership, deep think session over a weekend.  She was testing out a presentation that she was going to do and one of the questions was what would you--what kind of legacy would you like to have, do you hope to get it, or something on that order.  And I remember writing then, oh, I already know what it is.  And when we then had the open discussion to share all of our answers and everybody was looking at me and realized I was just in an entirely different position than many other people.  If everything stopped right now, I worked on a series that did a lot to describe a very important piece of American history.  I certainly made clear the contributions of African Americans to that history and actually its impact on the rest of the world.  And it's still being used today as it should be.  So that just feels great.  And it's an incredibly powerful experience and I'm a light years away from the moment and time in my career when I thought when I was doing those minute and thirty pieces for local news, is this all there is because I know there is something that could be lasting and profound and I used my skills to make it happen, and I'm really proud of that.
Story_ID: 64729
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have no children.  I have two almost grown niece and nephew, twin niece and nephew.  And that's who I work with--actually never really interested.  I know people think it's terrible in having children (laughs).  And so this has worked out for me just fine.  I might be interested in finding that great guy sometime, but it just hasn't worked out yet, but at some point, maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  It seems like you covered a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we've done a lot.  I mean there's plenty more we probably could say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  I don't, you know, it's hard to know where to edit or explain or whatever.
Story_ID: 64730
Speaker 1: Well, there's one more thing maybe I could think of here.  What is your journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, my journalistic philosophy is inclusion and accuracy.  And often one informs the other, I mean, we--I have found in my life, you know, coming from the lens of an African American person that the times when I have been most critical of my fellow journalist for accuracy reasons is when they have not bothered to tell the whole story.  And the whole story means that all perspectives have to be in.  That doesn't mean there's two sides, there might be three or four sides and it means a range of perspectives, and I am constantly amazed, even at this point about how narrow some people can be in not seeing those other perspectives and that's just not--that not capital "J" journalism, capital "J" journalism as I understand it means that you're precisely accurate and I believe you can get there and nine times out of ten by paying attention to whose voice is there and whose voice is not.  That's really important and understanding that all those perspectives have value.  This is my favorite Native American saying, "He who tells the story rules the world."  So I understand the power of media and if the story's going to be told then let's just make sure everybody's a part of the conversation.
Story_ID: 64731
Speaker 1: Okay.  My last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as somebody and actually somebody has pointed this out to me.  In winning the Wellesley Award, one of the things that came up in the letter because you are nominated anonymously and then people can write in letters and they don't share that with you.  But apparently a theme that came up across the letters, they did tell me was that I was a very good mentor to a lot of people and they mentioned that and wrote about it.  So I guess in small ways and large, I've been able to do that and to repeat the generosity of some people along the way to me and that's really important to me.  So I certainly would like to be remembered for that.  And I'd like to be remembered as a person who stood up and spoke up.  I am as we say standing on the shoulders of a lot of people who made a path when there was no path, so the least that I can do is on who is--who has taken up the task and the assignment of keeping the path clear that was already made for me is to be able to be vocal and be present in saying what needs to be said, even if it's not always quite comfortable.  So I definitely want to be remembered as a person who does that.  I want to be strident in doing and I hope I'm not remembered as a strident person, but as that one that when I said something that may be going against what the group-think is somebody in the room said, "Hmmm, I never thought about that."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
