Story_ID: 670728
Speaker 1: I'm Denise DeBurst Gines [Denise Gines] the interviewer for The HistoryMakers and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including middle names?
Speaker 2: My name is Ruth Antoinette Batton Campbell [HistoryMaker Ruth Campbell].  Ruth is R-U-T-H, Antoinette, A-N-T-O-I-N-E-T-T-E, nee Batton, B-A-T-T-O-N, Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 30, 1939, Benton, Mississippi, Yazoo County.
Speaker 1: And your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: Which one do you want (laughter) first?  I've had, I'm probably one of the group that first had multiple opp- occupations.  I started off as a teacher.  I have taught from seventh grade to grad school.  After teaching--I taught French, English, public speaking, literature, anything in the humanities.  After teaching, I went to work with the Mississippi Research and Development Center [Jackson, Mississippi] as a market analyst.  And I worked there, I have some letters that I received from customers about my work.  The research and development center was a--
Speaker 1: Well we're gonna talk, I just need the occupations right now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The occupations, okay.  After that I went to Mississippi Authority for Educational Television [Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: As--and?
Speaker 2: And after--
Speaker 1: What's your title?
Speaker 2: Well I rose from script editor to executive producer of public affairs and special projects.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: After that I worked with newly elected Governor Ray Mabus as his scheduler.  After that (laughter) I worked as associate director of the university center which was a collaboration of Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi], Mississippi State [Mississippi State University, Starkville, Mississippi], University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] and I believe Southern University--Mississippi Southern University [sic. University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, I think we have an idea of all of the wonderful things you've done, but we're gonna talk about each one of those positions, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I haven't finished.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) After that I went to work at Jackson State University as associate professor.  I left there and I went to Trilogy Communications, Inc. [Pearl, Mississippi] as, oh what was it, customer service manager.  I left there and I went to the Metrocenter Mall [Jackson, Mississippi] which was then one of the largest malls in this area as director of public relations, four years.  I left there and I went to work for the City of Jackson.  I started as a member of the department of human and culture [Department of Human and Cultural Services].  I ended as the deputy director of cultural services.  I don't think I left anything out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We are at WMPR [WMPR Radio] in Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: June 25--
Speaker 1: May.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, May 25, 2017.
Speaker 1: I think, today is the 24th isn't it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, May 24, 2017, we're good.
Story_ID: 670729
Speaker 1: Okay, so now I'm just gonna ask you a few of your favorites, okay.  This is just to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --get us rolling.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue and green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Alaska and Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh.  Oh gee.  I like soul food and I like seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall and winter.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: A favorite saying or quote?
Speaker 2: I have several, but one that I've learned recently is from Padre Pio, who is a Catholic saint.  And it is "Pray, work, don't worry" [sic.].
Story_ID: 670730
Speaker 1: Now let's start with talking about what you know about your ancestry, and let's start on your mother's side.  And tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please.  When and where she was born?  We'll, we'll start there.
Speaker 2: My birth mother is Viola Brice, V-I-O-L-A, B-R-I-C-E.  Fox Hill, Nassau [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what year she was born?  Do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: No, but she's ninety-seven.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you said birth mother, so did someone else raise you?
Speaker 2: My stepmother who is mother.  Both of them are mother, that's a long story.  But my stepmother is Thelma, T-H-E-L-M-A, Perkins, P-E-R-K-I-N-S, Batton, B-A-T-T-O-N [Thelma Perkins Batton].
Speaker 1: And do you know when and where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Shaw, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year?
Speaker 2: I'd have to go back and look, probably 19--around 19--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918] sound right?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one [1921], '22 [1922] something like that.
Speaker 1: All right, now--
Speaker 2: She's deceased.  She passed in 1998 and she was seventy-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay now you can tell me about both of them or either, or if you know any--if they shared with you any stories about their growing up?
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  My, my birth mother was born in the British West Indies.  She has told me that her parents [Clara Cooper Brice and Wilfred Brice] were lost at sea on a fishing trip.  And apparently at that time they had property, the Brice family had property but there was an uncle who wanted all the property and their grandmother was afraid that he would hurt them.  There was three of them, she and two brothers, and I'm sorry I've forgotten the name of the brothers.  So their grandmother took the three kids and they slipped away to the United States.  They were, I guess, refugees and they landed in Florida.  And my mother would sing for coins and the brothers, the youngest brother was very, very fair with light colored eyes, blue eyes.  Their ancestry is Scotch-Irish and Bahamian.  And so it appears that a white couple from somewhere in the Midwest or the west saw them and they wanted the little boy, the little brother because he looked white.  And they told the grandmother that if she would give them the little boy they would see that the older brother would get some work and she would go to school, and they would send her to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi] to school and so they did that.  I think the little brother was named Rodney [Rodney Brice] I believe--or was that the one--but anyway, the one that stayed in Miami [Florida] ended up owning funeral homes and had a large family, I don't know them.  The younger one was never heard from again, so the thought is that wherever he went he became white.  And my--she was a coloratura soprano, opera singer.  And she went to various schools beginning at Piney Woods, Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  She sang everywhere, Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  I think she even spent a while at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York].  She was, as I say, a coloratura soprano and sang--did an extensive tour in Europe.  But because she always sang her way to school.  At the beginning of her real success, she developed throat cancer which ended her career as a singer.  She came back to New York [New York] and did various things in the New York area.  She left--well me when I was two weeks old.
Story_ID: 670731
Speaker 1: So my mother, my stepmother [Thelma Perkins Batton], also went to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi], as did my father [Cleophas Batton].  So he--both of his first two wives came from Piney Woods.  She played with the Sweethearts of Rhythm [International Sweethearts of Rhythm].  I don't know if you ever heard of them, but they were an international all girls band.  She played the drums and they traveled all around making money for Piney Woods.  In those days, Piney Woods was really a very special school.  And if you've ever heard anything about it you'd probably know that.
Speaker 2: Well tell me about it?  Tell me about Piney Woods?
Speaker 1: Mr. Jones [Laurence C. Jones] and you may have to check on the facts of this, but Mr. Jones was I think a graduate of Tuskegee [sic.] because if you know, most--many of the educators in Mississ- in, in the South came out of Tuskegee.  Well he came into Mississippi and he wanted to build a school for Negroes, that's what they were back in those days.  And what he did was he wanted to build this little log cabin school.  And some whites found out about it and probably were Klansmen [Ku Klux Klan, KKK].  And they caught him out in the woods one day and they told him, "What you mean you're gonna build a, a school for these colored folks," and they probably said nigger, I can't remember (laughter) exactly how, how the story went.  But, he sat on a log and he told them that black people, Negroes could be more productive for them if they were educated.  He sort of had a little bit of that, you know, hands and minds work and, and then they can do things and they would be of more help to you.  And he talked to them I understand for quite a long time and would you believe that when he finished talking with them, and I'm sure that's the spirit of God, they said, "Well go build your school," and they gave him some assistance to build the school.  So he built Piney Woods, the little country life school which is something really that should be, Mr. Jones should be noted in HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] because he did a lot for the State of Mississippi.  And because there was no--there was no school other than I think they could go to the eighth grade, there was nowhere really for them to go after, after they finished school, you know, twelfth grade if they went into Yazoo City [Mississippi] or someplace like that.  But there was no like junior college or anything like that.  And so he put up this little country life school that educated so many of--men and women.
Story_ID: 670732
Speaker 1: My dad [Cleophas Batton] was a member of the original Cotton Blossom Singers, they toured everywhere.  And so, but that's, that's--that tells you pretty much.  Well an interesting thing though about my mother, which is--when I say mother I'm talking about my stepmother [Thelma Perkins Batton].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was abandoned.  Well actually she was left with her father as I was left with my father.  But her father was electrocuted.  They were walking down the road after a storm and an electric wire had fallen across the road and he stepped on it and was electrocuted.  So her mother--her grandmother raised her.  And she, I think that's why she was so very fond of me, even though I had my, my ways with her, but I'll talk about that.  I'll talk about children being adopted later on.  And she wanted me to have everything that she didn't have.  So she--for instance, when I was eight years old, I'm probably the only little black girl in 19--what around '48 [1948], '47 [1947] that had a camel hair coat.  Very few unless they were, probably came out of some wealthy black family, you know.  But everything that she didn't have when she grew up she wanted me to have.  And I had those things.  And she--she grew up--her playmates were the daughter of a funeral home director, there was some association with Aretha Franklin's people, they knew them.  And but anyway, I wanna talk about this--this thing with the daughter of the funeral home.  This little girl had everything, she thought.  She didn't have those things, 'cause her mother had to make things--her grandmother had to make things for her.  So she was determined that if she ever had children, she never had one, that her child would never have to want patent leather shoes, so and I didn't, I wore Capezios (laughter), so.
Story_ID: 670733
Speaker 1: Now just to go back just for clarity, your grandmother, who was your mother's mother [Clara Cooper Brice], had the three children and you were living in Miami [Florida] at first, correct?
Speaker 2: They were living in Miami.
Speaker 1: And you were not with them?
Speaker 2: On no, no, no, this was long before I was born.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: You wanted me to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was when she was a little girl, remember.  She was a little girl like, what, ten or eleven.  Well when they got there I imagine she was younger than that.  But when this white family met them, she was probably of the age to go to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi].  Now I, I don't know all those dates, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But another thing they said, my granddaddy [Willie Batton] used to tell me about her that her voice was so beautiful and so pure that she could sing just notes and the birds would come down and sit on the ground by her.  And she ran away when I was two weeks old because--this is getting involved (laughter).  She did not want to live in the country and she wanted to be a singer, and so she ran away.  I was two weeks old.  And I was left--my daddy [Cleophas Batton] had gone back to Piney Woods and I was left with my grandfather, my patriarchal grandfather.  I told you I'm confusing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so.  If we use names it might be a little easier.  What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: Your--your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: I have no, no--I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, well which grandmother--
Speaker 2: Raised me?  My father's grandmother and my father's mother [Mary Davis Batton] and father raised me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --up to--until he came and got me.  They--okay, maybe you want me to start with me--with my father.
Speaker 1: Well we're, we're--you don't--
Speaker 2: We're not there yet, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) have any more information about--no. You don't have any more information about your mother [Campbell's biological mother, Viola Brice]--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh (shakes head).
Speaker 1: You don't know her mother's mother.  Okay so that's fine.
Story_ID: 670734
Speaker 1: So yes we can go onto your father.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Cleophas Batton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: C-L-E-O-P-H-A-S, Batton, B-A-T-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And do you know when he was born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-one [1921].  He's deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  And he was born in--where?
Speaker 2: Benton, Mississippi, Yazoo County.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And his parents were?
Speaker 2: Mary Davis Batton, M-A-R-Y, Mary, Davis, D-A-V-I-S, Batton, B-A-T-T-O-N, and Willie Hudson Batton [Willie Batton], W-I-L-L-I-E, H-U-D-S-O-N, B-A-T-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right, so let's go on from there, okay.  So you're with your grandparents who raised you, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So let's, let's start from there.  Tell me about your grandparents, tell me--
Speaker 2: My grandfather--my grandmother came from somewhere around Vaughan, Mississippi and I don't know much about the Davises.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather came from within Mississippi.  What I do know about them that my great-grandmother, one of those greats, walked in chains from Georgia into Mississippi.  And she was sold to a family.  She, and I suspect they were the Battons, okay and but she was never sold again.  She had two sets of children.  One set that were sold off into slavery, one set from which I am descendent that were kept on--where she was.  She was--this was a great-great--one of my great-greats.  She was--apparently had a photogenic memory because she would be in the--she worked in the house and she would learn when the tutors came whatever they taught the white children, she would come back and teach her children.  So my grandfather and his brothers were all what they called learned.  And my grand- great-grandmother was also what they called the root woman and she also was a midwife, she delivered babies.  And they said she shaped my head when I was born.  Now I don't know if she delivered me or if she just came in, got there too late, but they said she shap- I don't know what they mean by shaping heads, but they said that's why ears don't stick out and--and my head is molded the way it is, I don't know.  (Laughter) But anyway, she--my grandfather was part African, Scotch-Irish and Native American, that's my daddy's--okay.  He was very well respected in the community by both blacks and whites.  As a matter of fact, he was the one to whom many blacks and whites came because they couldn't write or read, and he would read their letters for them and he would write letters for them.  He also took out hunting and fishing parties, and he was a great hunter.
Story_ID: 670735
Speaker 1: He was also a man of some temper, and they called him Bill Batton [Campbell's paternal grandfather, Willie Batton], that's all, all I ever heard anybody call him was Bill Batton.  It never was Bill, uncle, uncle, nothing like that, it was Bill Batton.  And one of the stories about him, my grandfather had traveled a lot, I don't know everywhere he went, but he had traveled a lot.  But he worked at the gin, the cotton gin, and he worked in, I don't know what they called that the way up top, I guess in the tower like or wherever, dealing with the machinery and stuff.  And it appears that one day when the wagons were lining u- were lined up and they were way out of the Yazoo [Yazoo City, Mississippi], 'cause then everybody black and white brought their cotton to the gin.  And let me--let me just say this too, most the blacks in Yazoo County [Mississippi] or what we call the hill country were tenant farmers, they leased the land, they were not sharecroppers and they didn't live on plantations.  And that was, believe it or not, a kind of source of pride.  They considered themselves more free maybe than the people up in the Delta [Mississippi Delta] who lived on plantations and you know, because they had--they had their own farms so to say.  They didn't own the land, but they rented it.  So, now where was I going with that?
Speaker 2: About the cotton gins that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was in this cotton gin and his best friend, and I forget his name, I wanna say it was a Mr. Jackson [ph.], this was long before I was born, was in line.  And a white--two white men cut the line in front of him and Mr. Jackson took exception to it.  And so they got into a ballyhoo about it and they took him down in the woods and hung him.  When I was about seven, he showed me that tree and but they locked my grandfather in that tower because they knew that if he got out he'd kill them.  So they locked him in there and my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] had to prepare his food every day and take it over to the gin and give it to him and they would put it through this winner--window, or however they got in there and they kept him there two weeks 'til they ran those men out of the county.  Can you believe that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: And so I came up in a family that was pretty much independent thinkers.  Another time--and my grandfather was a 32nd Degree Mason.  And the other thing, I think, that you probably already know as I've heard from some of your folk is that Masons, black and white, cannot turn their backs on each other, you know that.  So he was a 32nd Degree Mason.  But another time, one of my uncles, two of whom died way before I was born, but one of them was up at the country store and they, shooting craps, dice.  And my uncle apparently won all the money.  So one of the white boys, it was a mixture of black and white, got angry and he took a knife out at my uncle.  My uncle took the knife from him and in the scuffle he--the other boy got scraped or something, but anyway, he came home and told his daddy, my grandfather.  And so my grandfather said okay--my grandfather had been married before he married my grandmother and he had I think, let's see Spencer [Spencer Batton], Louis [Louis Batton], Bruce [ph.], Sutton [Sutton Batton], Major [ph.]--I know he had five boys and a girl [Irene Batton], but for some reason the number seven is stuck back in my head--in my memory.  But anyway, I only knew Sutton, bet that was Bruce--Snookie, okay that was the other one, that must've been Major, I knew those three, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were grown when he married my grandmother, okay.  So anyway, Spencer I think it was or Louis, whichever one came home.  So my grandfather told all the boys to get their guns and get in the window.  And because he knew that some white people were gonna show up, and of course they didn't call them white people.
Story_ID: 670736
Speaker 1: So they're all in the window?
Speaker 2: And sure enough late that night the--this white boy's father and a couple other white men, they come riding up.  My grandfather walked out on the porch and he said, "What you need?"  And they said, "Well Bill [Campbell's paternal grandfather, Willie Batton], we wanna talk to your son."  He said, "No if you're here you don't wanna talk to my son, you wanna talk to me."  So the man said, "Well it seems like he cut my boy."  My grandfather said, "He didn't cut your boy."  He said, "All them boys up there were wrong, they had no business shooting craps."  He said, "When you shoot craps and you lose, you lose."  He said, "Now I understand your boy came out with a knife and in the scuffle my son wasn't gonna stand there and let him--and let him cut him.  In scuffling over the knife, your boy got scratched, that's not a cut."  He said, "So we gonna settle this between us.  My boy won't be up there shooting craps no more, in fact all of them ought to stop shooting craps."  He said, "But I just have one thing to say, my boy's not going north and he's not gonna turn up missing.  Because if my boy turns up missing, some of y'all might turn up missing."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was one story.  Now I don't know why my grandfather was so well respected in that area but he was.  I, I understand at his funeral in 1955, the procession was like two miles long, black and white.  The other thing my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] used to say about my grandfather was that (laughter) the reason we never had any money was because whenever my grandfather made money he gave it away.  He said he could be walking down the street in Yazoo City [Mississippi] if he saw a lady who had no shoes, he said, "Baby why don't you have some shoes," and whatever story she'd tell him.  He said, "You take this and you go buy you some shoes."  He was a humanitarian--he's my favorite--he's my hero, I guess you could figure that out.  And he--so he was well loved in the community on both sides because he was a good man, but he was also well respected because he was not a weak man.  And of course now, you know, my father [Cleophas Batton] used to laugh and say that people like my grandfather was called that crazy nigger and they did not fool with crazy niggers.  Now I don't know how true that is, but that--that's, that's the word they used to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 670737
Speaker 1: All right, well tell me what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?  Let me explain to you, from the time I was bor- first of all--let me tell you how my grandfather [Campbell's paternal grandfather, Willie Batton] raised me at two weeks old in the country with no mother's milk.  They called me the Pet milk baby and I had a sugar tit.  Do you know what a sugar tit is?  It's a piece of white linen that's sterilized and they put butter in it and, and sugar.  And they mix it up and they tie that so it's almost like a pacifier and they let the baby suck on that.  Now the story is that when it became winter and I was about six months old that my grandfather when it got cool would put me under the stove, you know they had those potbelly wood burning stoves like he did bitties.  Know what a bitty is?  That's a baby chick.  And when the bitties are hatched, if they're--they, they are placed under the stove to keep warm, excuse me.  So, supposedly he would put me under this--this stove which, you know, when I think about it was sort of an incubator, you know, so I was kept warm all the time.  And I had Pet milk, I drank Pet milk 'til I was old enough to take cow's milk.  But when I, you know, I couldn't have cow's milk at first.  So I had a sugar tit and I had Pet milk.  I was a Pet milk baby.  And it is amazing how black people managed to do things in those days when we have so many things now and can hardly do, do anything.  And I like to say that I was--I have lived in three centuries, even though I was born in the--at the end of the '30s [1930s].  In Mississippi we were still in the 19th century and of course I lived in the 20th century and now I'm in the 21st century.  So I like to say that I've lived through three centuries.  But he--I stayed with him until my father [Cleophas Batton] came and got me, and I must've been around four, but you wanted to know my earliest mem- memory.  So let me go back to that.  My earliest memory is, I must've been about three, maybe two, I have two memories.  I was standing on the porch of my grandfather's house and I saw this snake coming through the grass.  And I told my grandfather, "There's a snake out here," and he said, "Where," and I said, "Over there," and sure enough it was.  Now I remember that snake very well 'cause it seemed like I could see his head.  The other memory I have is at the same house, so I must've been very, very young.  They have what they call a fighting rooster, he was a mean rooster.  And although they kept him fenced up, somehow he got out and he attacked me.  And my grandfather had to come and get me, and they put the rooster back up.  And I went and got a fishing pole, you know they had these bamboo poles like, and when they found me I was sticking that pole through the fence killing that rooster.  So I guess that Batton trend just came out of me too (laughter).  Now that's probably my earliest memory.
Story_ID: 670738
Speaker 1: My next memory is my, my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] and my father [Cleophas Batton] coming to get me and taking me to Chicago [Illinois] where they lived.  And I stayed in Chicago, I don't know how long.  I wasn't yet in school.  And then, I remember my grandfather [Willie Batton] came to get me and I was so surprised and I asked him what was he doing there, I remember this, and he told me, "You came to me and told me you wanted to come home."  I think he was joking, but anyway he came to get me.  Because later I found out he came to get me because my grand- my father was going to war [World War II, WWII], okay.  So I came back to Mississippi where I started school, what they call pre-primer and it was in a two room school [Orange Hill School (ph.)] which I suspect had once been the white school and then they had moved to a brick school up the road.  But we only used one room.  And our teacher had finished only the eighth grade, but she taught eight grades in that one room.  And the amazing thing is that in a sense she taught us all together because the older ones would help the younger ones.  And we--I stayed there until after the war, but le- but I can tell you something about the war.  I, I--
Speaker 2: Well before we--before we get to the war, let's talk a little bit more about the school.  How far away was the school from where you lived (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From where we--where I lived?  Well, with a child's mind it was a long way.  I suspect though maybe three miles and we walked, and I know (laughter), I remember we, we had to go through a pasture and I remember there was a mean old bull in that pasture sometimes.  And I remember he got after us one day and we had to run and climb a tree.  And he didn't go away.  My--somehow or another my grandfather found out about it and he came and got us.  But I also remember--and this is, this is truly something about our history that--that it--that I want to say.  My grandfather must've been over whoever the school board, if they had that kind of thing, because he would show up at school all the time.  And when the weather would change, he would either bring the wagon and take all the children home or he would come on his horse and get me depending on what the, I guess the conditions were.  So, so I can remember riding home on the horse with the rain beating down and the cold, and that may even have been later when I came back to Mississippi.  But, he would come and he would supervise us sometimes and he would see that there was wood cut for the stove.  And we had to take our lunch, my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] fixed my lunch every day.  It was far more nutritious than anything kids get today and better tasting (laughter).  And she would fix enough so that I'd have some to give other kids if they didn't have anything.  And I had a dog named Tom, it was a black and white hound.  What do they call those dogs, they have a special name.  He was born in April, I was born in June, and he lived to be thirteen.  Dogs and cats played a large part of my life.  But anyway, he would go to school with me every morning and thought I heard a dog (laughter).  (Unclear) he would go to school with me every morning and then when I would go in he'd go somewhere and you know, when we came out for recess he'd show up.  And I'd go in, he'd go away, and when we got out for lunch, he'd show up.  When I'd go in, he'd go away.  When I came out from school, he'd go home, we'd walk home.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And but, I digress.
Speaker 2: No, that's fine.
Story_ID: 670739
Speaker 1: We were talking about, you know, how far it was for you to go to school [Orange Hill School (ph.)], and--
Speaker 2: The, the lady who taught.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was going to ask about her teaching (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she taught all of us in one room and all eight grades.  And I--I'm telling you this because something that happened afterwards is, is so telling about what was happening in the South in certain areas, you know.  And as it happened, oh god so much, later on when I went back to Chicago [Illinois]--I'll tell you about that, but I wanna go back to living there with my [paternal] grandfather, my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton].  I used to go and play with the white granddaughter of the family that my grandfather leased his land from and we were just children and we would play together.  And she would come down to my grandmother's house and we would play.  But I remember one time when I went up there, we'd always eaten together, but this particular day that I went up there we had played all morning.  And because he, he--her grandfather would come down there and say, "Bill [Willie Batton] is--can Ruth [HistoryMaker Ruth Campbell] come up and you know, play with--," I don't remember her name.  And I would go up there, we'd play and we'd eat.  So when lunchtime came that day we were sitting at the dining room table eating and the cook called me and so I went to see what she wanted.  And she said, "Baby, she said, "you can't eat in there."  She said, "You have to eat in the kitchen with me."  And I said, "Why," and she said, "Because yous black," or colored I think she said colored, "and you're not supposed to eat with white folk."  So I told her, "Before I sit here and eat in the kitchen with you, I'm going home," and I went home.  And I was just a little girl, just a little bitty girl and I never went back to play with that little girl again.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your teacher's name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: For elementary school, you don't remember her name, okay.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I've had so many teachers.
Story_ID: 670740
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what grade did you go through there before you went to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was supposed to be in third grade.  So I'd gone through primer--pre-primer, primer, first and second grade.  And when the war [World War II, WWII] was over, my dad [Cleophas Batton] came back and got me.  And he was then at Chanute [Chanute Field; Chanute Air Force Base, Champaign County, Illinois].  But let me go back, that was also the first time I saw my mother, my birth mother [Viola Brice].  She came to take me away from my grandparents and give me to the nuns 'cause (laughter)--I'll tell you this is really mixed up.  My grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] and grandfather [Willie Batton] were in the field and I was at the house, and I remember this distinctly.  She and these three or four nuns showed up and I didn't know who these people were, and the nuns were white naturally.  And she--and she came in and I remember her saying "Ruth Ann [HistoryMaker Ruth Campbell], I'm your mother."  And of course at that time my grandmother was my mother (laughter) right you know, so I just looked at her and I said okay.  Even though they always told me I had a mother who had this glorious voice and all this.  And she said, "I'm gonna comb your hair and we're gonna get ready and we're gonna go with these people."  And I told her, "I can't go with you," you know.  But what had happened, they had stopped at the country store which, you know, was owned by Mr. Oates or let me say, Mr. Henry Oates and Miss Maggie Oates [ph.].  And the reason I remember them is 'cause I used to go up and stay with Miss Maggie because she--I don't know if they didn't have any children or if the children were gone and she liked for me to come up and visit with her.  So I'd visit between the store with Mr. Oates and her.  And she--they had stopped at the store to get directions to where my grandfather lived and Mr. Oates had asked them why, you know, back in those days everybody wanted to know what's your--what's your business here.  And one of the nuns told him, "Well we're coming to get this girl's child."  And he said, "Who's her child," and they told him.  He said, "Oh, get her for what?"  And anyway they told him they were taking me--bringing me to Jackson [Mississippi] and I was--she was giving me to them.  In her head, she was giving me to them to get an education.  Well of course the minute they left, Mr. Oates got in his truck and he went and found my grandfather.  So while they're there at the house trying to convince me to let her comb my hair, my grandfather comes in (laughter).  I remember him getting his shotgun and saying some very epithet removed words to the nuns.  He didn't like Catholics.  I think historically there's been some diff- differences between Catholics and Masons or something--I don't know or the Knights Templar or something.  But anyway, he told them to get out and told her to get out, she did not have a child there.  And that was the end of that.  That was the first time I saw her.  I only saw her three times before I was twenty-one.  And they went away.  And my grandfather was very upset about it because he didn't think that I would've been treated very well with the nuns in Jackson.  He thought I'd be emptying slop jars and washing dishes and, you know, and that they could very well educate me on their own, which probably brings me to what you want me to go to is going to Chicago.
Story_ID: 670741
Speaker 1: I was supposed to be third grade and I went to Burke Elementary [Edmund Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] on South Park 228 [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], I think, number 228.  And when I got there they told me that coming from Mississippi I could not qualify for third grade that I would have to go back--they had what they called 2-A and 2-B.  I would have to go back to 2-A, okay.  And that I couldn't, I wouldn't know enough to be in the third grade.  So they put me in 2-A, kids couldn't keep up with me.  They put be in 2-B, kids couldn't keep up with me.  They put me in 3-A, kids couldn't keep up with me (laughter).  So they put me in 3-B and ultimately I ended up in fourth grade.  Now let me tell you why.  Because before I went to school, my granddaddy [Campbell's paternal grandfather, Willie Batton] taught me to read and, and to write, not, you know, print.  And I tell people that if I come across as being sort of strange it's because I grew up learning to read the Bible, an old dog eared copy of Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] and Dick Tracy.  My grandfather took the paper, the paper came in the mail and the mailman would stop and I guess they got it once a week or two weeks or a month, I don't know, but he took the paper.  And so we--our favorite story was Dick Tracy.  So I learned to read Dick Tracy, Shakespeare and the Bible.  So, and going to school and then my aunt would send me Little Golden Books and you know, and I remember my favorite was Jason and the golden fleece and then there was something else and Henny Penny.  So I had very, very good education when I went to Chicago [Illinois].  And so when I left Chicago--
Speaker 2: Okay, well--give me just a second to just get a little clarity here if you would.  All right, so you're about eight or nine or I guess about nine--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --if you were going into the third grade, and your father [Cleophas Batton]--
Story_ID: 670742
Speaker 1: Now, before we even talk about that, is there a story about how your mother and father [Cleophas Batton] met, do you know--do you know that story?
Speaker 2: They all met at Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: At Piney Woods, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My birth mother [Viola Brice] and my mother [Thelma Perkins Batton], he met my birth mother first and I think she got pregnant and in those days they made you marry.  So they got married and that may be why she didn't wanna stay either.  But the story was also that my dad--my granddaddy [Campbell's paternal grandfather, Willie Batton] could not afford to send both of them to school.  So she was gonna have to stay in the country and he went back to school, okay.  Now after that--after she ran away to New York [New York] or wherever she went, he met my stepmother.  And he filed for divorce and some kind of way they sent her the papers, but apparently she never signed and returned the papers, and that's another story.  But so anyway--
Speaker 1: So your, your father is who takes you to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Takes me to Chicago, right.
Speaker 1: Okay and he's now married to your stepmother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, okay and so they were living in Chicago.  Now is this before or after he goes to war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: This was after.
Speaker 1: After, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: 'Cause the war ended in what '44 [1944] or '45 [1945], yeah this was after.
Speaker 1: So how long do you stay in Chicago and this is when, do you stay there or is this the time when your grandfather comes and takes you back?
Speaker 2: Oh no that was further back now, that was when I was I was a little, little, little girl (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now you're in Chicago--
Speaker 2: For the second time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) with your mother--stepmother and father?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now the first time they came and got me remember I stayed with them until he went in the war.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, okay. We're, we're good now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, and--and then he came and got me.
Story_ID: 670743
Speaker 1: So this school you--was--you said Burke [Edmund Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was the name of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Burke Elementary.
Speaker 1: Burke, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was number 228.
Speaker 1: All right so--
Speaker 2: And we lived at 20--I still remember 208 East Garfield Boulevard which was 55th Street, South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At that time, Chicago was--South Side was beautiful, you know.  In fact in the summer, we're not gonna ever get out of my childhood (laughter).  In the summer they would take--families would go to Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] and they would spend the night.  And they would have--they would do barbeque and they would have picnics and somebody would be playing music and it was just wonderful.  It was, the South Side was so nice and so--Chicago was so neat, you know.  My mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] would put me on the bus with her money and I could take the bus downtown--I didn't mean the bus, the subway downtown Chicago and pay her bills and I was eight years old, you know, seven or eight, something like that and I would come back home by myself.  Go and come by myself, nobody bothered you.  (Pause) What else can I tell you about Chicago in those days?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: In those days they had--my mother and father [Cleophas Batton] were, I guess, very, very social.  They had the club Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois], they had the, oh god I can't remember all those clubs.  My mother--my mother modeled a lot and so I got to go to the clubs when my mother would model.  And I remember that I got to see the great Sonja Henie, a skater, when I was a little girl.  And I got--and I skated myself, I did--this was roller skating.  You know they had the big roller rinks and I participated in shows and I was a little girl, you know, I tried to ice skate but my ankles wouldn't, wouldn't handle it.  So, my memory of Chicago was so different from the Chicago of today.
Speaker 1: Today. Well--
Speaker 2: You know, the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois], the Rhumboogie, oh gosh.
Speaker 1: That's fine, I--I'd would like you to kind of talk about, about you and the neighborhood, you, you told me how beautiful it was.  But if you were to walk a square block, tell me about the house in which you lived, you know, describe it to me and a square block of who lived there, who were your friends, and you know, what their parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I lived, like I say, on 208 East Garfield Boulevard.  My mother worked at a--at her friend's shop, boutique, dress shop.  And we lived in an apartment building, we lived on the first floor.  At that time, we were renting a room and because my daddy was at Chanute [Chanute Field; Chanute Air Force Base, Champaign County, Illinois].  So we were renting a room and that was the first time I saw a real Christmas tree with electrical lights.  Now my grandfather [Willie Batton] would have Christmas trees, but we had popcorn strung on it and you know, things made to put on it when I was in the country and I was a little girl.  But there was a basement and the children could go down in the basement and play.  And I played with, what was Sam's [ph.] name (pause), you sending me so far back, Sam--Aunt Beulah's [ph.] children, Junior [ph.] and Elaine [ph.], we played in the basement.  My best friends though was my mother's play sister, who was Willow White [ph.], and Ed White [ph.] was her husband.  He owned a Buick dealership downtown Chicago somewhere.  And I think now that he probably was a numbers man 'cause he had a lot of money.  As a matter of fact, I can remember that we learned the combination to the safe and we played Monopoly a lot.
Story_ID: 670744
Speaker 1: All right, so let's continue to talk about the, the neighborhood.  So we started with your best friend and her father, and you were telling a story about playing Monopoly, but something about the safe? About the combi- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We got in the safe and we got real money.  So when they came home that night and it was a Friday night, 'cause Friday night was always fish, we have fish and we were at Aunt Willow's [Willow White (ph.)].  We had hundred dollar bills, fifty dollar bills, we had real money playing Monopoly spread all over the living room floor, and of course they had a stroke.  But the o- only other thing I wanna tell you about that, about Aunt Willow and Uncle Ed [Ed White (ph.)] is that because of Uncle Ed when we came south that summer to visit, we stayed at the Peabody Hotel in Memphis [Tennessee] where black people could not stay.  And we stayed there because of Un- Ed's connections.  Now I don't know what those connections were, okay.  But when we got into Memphis and we drove over to the Peabody, we drove around in the back to the alley.  We were led in through the kitchen, we were taken to the servant's elevator and we went upstairs to our room and we stayed there.  Dinner was brought to us and, and I remember them telling us that we could not go out in the hall.  Now Aunt Willow probably could 'cause she was very, very fair and one of her children were fair, but the other one was about my color.  But they also had this long lustrous hair, and of course you can tell I didn't (laughter).  But anyway and we stayed there.  And that morning, they brought us breakfast and we ate, we went back down the service elevator, back through the alley, got in our car and came on south.  And in those days you couldn't stay in hotels.
Speaker 1: Did you know the significance of being able to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do I know what?
Speaker 1: Did you know the significance of you being able to stay at the Peabody at that time?
Speaker 2: No not then, we were too young.  But later I knew (laughter).
Story_ID: 670745
Speaker 1: But I wanted to tell you before we got to this about, I remember rations, when they gave coins for ration.  When I was still with my [paternal] grandfather [Willie Batton] and I remember my grandfather having the only radio in the area [Yazoo County, Mississippi] and people coming to our house to listen to the war news.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And how, you know, the house would be filled with people, black and white, to hear what was going on in the war, that was all.
Speaker 2: Well what were some of the other things besides the war that you--that you listened to as a child?  Did you listen to the radio to any programs (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I listened to the radio and, and I remember H.V. Kaltenborn who was the great announcer then I understand.  And I remember my--I remember the people cheering when we had won a battle.  I'm not sure if that was the end of the war, but I remember them cheering.  And I remember my dad [Cleophas Batton] was in Germany.  And you don't wanna hear that story (unclear).  Well he, you know, when they went to the [U.S. military] service they were divided when they were in the South, but when you go into war they were still in like, you know, they were like the cooks then 'cause you couldn't be anything else if you were black, you had to cook.  So, they were--my, my dad, the only story he would ever tell us about the war was this one.  It was that they came under attack, the cooks, you know, I guess the platoon was out somewhere.  And they had these hard little knots of white potatoes and they ran this little group of Germans--of Nazis off because they could hide and (laughter) and these black boys could throw a rock, and they would throw these potatoes and hit them in the head.  They couldn't shoot 'cause they didn't know where the potatoes came from (laughter).  So that was the only story he would tell us.  He would ne- he never talked about the gory details.  But my father served in World War II [WWII], he served in Korea and he served in Vietnam.  He retired from Vietnam and lived in the Far East, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay,
Story_ID: 670746
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so now--
Speaker 2: We left Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: You left yeah, well you left--
Speaker 2: Oh you wanna talk some more about the neighborhood or what?
Speaker 1: Well we, we--well--
Speaker 2: We probably--
Speaker 1: We're still--okay, we're still in Chicago, yes you can talk more about your other friends and what's in the neighborhood.  You talked to us about Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois], but I just wanted to know about the house.  Well you said it was an apartment on the first floor, you talked about that.  And you talked about Christmas and having electric lights (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're very lovely apartments.  There was no--it was not a ghetto.  Chicago's South Side became ghetto much later.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay and, and some of your other friends, do you have any childhood friends that--
Speaker 2: Oh no--
Speaker 1: --not from that time?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --traveled too much.
Speaker 1: Too much, okay.
Story_ID: 670747
Speaker 1: All right, so where did you head next, where did your family go next?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Ohio.  I forget the name of that, but I went to Felton Elementary [Felton Elementary School].  And so, so that I had spent just that year in Chicago [Illinois] and so I had gone through all of the second and third grade and now I'm fourth grade, okay.  And I'm in--am I fourth or fifth--I'm fourth grade.  So I'm at Felton Elementary in Columbus, Ohio.  We lived in a little house that was probably our first house on Leonard Avenue.  And we--I would go on Saturdays, I would take the bus across a bridge to the poultry house to get my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] the chicken and 'cause you could go to the poultry house then and get your meat.  And she loved chicken feet, so I would have to get this chicken and chicken feet and I would come back home.  My most memor- memorable event in Columbus was going to see Marian Anderson.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother--she was performing downtown probably at a con- I don't know if they had convention center, probably it was a city auditorium in those days, I don't know.  My mother did not have enough money for both of us to go.  So she bought a ticket for me.  And I remember I had on a long black with trimmed in white and some glitter dress, a little white fur, fur cape, so it must've been sort of winterish.  I remember I had those black patent leather shoes on.  And taking the bus at night in Columbus, Ohio riding downtown to see Marian Anderson.  Coming back out of the concert which must've been, what ten o'clock, and I think and getting back on the bus and coming home with the program and telling my mother all about Marian Anderson.
Speaker 1: And, and what did you think about, about her concert, it had to be amazing, so when you saw her for the first time what did you feel (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see to me it was natural, because my people always talked about who was who, who was doing what, Jackie Robinson, Booker T. Washington.  You know, I knew black history from my family.  And Marian Anderson was just a great voice.  I remember thinking she sounded so beautiful.  And then I had the whole thing about my mother [Campbell's biological mother, Viola Brice].  They never ever denied my mother's talents.  And so I understood that my mother was somewhat like this lady, that she had this beautiful voice also.  So to me it was natural, it was not, because children don't think in terms of whether you're black or you know, unless they have some exp- tell you the truth, nobody ever called me a nigger until I returned to Mississippi from--much later on, we'll get to that.  So I didn't have any--now I--I knew to be wary, I was taught that.  But I--I was--my grandfather [Willie Batton] taught me, I always get back to my grandfather.  My grandfather--first of all he told me I was not a Negro, I was not colored, I was a person of color and that I should always remember that black people were people of color no matter what they called us, we were people of color.  And so I never had any color problems and, and my mother and father [Cleophas Batton] always taught me to be--that I was not better than anyone else, but I was not less than anyone else.  So I grew up with a great sense of self-esteem.  You know, it was surprising to me in later years to hear Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and people talking about, what, what was the thing, not finding yourself, what was it, oh my gosh what was it.  It was knowing who you are or something.  I always knew who I--oh I am somebody.  That was interesting to me because I had always been somebody.  And I--I never thought of myself in terms of being less than anybody else, you know.  I never thought of my ter- myself in terms of being more than anybody else 'cause I was also taught that there but for the grace of God go I.  I had training in, you know, in black history, in the church and I just had a good foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so your mother and father taught you these things and then--about black history?
Speaker 2: And my grandfather.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, okay.
Story_ID: 670748
Speaker 1: Now what about church, what about religion?
Speaker 2: We are--I am probably fifth generation African Methodist Episcopal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And okay, and both your mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] and father [Cleophas Batton] were active or did you go to church?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Willie Batton].
Speaker 1: Oh your grandfather, but as you were living with your parents--
Speaker 2: Now being in the [U.S. military] service, you know, we weren't always near an A.M.E. church.  So my father was Lutheran, my mother was Baptist, I went to al- and on the base we had chaplains.  So (laughter) I guess that makes me kind of mixed up too.  So I had a well--and my, my mother is Catholic, so I never had any problem with religions.  You know, I was taught that people chose to worship as they saw fit.  But that all of us, you know, should believe and follow in Christ's footsteps and in--and believe in God.  So I come from a very religious background but it was not a sterile religion, it was a--being A.M.E., you know, being A.M.E. we have always been a socially active church from the founder Richard Allen up until now.  During the Civil Rights Movement, the A.M.E.'s were always there.  So that's my religious heritage.  I also appreciate other faiths because many times those were churches that I had to go to because I was not near an A.M.E. church.
Story_ID: 670749
Speaker 1: All right so, at Felton Elementary [Felton Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] fourth grade, we're going into the fifth grade and you were there for how long?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about that school or any teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I remember that I--I could do everything but tell time.  And I just couldn't learn how to tell time.  And I remember the teacher writing home to my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] telling her that I was an excellent student but for some reason I just couldn't learn how to tell time.  My mother taught me how to tell time that night with a shoe and a clock.  And of course now they would call that abuse.  But it taught me that you can learn what you think you can't learn (laughter).  So I went back and the next day the teacher was amazed 'cause I could tell time.
Speaker 1: Now at one point, you said that, you know, you have already learned to read before you went to school and now moving on, what are you reading now because before it was, you know, you had the Golden Books [Little Golden Books] and but what, what are you reading now.  You've already re- read Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], so--
Speaker 2: Well you know, you still have to go through what the schools give you, you know, you just add to it and it helps you be more informed about what they're teaching you, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And see my grandfather [Willie Batton] would, you know, he had these poems committed to memory that he would just recite, you know.  And my father [Cleophas Batton] and his, you know, all my family except me could sing.  And they would gather, you know, whenever they got together because they were all in different places, but the brother and the cousins and things and they would just have--they would just sing down, you know.  And we'd be on the front porch of my grandfather's house and everybody would be singing, you know.  And we--lost my thought.
Speaker 1: Well what other--you might not could sing, but did you have other talents?
Speaker 2: Drama, reading, and folks say I can sing, but you know, and I think I probably could have been a very good singer, but they would laugh at me and they would tell me, "You can't carry a tune," and they'd bring me a bucket.  But I always sang in the school choirs and the church choirs, but I had a hard time trying to do a solo.  And one reason was because I had this thing, I would change and sing whatever pitch the person next to me (laughter) was singing.  The only songs that I could sing straight through without messing up were the ones I wrote, made up myself.
Speaker 1: And did you do that a lot, make up songs?
Speaker 2: No not anymore, but I still write poetry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) once in a while.
Story_ID: 670750
Speaker 1: All right so when you leave Ohio, where does your family trav- go to next?
Speaker 2: I had to come back to Mississippi because my mother [Campbell's biological mother, Viola Brice] decided, somebody told her that since she had never signed the papers and sent them back in that my father [Cleophas Batton] was not divorced.  So I remember we took the--and this brings in the trains.  When we were going to Chicago [Illinois] we were riding the City of New Orleans, which was the train, except for the Panama Limited that you couldn't board if you were black in the South until you pass Cairo, Illinois.  But so we rode the City of New Orleans.  From Columbus, Ohio we came by train and it was a famous train, but I can't remember the name of it.  I wanna call it the silver flyer, but I'm not--I'm not sure that's the name.  In those days, one dressed up to ride the train.  You wore suits and dresses and you know, it was--you saw people getting off the train in their furs, you know, with their luggage and it was all very, very, very sophisticated.  I remember that we changed trains, I think, in Cincinnati [Ohio] and I loved comic books.  And so my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] had told me to stay right by her and I was usually a very obedient kid, but I saw this comic book stand, I remember this, and I went over to it and was picking out comic books.  And my mother looked around and couldn't find me and I heard this shrill shriek and it was my mother, "Ruth Ann [HistoryMaker Ruth Campbell]."  So I remember that in the train station.  Of course, I got my--she did buy the comic books after talking about me.  And we got on the new train and we came into New Orleans [Louisiana] because their best friends lived in New Orleans.  And this was Sarah [ph.], she had been another Sweetheart of Rhythm [International Sweethearts of Rhythm] and she and her husband, Emile [ph.], was the chief chef at Dooky Chase [Dooky Chase's Restaurant].  Dooky Chase, at that time, was one of the most fabulous white [sic.] restaurants in New Orleans.  So, we came there to visit them and we stayed with them a couple of days and then my mother and I took the train, which now is the City of New Orleans to Mississippi for me to spend the summer with my grandparents [Mary Davis Batton and Willie Batton].  And at the end of the summer, I boarded the train back to New Orleans, we were getting ready to go back to Columbus, Ohio and my dad called.  And I remember hearing my mother crying talking about, "What are you talking about?"  And I remember her saying, "I don't--I can't leave her down here, she doesn't need to be down here.  How am I going to explain to her that she has to go back out in the country?"  And you know, and I can--what in the world, 'cause I was a good size girl now, you know, I was going into the fifth, right, I was going into fifth grade.  And anyway, the reason was that my birth mother had discovered that she could get all of the pay that had gone to my mother and me.  And see what my dad did, without thinking, he never sent me a check, he sent all the money to mother, and there was no reason to have two checks going to the same house.  So he had to pay back all the money that he collected in the [U.S. military] service from the time he went into the service until then to my birth mother, so they had no money.  And I had to come back to Mississippi.  So mother--but now, now I learned all this later, listening, you know how children listen and my mother didn't tell me that.  What mother told me was that daddy was not going to be able to stay where he was and they were gonna have to look for a new house and as soon as they got a new house and all of this they would come and get me.  Okay, but I knew not too long after that the whole story.
Story_ID: 670751
Speaker 1: Now I come back to Mississippi and I am--fifth grade.  This is the second time I've seen my birth mother [Viola Brice].  She comes through maybe the summer after my fifth grade year and my grandfather [Willie Batton] has moved to another place, but she found us some way and she gave me a quarter.  And when she left, I threw it away.  I wanted nothing to do with her, because a funny thing about children when--some children when they are adopted, mother was mother.  I didn't know who this woman was and I did not like her at all at that point.  So, I stayed in Mississippi, I had to end up staying two years for them to get back on their feet.  At this point, my dad's [Cleophas Batton] going to Korea.  And I was so far advanced 'til--when I finished the fifth grade I was promoted to seventh.  And I finished the seventh grade here in Mississippi, and then they came to get me and wow we had a car, we had our own car which was like a '49 [1949] Chevrolet, lime green.  Oh that thing was beautiful.  Of course now I was accustomed to cars 'cause my godfather who was a minister, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, had a car even when I was a little child and we used to go with him to places.  But anyway, they came and probably the only time my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] went out of the State of Mississippi, though she traveled all over Mississippi, she went to--we went to Virginia.  Daddy was at--stationed out of Langley Field [Langley Air Force Base, Virginia].  And he, he, let me see, he had come back from Korea--no he was still in Korea, and--'cause we were there alone, my grandmother, my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] and me.  And I went to the eighth grade, 'cause remember I skipped the sixth grade, so I was fifth and seventh in Mississippi.  I went to eighth grade.  I attended George Pearley Phenix High School [George P. Phenix High School] on Hampton Institute campus [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] for the eighth grade.  We lived right off of Shell Avenue [sic. Shell Road].  And the thing I remember most about Virginia was the cherry blossoms, they were so beautiful.  And the school and being on Hampton Institute campus, though I don't quite think I knew the significance of being at that school.  But I loved it and I was very sorry to have to leave it.
Speaker 2: Were you there for one year?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, one year--
Speaker 2: But what--
Speaker 1: --the eighth grade.
Speaker 2: But in the seventh grade what school did you attend in the seventh grade?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: I was still in Mississippi remember.
Speaker 2: I know, but what was the name of the school?
Speaker 1: Orange Hill [Orange Hill School (ph.)], same school.  Same school I went to when I was a little bitty girl, Orange Hill.  And they still were just going to the eighth grade.  But I didn't go to the eighth grade 'cause I was back out of Mississippi in Virginia.
Speaker 2: Right, but in the seventh grade, was it still a one room school with all the--
Speaker 1: Still one room school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with all the grades in one room?
Speaker 1: There was another teacher though, I don't remember who the teacher was--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but it was another teacher.
Story_ID: 670752
Speaker 1: Oh let me tell you though.  In that time movies had come to the country when I was there.  And what they did was they would bring a big tent to the country store and they would put up this big tent and they would show movies.  See I was accustomed to movies 'cause I had gone to the movies in the cities.  But they would bring me and they'd have all these benches, no backs to them, and believe it or not it wasn't segregated.  People just sat.  Well children all sat in one area and other folk, you know, and the men sat, you know, my [paternal] grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] never went, she just wasn't into that.  But my grandfather and the men, black and white, they would sit around and they'd ta- 'cause they had to discuss the movie, see.  'Cause they were mostly Westerns, you know, (pause) Gene Autry, oh I can't remember all those movies, but it was always somebody shooting, it was cowboy movies.  So they would bring--and they would come on Saturd- on Saturday evening, Saturday night.  And my grandfather and I would walk up to the general store and watch the movies and you got to get a stage plank which was a cookie that they called a stage plank.  You could get drinks and the drinks would be in a tub filed with ice, best drinks in the world, bottles.  And so anyway, that was my first adventure with movies in the South in Mississippi.  One other thing happened while I was here during that time.  My--I was sitting on the porch and this white man came up, I don't know who he was, he was riding on a horse I remember.  And he said, "Bill [Willie Batton]," he said, "I see you have this girl here," and my granddaddy said, "What girl?"  He says, "You're talking about my granddaughter?"  He said, "Yeah." "Why?"  He said, "Well you know I was thinking, you know," he said, "my wife had, just had a baby and she needs some help and I was wondering if maybe you might like her to make a little money, she'd come help out my wife."  (Laughter) My granddaddy looked at him and said, "She doesn't help me out so why would I let her come help your wife out?"  He said, "She doesn't go to the field."  He said, "She does exactly what she's doing now, play."  And that was his thing, I never--I would go to the field with them.  I remember when I was little I would ride on the cotton sack while they picked the cotton or I would lay on a pallet and read a book under a shade tree.  But he never allowed me to pick cotton or chop cotton that was not for me.  Now I have to tell you this.  My father [Cleophas Batton] was the only one he sent to school.  He did not send his older boys because he thought that with their temperament they would be incapable of living in the South without being hurt if they had the education that he--he, himself had.  But he thought things had changed enough when my father came along that he sent my father to school.  And now I digress because I need to talk about my father going to Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 670753
Speaker 1: You were going to tell me about your father [Cleophas Batton] at Piney Woods [Piney Woods Country Life School, Piney Woods, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well my father said that one day he was plowing a field and he thought to himself I am tired of looking at the south end of a horse going north, and he walked out of the field and told my granddaddy [Willie Batton], "I can't do this anymore."  And so he had to go to school.  My granddaddy decided to send him to Piney Woods and at that time, to go to Piney Woods he had to go by horse and wagon to Yazoo City [Mississippi], catch the train and come to Braxton, Mississippi, get off the train and a truck would pick them up in Braxton and take them to Piney Woods.  Amazing, it's amazing.
Story_ID: 670754
Speaker 1: Let's go back to your schooling in--
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: You're in Virginia and you do that year at Hampton [George P. Phenix High School, Hampton, Virginia] and so what, what happens next for the ninth grade?
Speaker 2: We left Virginia at the end of my eighth grade year and we went to Omaha, Nebraska.  We came back through Mississippi, dropped my grandmother [Mary Davis Batton] off.  Well actually my father [Cleophas Batton] wanted to pick up my grandfather [Willie Batton] up and have them come and live with us, but he had gotten to the age where didn't wanna go.  So we went back to--I mean we, we left my grandmother with my grandfather and we went to Omaha, Nebraska.  And at Omaha--in Omaha, Nebraska the first school I attended was Omaha Technical [Technical High School] and we didn't know anything about the schools.  So Omaha Technical was a very good vocational school, it was very good academically too, but it was in an area of the city that was very close to downtown, the stockyards in maybe less, not as nice an area, you know, then as, as he wanted to live in.  So I went there only one year, my ninth grade year.  But I had an excellent education at Omaha Tech.  And the only time I ever tried to shoot hooky I did at Tech.  And it didn't bode well.  My mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] worked at Goldstein Chapman's [Goldstein Chapman Company] which was a leading department store in Omaha at that time, which was downtown.  I decided well, my friends urged me and me being what twelve, twelve--twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen--thirteen.  We were gonna shoot hooky on this particular class, go down on 24th Street to the soda parlor and get a malt and then make it back in time for the next class.  And we did that, and when we finished the malt I opened the door and walked into my mother, not good.  Why she was at that part of town, that part of the day I have no utter idea.  But I do remember her purse descending on my head.  And my mother's a little bit--my daddy loved little women, both of my mothers are little.  And (laughter) she's this little bitty woman but she was beating me to death with this purse.  And then the kids were laughing, so she turned around and started beating them with her purse and sent all of us back to school.  That was a memory.  Anyway I went to Tech for that one year this was the first time I was introduced to something called a rumble.  A rumble is a street fight and I didn't know anything about rumbles and I didn't know anything about gangs.  And--but there were gangs and I remember the first fight I had ever been in was at Tech.  For some reason these girls did not like me.  And I came out of class one day and they jumped me, it was about five of them.  But one thing my daddy had always told me about fighting is something I taught my children.  He said, "If you're ever attacked by more than one person you know you cannot beat them all.  So you choose the weakest one and no matter how hard or how many people are hitting you, you just keep pounding on that weak one."  He said, "And he will scream so they will stop," and it worked.  And nobody jumped on me again, that's my fight history.
Story_ID: 670755
Speaker 1: So anyway, the next year I went to Omaha North High [Omaha North High School; Omaha North High Magnet School, Omaha, Nebraska] which was because we had moved into North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], which now incredibly is a, really kind of a slum area.  But I went back to Omaha [Nebraska] in 2012 and my house is still there.  Nothing beside it.  We lived behind Bob Gibson who's a famous Cardinal player.  Is it the Cardinals, St. Louis Cardinals, he played with the St. Louis Cardinals.  His sister and I were very good friends, our fences backed up to each other.  And we--2518 Emmet Street was still standing.  All the other houses on that block were gone.  They had an interstate [North Omaha Freeway; U.S. Route 75] coming through there.  I remember that my sixteenth birthday party was at Fontenelle Park in Omaha.  But I'll tell you about Omaha North.  We were--I was one of maybe five to ten black students in that school at that time.  It was one of the reasons why I wanted everything to be desegregated except the schools.  Now I was treated very nicely 'cause I was what they called smart.  But children who were not so smart tended to be overlooked and I think that still happens.  So I went to Omaha North.  The only incident I had at Omaha North was in--well we had two.  When I was at Omaha Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], the Omaha school system did not want--my daddy [Cleophas Batton] was at Offutt Air Force Base [Nebraska] or SAC [Strategic Air Command] headquarters.  They didn't want the [U.S.] Armed Forces children in their public schools because they said we were too much trouble because we were entering and leaving at all times of the year.  General LeMay [Curtis LeMay] was at that time head of SAC.  And they wanted to give him an old dilapidated school and have all the armed services children go to that school.  And I remember General LeMay's response, and I paraphrase was--oh they also didn't like the sound of the jets going over their houses, going through the sound barrier.  But his response was, "If these men and women and their children can come into Omaha to protect you and this country, you can stand the noise and you can stand their children, and my children will not go to any dilapidated school, they will stay in the Omaha district [Omaha School District; Omaha Public Schools]," and we did.  Now the only racial thing that happened to me was, I was basically an A student, A, B, seldom Cs.  My mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton], for some reason, was adverse to Cs.  She thought--she and my dad thought that if you just sat in class and listened you could make a C.  If you tried a little bit you could make a B.  If you work really hard you could make an A.  So, you know, we didn't even discuss Ds and Fs (laughter).  But I had this one teacher in typing, she was new that year and this may have been my tenth grade year, 'cause tenth and eleventh I was at North.  She came from Georgia and she didn't like me.  I was the only black person in her class, but she just--I got--what did I get a D or a C, but I remember I sat on the steps I was scared to go home.  And so finally I went home and I gave my parents my card and they were terribly upset.  They were all over me fussing and I said, "She doesn't like me, and I think she doesn't like me because I'm black."  Well my mother's attitude was, doesn't matter if people don't like you because you're black, but if you have been doing everything you're supposed to be doing she couldn't take it away from me.  I said, "But she said that I didn't turn in papers that I knew I turned in, they were not in my folder when I got my folder back."  Now, I did not know that my mother went up there, she never told me that 'til later years, I was grown.  But when I went back to school I remember the teacher saying to me--well no my mother had told me, "You take a sheet of paper every time you turn in an assignment to her, I want it written down and I want her signature and you bring that back to me."  And evidently she told her that, because I told her what my mother said and she just had this grimace on her face but she signed it and she gave it back to me.  And my grades came up, amazingly, and so I didn't have to worry with that anymore.  In the eleventh grade year, at the end of that year, I turned sixteen.
Story_ID: 670756
Speaker 1: Okay so we're, we're in 1953 now?
Speaker 2: That would've been in 1965.
Speaker 1: No, we're we gotta be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the middle of that year, at the end of the school year [at Omaha North High School; Omaha North High Magnet School, Omaha, Nebraska] I turned sixteen.
Speaker 1: Well it would've been nineteen fifty--'55 [1955].
Speaker 2: What did I say '65 [1965], I'm sorry, 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my dad [Cleophas Batton] was now on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], so we were leaving for Okinawa.  And we left Omaha the summer of 1955, took the train to Chicago [Illinois] on to Fort Mason in San Francisco [California] where we were to board the D.I. Sultan [USNS General Daniel I. Sultan] and I still remember the name of the ship, which was really a true carrier that had been converted into a ship to transport families to the Far East.  And in Fort Mason we went through this training where we were taught we were to be little ambassadors to the United States.  Whatever we did overseas would impact heavily on what people thought of the United States.  We were quasi attached to the [U.S.] military and so we had to be on our Ps and Qs, and just leaders and all this good stuff to make us be good citizens while we were overseas.  And we boarded the D.I. Sultan and our first stop was supposed to be Hawaii; however, we didn't stop in Hawaii because we ran into a typhoon.  It was my first experience with a really bad storm.  I did well being on the ship, my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] didn't.  She was throwing up and being sick.  But in the--in the storm, I remember everybody had to stay below deck and we could see through the porthole and the ship, to survive in that kind of water, has to ride the waves.  You have to go up the wave and come down, and when you coming down you're coming down in a trough and you can see this huge wave that you've got to climb up next like a mountain.  We thought it was great fun, the teenagers thought it was great fun, you know.  Our parents didn't think it was fun at all and we didn't have enough sense to know it was not fun, and I'm sure the, the captain didn't think it was fun either.  But because of that typhoon we had to move away from Hawaii, I guess further out to sea and so we didn't stop there.
Story_ID: 670757
Speaker 1: So our first stop was, at that time, Taipei, Taiwan.  And it was still then under the--it was still a sovereign country, was not under the Chinese, it was Formosa, that's right.  And we had land leave and we could leave the bus and we could go into the village, and we had a tour.  We went to the Sun King's Palace [ph.], we went into the village, we got off the bus and all at once these people ganged us and they were rubbing our skins and, and looking at their hands, and so finally one of the [U.S.] Navy guys, a sailor came up and told us, "Don't be afraid but you are the first black Americans they have seen," there wasn't that many of us on the ship, most of them were white.  But those of us who, who were black were just being (gesture) (laughter).  And the reason they were rubbing us was because they thought it would come off.  So that was--that was new to me, and I thought it was to, to, to me that was really kind of strange, they didn't know anything about dark skinned people.  They weren't exactly light themselves (laughter), but anyway.
Speaker 2: How many--how many people were on this--on this ship with you?
Speaker 1: I'm sure there were hu- there was probably several hundred, you know.  As for teenagers, oh I don't think there were that many teenagers.  There were no blacks and, and the thing was in those days, servicemen didn't take their wives and families with them too much.  One reason was because the women didn't wanna go I understand.  They were afraid to go.  So we were kind of unique, my mom [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] and I in the '50s [1950s], you know.  I mean there were others, you know, but not that many.  And I don't remember any blacks on that ship, any tee- any other--there may have been some black co- black women on the ship, but I don't remember any other black teenagers on the ship other than myself.  And while I was on the ship, my grandfather [Willie Batton] died.  So I did not get to go to his funeral, in fact I didn't know he had died.  But I did have a dream and I dreamed that I, I came home to Mississippi and I saw everybody and I kept asking, "Where's Papa, where's Papa?"  And I couldn't find him, I looked everywhere and I couldn't find him and it was just a strange dream.  But when we did finally arrive in--on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan] and we got off the ship and got home, my dad [Cleophas Batton] told me that my grandfather had passed and they had had his funeral while we were at sea.  But after we left Taiwan we stopped in Japan, in Tokyo and we went to Yo--
Story_ID: 670758
Speaker 1: We stopped in Japan and we docked at Tokyo [Japan], so we had a little time in Tokyo and we went to Yo- Yoshihama [Japan] where we had some time.  And basically my memory is sort of a blur because we didn't have as much time there as we had on Formosa.  And but I remember the--the, you know, the houses and the landsca- everything was so new and, and different from anything I had ever experienced, so I was pretty much in awe of everything that I saw.  And then we had the final leg of the journey where we docked in Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], and which was to be my home for--until--for two years, three years, two years I guess.  And--the thing that--and I don't know why because we, we, we had the rickshaws in Japan, but I don't know why I don't remember a smell in Japan, but I remember the smell on Okinawa when we got off the boat was god awful.  And that was because they had the honey pots, and the honey pots are buckets of waste, this as nice as I can say it, and they, they carry it on their shoulders because they're carrying it to fertilize, I guess, places.  And then there were the rickshaws and then there were all these people speaking Japanese.  And the island was so beautiful, verdant and green and just beautiful.  It was warm and we had a beautiful little white stucco house with a red tile roof and we lived in a place called Awase Meadows that may not be there now.  And my dad [Cleophas Batton] was stationed at Kadena [Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan], later we would move to Kadena to--on camp- on base housing.  But at the moment we were living dow- we were living at Awase Meadows, and I attended Kadena American military dependent high school [Kadena High School, Okinawa, Japan].
Speaker 2: So now this is a school that is operated by the United States right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All of our teachers were probably master's degree because they were mostly retired and had chosen to come to Okinawa to teach.  We went to school, now I understand now my nephew is there that they have a huge modern high school.  But we went to school in Quonset huts right on the beach so that between classes or in study hall if the teachers weren't watching we'd slip out and go wade in the ocean and come back to class.  I was the only black in my class and I brought my yearbook, we can see some pictures of that whenever we get around to that.  And I was twelfth grade, a senior.
Story_ID: 670759
Speaker 1: My best friends were Filipino.  They ran the--their father owned the only, I guess, pharmacy in the village or on the base [Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan], I don't really know.  But, but he was a pharmacist, Imelda [ph.] and Fai Sunga [ph.], and Gloria [ph.], Gloria was the baby, Imelda was the middle, Fai was the oldest.  And I really, really struggled with Imelda Marcos 'cause I could never tell whether she was my Imelda or not.  'Cause when I would see pictures, you know, I would see that resemblance, but that could just be Filipino resemblance you know.  But anyway, we were very good friends and we would go from house to house.  My other friends, of course, were white.  One of my class--well she was a year behind us I believe, was General Moore's [ph.] daughter, Mary Moore [ph.].  The only civilian was Larry Kelly [ph.] and I don't know why his father was there, I don't know what they were doing, but they were civilian.  Larry was the only person who had a car, we would all pile into the car.  We (pause) spent a lot of time in the water, but I never learned to swim and I regret it to this day because June--what was her last name, wanted to teach us and did teach a lot of students--a lot of the kids.  She had taught the first frogmen.  My problem was hair.  That was during the time when people didn't wear Afros, they didn't wear wigs, and so you had to wash your hair, dry it, press it with a hot iron, curl it with the hot curlers and hot irons went on the stove, curl it with the hot curlers and so forth which took hours.  Well that meant that if I went swimming, I could do nothing the rest of the day with my friends.  So they decided--they didn't believe it so they came home with me to see this process.  And they were amazed because nobody had nappy hair but me (laughter).  But they got to see the whole process and so we all decided that I could get in the water on a water raft or in a tube, but I could not swim (laughter) 'cause that messed everything up.  So that's why I don't swim, but I wish, wish now that I had just gotten my hair messed up.  But you know, that wasn't the time, it wasn't--it was before the Afros, before the wig.  It was, you know, and even though you got the swimming cap it really didn't keep your hair from getting wet, so that was that.  And we had, and I came up during the time when they had teen centers, you know, kids went to teen centers where they could dance, play cards, play table pool or whatever and skate.  And we had a teen center there.  So I remember go (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 670760
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I wanted to ask you a question about your father [Cleophas Batton], what rank is your father now in--
Speaker 2: My father's deceased, his highest rank was master sergeant.
Speaker 1: At--no at that time, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I meant at that time he was still alive (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He made warrant officer, but wouldn't take it because--I'm trying--something about, I can't remember now why he would--he didn't wanna take the warrant officer.  I think it got him out of the arena of doing things.  My father was very much interested in being active and he was--he started off as a cook, he ended up as an elec- electronics person.  In fact when he retired from Vietnam, he worked for Bell Helicopter [Bell Helicopter Textron Inc.].  And--but I'm getting ahead of myself, that's another whole story.  But anyway back to Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan].  So we--(pause) several stories I guess I wanna tell about that.  We were very close friends.  I remember my homecoming teacher told me that she thought I had been born fifty years too soon, never understood what that meant until now.  And, but I don't think so.  I think I came along at the time I was supposed to.  I, I like to think I was an agent of change and that I affected change in many ways with many different people across different stratifications.  But, we wanted to do a--our senior play was going to be, what was the name of that, 'Our Miss Brooks' [Christopher Sergel].  The leading characters was of course a girl and a boy.  I was chosen for the girl, the boy of course had to be white.  Everybody was fine with this.  Some parent somewhere had a fit.  Said that, you know, no they just couldn't go along with that and it was a big, big to do which, you know, we didn't know much about.  But they came back and they told us that 'cause some parents objected to having a black and a white together as dating in the play that we couldn't do Our Miss--that--that we--one of--I would have to give up the role of, I guess it was Miss Brooks, anyway.  So my class voted then that we wouldn't do the play, that we would do our own skit, which they never should've let us do.  And as a result we did and we probably did more in the skit then we would've done in 'Our Miss Brooks.'  So we had (laughter) our way anyway.  The other thing was the senior prom.  There was nobody to go with me.  The only other boy--the only other black was a--in high school was a boy in the tenth grade which somebody kowtowed to go with me.  My partner, my best friend was white boy who was the colonel's son.  But that--they weren't gonna accept that so I took this little boy to the prom.  After the prom, we took him home and all of us went on to party (laughter).  Children, I think, have very little, if they are not prejudiced at birth or soon thereafter have very little concern about race, you know.
Speaker 1: So even living in Japan during this time because this was a, a school, you know, run by the [U.S.] Department of Defense, it still was like you were living in the United States and segregation was still a big part of, of life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in the school [Kadena High School, Okinawa, Japan].
Speaker 1: Not in the school?
Speaker 2: It was with the parents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the base [Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, Japan].  Some of the parents, I guess, objected.  You know, the school didn't object, it was the parents who objected when their kids came home and said, you know, and we never were told, you know, who those parents were, naturally.  And so no it was not the school, the school had okayed it, they were quite, quite well with it.  One of the things that--and I think this is when I--my eyes were first opened to America.  We were chosen as host and hostess, our senior class, for Cunard Lines.  Cunard was then and still is to this day, I guess, one of the major tourist lines for very wealthy tourists, people who are going around the world and this sort of thing.  And we were, they were putting in to Okinawa and we were to host them.  And this was the first time I was introduced to the ugly American.
Story_ID: 670761
Speaker 1: Okay, and so now tell me how you were introduced to ugly America?
Speaker 2: We are--were to be the hosts on the bus.  And they came off the bus, they were very wealthy, very privileged people, got on the buses.  We had been told that they could take pictures in certain areas.  They could not take any pictures of military establishments, on the bases and that if so, we were supposed to confiscate the film.  If they would not give us the film, we would have to call the MPs [military police] and they would get the film.  We were to take them throughout Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], all around.  And so the first thing that happened, we got on the bus and there were two of us on each bus, and I've forgotten who was on the bus with me, but, but of course they were white.  And so the immediate--the immediate concern was me.  They wanted to know how did I learn to speak English so well.  And I said, "I beg your pardon."  They said, "Well you speak English so well for an Okinawan."  I said, "I'm not an Okinawan, I'm an American," and of course that was kind of a pause.  I said, "And I learned to speak English like every other American youngster," you know.  Then they wanted to know why I was there.  Now we're--they're supposed to be touring.  So I told them and some of them had this look of utter disbelief on their faces.  Others were beaming and--but we had also, we told them that--we told them about the cameras.  We told them that, "We're gonna take you into some of the villages and that you are--will be able to shop but we're gonna stop you at a place where you change your money to yen, because you cannot give them American currency.  And we ask you not to yell at people, because yelling at them is only gonna make them retreat into Japanese because they--if they understand they are insulted.  If they don't understand, they're not gonna understand by your yelling at them."  Well, very first stop, they got their yen and I guess some of them didn't get enough or didn't change currency.  So the very first stop, we had to stop somebody from buying something 'cause they wanted to use American money.  We could not give the Okinawans American currency, it's against the law, you know.  I think eighteen hundred yen was, at that time--wait a minute let me see, that may have been the value of a dollar, I'm not sure.  And so the trade would've been so one sided, plus they weren't supposed to have it in the first place.  So we had to, to stop, we had to call the MPs about that.  And then the next thing we had with all the yelling.  And the Okinawans have a saying, wakaranai.  Wakaranai means I don't understand what you're saying; they were lying.  They understood, a lot of them understood what they were saying but because you were yelling at me, I'm gonna pretend like I don't understand what you're saying because you have insulted me and I'm not going to participate with you.  So, you know, we spent a lot of time dealing with them, trying to get them not to yell at the, at the native Okinawans.  Then the next thing we started going on the fa- base facilities into restrictive areas that they could see but not film.  They filmed.  I asked for the camera (shakes head), "May I have your film," (shakes head), who was I to ask for their film.  So we--I had to call the MPs.  The MPs were not as nice as I was.  They took the whole camera.  (Laughter) All I wanted was the film.  So that was my introduction to the ugly American.
Speaker 1: What was it that they weren't supposed to--what were they looking at that they didn't want them to take pictures of?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  I don't know if they were looking at the jets, if they were looking at--I don't know what.  I mean we were taking them past jets and past different military equipment and they were not to, to, to photograph it.  And I don't know why except that maybe they thought somebody on there may have not been who they were supposed to be and would have pictures of our stuff, you know.  But anyway, they were not allowed to--because you know during that time we had all kinds of suspicions of everybody in the world and at that time, maybe this time too.  So, they could not do that and they had lost their cameras, and of course the government did not give them back.
Story_ID: 670762
Speaker 1: Talk to me about Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], about what you--were you able to just go anywhere you wanted to go on the island (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anywhere we wanted to go we could even ride--I even learned, well actually I spoke pretty good Japanese by the time I left.  Now I don't remember any of it because what you don't use you lose.  And I probably don't remember anything but (speaks Japanese), I probably can count ichi, ni, san, yon, go, roku, shichi.  You know, some few little things like that.  But I had learned enough to even read the buses and you could take the, the Okinawan buses and go from one base to another.  Like we--we'd leave Kadena and go to Sukiran [Camp Sukiran, Japan], which was I think at that time, I don't know if it was Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] or [U.S.] Army.  And so you could go mostly anywhere.  We had one uprising that I remember that we were a part of.  We were coming from the teen club and at this point we had moved on Kadena Air Base [Okinawa, Japan], 1407 Stillwell Park, Kadena Air Base.  And we were coming from the teens--teen center.  And all of a sudden there was this push of people, it was an anti-American riot and they started rocking the car, you know, 'cause we had to stop we couldn't get through.  And I heard somebody say, "American baby-sans," and all of a sudden out of this crowd came sailors and Marines and soldiers and [U.S.] Air Force folk, and they surrounded this car and they pushed people back and we had armed guard into the base.  And I don't remember now what the uprising was about, but I do remember we were terrified there for a minute.  They were telling us to go home, down with Americans and you know this sort of thing.  And my--one of my most beautiful memories from Okinawa was being at White Beach, which is really to the northern end, I believe, of the island.  And it's up on a, you can go up on a high bluff and you can look down at the sea.  And we were up there one day and the [U.S.] 7th Fleet came in and if you wanna feel pride, is to watch a fleet of [U.S.] Navy ships move into an area.  I mean it's just, the ships looked white, the water was blue, the day was golden, the sky was azure, it was just, I mean, I don't think I've ever had a more patriotic moment than see those ships coming in.  It was like, problems, we're here.  And they came in and we got to go on board one of the ships.  And you won't--this is incredible, we went on the ship and we got to tour the ship, and the sailors were giving the kids their caps, the girls, their caps.  One sailor, American black gave me his cap.  I met him again years later, he remembered me, I didn't remember him, at Jackson State University [Jackson, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: That's, that's amazing (laughter).  That's amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's amazing.
Story_ID: 670763
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the graduation [from Kadena High School, Okinawa, Japan] and about the prom?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I told you about the prom, we went to the prom and I had this made up escort (laughter) to the prom and then when we left the prom we dropped him off and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: --we went on to somebody's house and had a party.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But at graduation (laughter), and I told you about the play, we did our own skit.  At graduation the funniest thing I remember is because I'm so tall, you know, I was sort of towards the back and I, I was probably on the last row where I usually am, and I remember coming out of graduation saying to my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton], "Mom could you see me?"  And mother says, "Could I see you baby, you the only black person on the stage," (laughter), "how could I not see you, everybody else saw you."  So, that was--but that shows you how innocent of race, you know.  It was the idea that I was in the back, so could she see me.  Another incident when I was on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], we were having a beach party.  And so mother told me--took me to get a new swimsuit and I would have nothing but white.  It had a little black thing here and the rest of the suit was white.  She said, "You don't want that suit."  Unh-uh, had to have this suit.  And I, I, I did tell you, you know, they would pull me on the raft, I would get in an inner tube, or I would--one of the guy's father's had a boat, a yacht like and we would go out on that and sometimes I would just stay on that and read a book while they would be round swimming.  And in one instance and I'll get back to the swimsuit, now I was sitting up there and they were in the water swimming, they'd come and maybe use the bathroom or get a drink.  So I saw this thing going around the boat, and you know, it happened one of the guys came up and I said, "You know what," I said, "there's this fish that keeps swimming around the boat." I said, "But I never see anything but it's tail."  And he said, "Fish, where?"  And at that time I said, "Oh look it's over there."  He goes, "Shark," and dives right in the water, gets everybody out of the water, he says, "That's a shark Ruth [HistoryMaker Ruth Campbell], that's a shark," (laughter).  "You're gonna let us get eaten by a shark."  But anyway we all had fun with that.  But I was the only one on the boat, you know, and I guess if it had come any closer and I could've seen it, well I know if I could've seen it and knew it was a shark I would've called them.  But back to my swimsuit.  So I get this white swim- swimsuit.  I'm dark, okay.  I get in the water, I come out of the water, my swimsuit is nude (laughter), because white on black skin turns nude when it gets wet.  So every- you know, everybody had a kick, I was mortified.  My mother said, "I told you not to get the suit."  She said, "And since I told you not, I bought this one for you."  So I had another suit.  But she just--.  My parents believed in letting you learn a lesson, and my grandparents [Campbell's paternal grandparents, Mary Davis Batton and Willie Batton] too.  So that was another thing that was a kind of fun experience.
Story_ID: 670764
Speaker 1: I was also, I think, I remember the first black to be the member of the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] court of honor at their annual Marine Day.  So I think that was my first experience of being a first, though I guess I've been--I had been a first in some things and I just didn't realize I was the first, you know.  And that was really lovely, you know, we got to go out and I had my gown on and it made the black servicemen so happy.  As a matter of fact, I never got more money in my life then I got on Okinawa [Okinawa Island, Japan], because every time the grades would come out I would always have A's and Bs, and servicemen would either give my father [Cleophas Batton] money or if they saw me at the PX [post exchange] or somewhere they gave me money for A's and Bs.  And so I always had a stash of money at grade--when the grades came out.  And my father said, you know, they were just spoiling me.  Now my mother [Campbell's stepmother, Thelma Perkins Batton] and father didn't spoil me though.  We had a maid and I must tell you this, her name was Tomiko [ph.].  And my mother said that I had to help Tomiko.  I had to help her at the house, I still had to wash dishes, I had to clean my room, I had to help her with washing and other sort of things.  So my question to her was, well why do I have to do this, nobody else on the island, none of the other kids have to do work, everybody has a maid.  Well everybody had a maid 'cause the maids were so cheap.  My mother told me, she said, "You have never had a maid in your life.  When we leave Okinawa you will never have a maid again in your life.  There is no need of you starting to think that there's somebody that's gonna clean up after you everywhere you go.  It's not gonna happen.  You're gonna do just what you did before you came to Okinawa, not as much, but you're gonna learn to take care of yourself just as you did then."  Course my mother is gone now and I have a housekeeper, every two weeks (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 670765
Speaker 1: What you did not tell me was what--do you remember what the skit was about [at Kadena High School, Okinawa, Japan]?
Speaker 2: What the--?
Speaker 1: Since y'all--yeah, the skit, because you didn't do 'Our Miss Brooks' [Christopher Sergel] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really don't but I knew it had something to do with a couple and he and I were still a couple.  And we wrote it, but I don't remember (laughter).  I don't.  It probably was not too far from 'Our Miss Brooks' (laughter).  But I remember we did the skit and everybody enjoyed it and you know, if there were some rumblings about it afterwards we didn't hear it and we didn't care.  You know, and--you know, some of our teachers were laughing--somebody at the door.  Some of our teachers were laughing, we could see them laughing over in the corner because we did our skit the way we wanted to do it and we paired up people the way we wanted to pair them up--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
