Story_ID: 64745
Speaker 1: Could you give me your name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My name is Earlean Collins, E-A-R-L-E-A-N C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Your birthdate please.
Speaker 2: I don't give my birthdate, no.
Speaker 1: Day? Just day and month?
Speaker 2: September 4.
Speaker 1: Birthplace?
Speaker 2: Rolling Fork, Mississippi.  That's the delta of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: R-O-L-L-I-N-G F-O-R-K.
Story_ID: 64746
Speaker 1: Can you give me your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Without vision people will perish.
Speaker 1: Why is that your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess because I believe in it.  I always considered myself to be a visionary.  I think you have to open up your mind and look to the future in order to have an understanding of what's around you and where you want to--how you want to move to the next level.  Because I believe life is a continuance and so is progress.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Up until, I would say, I retired, I didn't really have a favorite food.  I enjoyed a variety of foods; vegetables, fruits.  Probably now I would say vegetables and fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue, black--that beautiful green they have out now.  I like that.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Whenever the temperature is in the 70s, low 70s.
Speaker 1: And when you do get a vacation, where is your favorite place to land?
Speaker 2: Well, I've done extensive traveling around the world.  And the place that I truly enjoyed with a lot of beauty it was in Mexico in (unclear) Oaxaca on the Pacific Ocean.  One of--the second largest golf course in the world.  And I enjoy it there.  Lot of villas.  Beautiful flowers.  I, I just enjoy it.  And I've been to a lot of places, but I do like--
Speaker 1: Do you golf?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your handicap?
Speaker 2: Well, I won't tell.  I'm not that good.  And I've been off for a whole year.  In, in fact, I don't even know what I, you know, what I do.  I haven't been golfing very long though.  It's like two, three years.  Two and a half years, yeah.
Story_ID: 64747
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Can you name your parents for us and spell their names?  Tell us where they're from?
Speaker 2: They're both deceased.  Does it matter?  You want them, even being de-?  My father's name was Charlie Branch and my mother's name was Carrie Branch.  Yeah.  My mother's maiden name was Glasper.
Speaker 1: And they're both from Rolling Fork [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: My father was, I think it was, from Louisiana.  My father was much older than my mother--much, much older.  And my mother was from, I think she was around Cary or someplace like that in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your siblings--how many and what is their birth order, name and birth order?
Speaker 2: I had a very strange family.  Three sets of us, because my father being much older than my mother, he had four grown children.  And the sec--the third--the second one was the same age as my mother, and she was a good friend.  So two boys and two girls on my father's side.  And then my mother married and--my father and she had eight children.  And then my father died and she re-married and had two children.  So that's three sets, fourteen.  Seven girls and seven boys to the fourteen.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 64748
Speaker 1: Okay--do you want to name the fourteen or do you just want to tell us where in the fourteen you fall?
Speaker 2: In the middle.  I fall in the middle, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it like growing up in the Branch--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but actually I don't think we had--my mother [Cary Branch] had more than--the largest number at home had to be probably five at one time, six in the household.  Yeah, because the others were grown and moved out.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Tell me, what is the most vivid early memory you have of growing up?  Did you grow up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no. I grew up in the South.  Probably the most vivid memory that I have is when I was a little girl.  I had a grand--a godmother and they lived out on the--it was a lake at the time where my grandmother lived.   And they owned land adjacent to my grandmother and grandfather's land.  And I used to stay with my godmother a lot.  And she had a son who had a home on the same property a little down the, the wooded pass.  And I saw a snake with a beak like a duck.  And it was in 1980--I think 1981 or '82 [1982] that I saw a picture of that snake.  And I was always told that it didn't exist, and so "This snake never existed."  They said, "No, you made that up, you made that up."  And then finally in '80 [1980] I was sitting in a dentist's office with a magazine and I saw this snake with the beak.  And I think that was very, very vivid for me in terms of, I could always see that snake because no one believed that I had seen that snake.  So I, I, I remember that.  Of course I've been always afraid of snakes all my life, so, too, you know.
Speaker 1: So when you saw this snake was it beeping?  How old were you?
Speaker 2: No, it had like a duck's beak on it.
Speaker 1: Oh, beak.
Speaker 2: Beak, yeah, yeah.  Duck beak.  Never seen that before.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you saw this snake?
Speaker 2: Probably about five years old, I guess.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You do have a good memory.
Story_ID: 64749
Speaker 1: Well, that was my earliest, most vivid memory.  And then my father's [Charlie Branch] death.  He died when I was five.  So that, that I remember.  I remember he was lying on the floor in the back doorway where he was lying there after dinner.  When he ate and he had, he thought he had indigestion and so he was stretched out there in the cool breeze.  And he died because he was hav--he had a heart attack.  And at that time, you know, people thought that you had indigestion and it was too late.  He died.  He died from heart failure.  He had a heart attack.  And when I came home--I was at my brother's, I had gone to my older brother's house to spend the night with--because my older brother's children were, we were all the same age or a little older.  Some of them were a little older than I.  And we were there to spend the night.  And I remember them carrying me on their back home to my house after my father had died.  And I went in and got down with him on the floor as I always did and was talking to him and telling him to wake up and he didn't.  I remember that.
Speaker 2: What kind of relationship did you have with your father?
Speaker 1: Ahh, great.  We were always a loving, close family.
Speaker 2: That means your mom [Cary Branch] too?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 64750
Speaker 1: Is there any special memory of an exchange between just you and your mom [Cary Branch] that sticks out for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of them I guess.  My mom could always tell when there was something wrong just as I can.  And when I was making a decision to re-marry--it was really funny.  My last marriage, and I was going through some real doubts and changes.  And so I didn't tell my mom I was coming home and at the time I couldn't get a plane.  I was already a state senator [Illinois General Assembly] at that time.  And I couldn't get an airplane to go into Greenville [Mid Delta Regional Airport, Greenville, Mississippi] because they had stopped the planes.  And it was on the weekends and you couldn't get a train.  And for the first time, I actually got on the bus and I went all the way--no--yeah, into Memphis [Tennessee].  I did, I took the train into Memphis and then I took a bus into Rolling Fork, Mississippi.  And when I got to the bus place where the bus stopped, no one had told my mother that I was coming home.  But yet, she knew and she came and she picked me up there.  Not only did she know that I was coming home to meet me there, she also knew what I wanted to talk to her about.  And we, we talked about it.  And then for the first time--she had never had a family reunion with just her sisters and brothers.  And I did a Thanksgiving dinner for she and I flew her sisters from Saginaw, Michigan and got them all together and had a chance to do that the year before she died.  So that was really good, yeah.  I remember them.  I have a lot of vivid memories of my mom, you know.
Story_ID: 64751
Speaker 1: And you were telling me, you have always been active in the public eye--you started in church singing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started singing?
Speaker 2: Probably about six, seven years old.  And then we all had to take music.  And we had a piano, and every kid had to take music in my house, you know, that's one of those things.  And I learned to play.  And then I started playing for churches when I got about ten, twelve.  And there you had different churches on once--you had--like, the minister preached once a month and you had communion once a month and you had a testimony once a month.  And so each Sunday, you had something going.  And there was another church that had--they would rotate.  And so I played the piano for the choirs and trained the choirs in music.  And I got paid for it, you know.  I got paid.  And I was making money a long time ago, from the time I--consistently from the time I was twelve, because I would play and sing and organize choirs and things like that.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's great.  And you said your father [Charlie Branch] was a minister?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Probably very inquisitive.  Everybody would say that.  I still am.  I challenged things.  And I had no fear of challenging everything from God to--you know, I mean from plants to God, I guess.  I was always never afraid to express myself or to disagree, to, to--not to do what I didn't believe in.  I never was afraid of death or anything of that nature.  I consider myself a survivor, you know.  I've taken on some pretty big people and I've, I've succeeded.  I've never--I've been a totally independent person, independent politician.  And I've taken on challenges and I've won them all.  I won, I could have won that one. It was me against not only the Republican Party but the Democratic Party.  When I ran statewide, I won the primary on my own.  But then in the general election, it's the responsibility of the party to help the, you know, their nominees.  And, of course, they didn't support me at all.  They gave me no money.  I had no money by the general election because I had spent it all in the primary.  And I lost.  And I was the only candidate, Democratic, on the ticket, leading in the polls and had an opportunity to win.  But it was this personal thing with Gary LaPaille, and of course, they didn't help.  So, like, I don't consider that as a defeat in a sense.  My defeat.  I saw that as a greater defeat of the Democratic Party than for me.  And I've always learned something from every experience.
Story_ID: 64752
Speaker 1: It seems like the Branch household was such that it created an atmosphere which a child could thrive.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  My mother [Cary Branch] had a fifth grade education but she was probably one of the smartest people that I've ever known.  She's definitely my female role model.  My father [Charlie Branch]--even though he died when I was very small--but I, I knew of my father.  And I knew of his, you know, the history.  And him being a man, we--even though we lived in the South and there were a lot of racism and prejudice and--but my father was always respected by everybody, by whites as well as blacks as men.  He did not allow--he wasn't afraid.  He didn't allow white men to disrespect his family, his wife.  I hear them talk about the incident where the man that lived on the plantation came down--and he was in the yard--and passed by him, well, asked him where was my mom.  And he said, "She's in the house."  And he proceeded to walk on, to come into my home--our home.  And he asked my mom--he called her.  And he stopped.  "What are you calling my wife for?"  And he told him, "I want her to go down and help.  My wife is having, we're having a party or something and I want her to go down and help him--help her to get things together."  And he said, "Are you crazy? Can I walk down to your house and pass by you and ask your wife to come down here and help me?  We got some things that I like for you to help her do."  You know.  They respected my father.  They often called him crazy.  And, of course, when he died they came to his funeral.  They made sure that we were taken care of.  And I think respect demands respect and that's the way I've been and that's why I'm not a racist.  I've never looked at white people as any different from no one else.  And I see them doing rotten things and I don't--I experienced racism more or less when I was an adult.  When I really knew what it was about, when I came here, I wasn't quite an adult.  But I think my first experience with racism was when I came here and moved on the West Side of Chicago [Chicago].  And blacks were beginning to move.  And they had guns.  And, and the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] experience, when he came, you know, the West Side and what was going on there.  I really got into the racism.  And then when I started looking for a job, how they would pull out the light people, you know, real light people and give them opportunities for jobs before they did the black, you know, the real black.  And then, and things like that, I began to notice and experience racism.
Story_ID: 64753
Speaker 1: What were your school years like?
Speaker 2: School years?  Very good.  I wasn't the, the best academic student in all, you know, areas.  But in the areas of polit--government and things of that nature, civics--I've always succeeded in those areas.  I always did a lot of public speaking.  In the South you had special days--I was, you know, with the Girl Scouts and the 4H Club and we would do County Days and different things like that.  And we, we went from school to school doing different kinds of debates and academic challenges and things of that nature.  So I was always doing something.  I was in the band in the school.  I was the drum majorette.  I was on the track team.  And we used to do a lot of traveling as kids.  We went to Xavier University because I was a potential voice, I was a voice student.  And so we would get exposure at going and singing at places like Xavier University. I saw Aida I think when I was fifteen, fourteen, fifteen years old.  They made Aida at Xavier, you know.  So some of the people came from Xavier.  And so I had an opportunity to do things with the churches, with the schools, with the county and at an early age.  And I guess I never really had any--that much stage fright, other than that's normal, it happens every time you step on a stage, but you're used to it.  So I've been out there a long time in the public.
Speaker 1: You did grammar school in Rolling Fork [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did grammar school and two years of high school.  I did.  I graduated from Wendell Phillips High School here on the West--South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Would you name your Rolling Fork schools?
Speaker 2: I went to--it was called Rolling Fork--it was called Websters [sic, Weathers] Elementary School.  And it was called Sharkey County High School, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you play any other instrument besides the piano?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't even do that now.  But I used to do clarinet and I used to do the trumpet and, of course, the piano.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite kind of music?
Speaker 2: You know, I like probably all music, a variety of music.  I, I like jazz.  I would say if I had to just choose one I would probably say jazz and, and classical.  You know, I do.
Story_ID: 64754
Speaker 1: Who were your favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Favorite teachers?  Probably in grammar school, Mrs. Craig.  And in high school, probably--I think her name was Ms. Watson.  Yeah, Ms. Watson. Gee it's been a long time.  Probably Ms. Watson.
Speaker 1: What made them your favorites?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Well, I think they knew me better than a lot of other teachers.  And at some time, they, they had a tendency to, to listen.  Also to recognize me, my potentials, my talents.  And they respected me and I respected them even though they didn't, you know, I didn't have my way with them or I didn't get away with them, you know.  And they would not accept anything except my best.  Not comparing me with what some other kids best was--I expect more out of you.  You can do better, you are not operating, this is not your full potential and, and we want you to do, do better.
Speaker 1: What was your greatest influence during your growing up years?
Speaker 2: My, my greatest influence? You mean who influenced me the most?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My mom [Cary Branch].  My mom and the history of my dad [Charlie Branch] and the fact that in my schools we had black history every day.  We, we, we did not have black history month.  The school was named Henry Websters--I'm saying Websters, but it was Henry Weathers.  And we came into the school in the morning, we singed the, the black anthem and we talked about black history.  And in my home, the stories that they would tell--they would sit and they would talk--which would be carried down from generations to generations.  And I would like to see more of that happening in our families.  And I think that's what has happened to the black families in America, is that the fact that we--many of us--most of us were cut off from our heritage in terms of when we first came to America and being separated from the families.  And so that tradition--the bond was broken.  But even that, since that time, generations since slavery, we still should be able to carry that story.  And that should be taught around dinner time, family time, the way we used to do it.  We used to have fireplaces and we would sit around the fireplace and, and the older people would tell stories about what happened and the struggles and things of that nature.  And, and you understood the significance of why you should be educated.  And it was ingrained into your, your values, you know, it was a part of it--right and wrong, good and evil.
Story_ID: 64755
Speaker 1: What was it like when your family moved to Chicago [Illinois], personally, in your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, my family--it didn't move to Chicago in the traditional sense of migration because my mother [Cary Branch]--my mother died--we, we, we still--she lived in a home in Mississippi.  When my father [Charlie Branch] died--we had the grown children--I told you the, the, the three sets.  The grown children were here for--all of his kids were here.  And, well, one came after.  But shortly thereafter he died.  And the, the grown children here helped to support us in Mississippi.  And because of taxes and, and at the time you had to validate that the kids there with you.  We were one--just one would take one at a time.  And we would live like that, on and off in Chicago [Illinois].  And we would go back home.  And so it was here and there and that, that way.  And as we got older we came and we stayed.  And we went to school like I did, I came and I finished my last two years of high school here.  Another sister went to--same thing in St. Louis [Missouri], another sister went with another sister, and, and that's how we basically came up.  And so at no one time--that's why there were not that many children, more than five at home at one time.
Story_ID: 64756
Speaker 1: When you--okay.  So you're here in Chicago [Illinois].  You finish up Wendell Phillips High School, so you were getting ready to embark on this new level of maturity; what kind of things were going through you mind?  What were you planning, dreaming, hoping at that time as you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I, I knew--for me it was kind of different because all of my life, you know, since I was about nine years old because I was multiple talent--I had multiple talents.  It's like it is now.  People tend to drive your career even now.  I had no desire at the time to run for senate.  I had no real desire.  You know, I, I had a desire--I love music and to play.  But it takes you different places.  And then people say, well, we want to do a singing radio thing on the radio or whatever.  It, it's, it's not--it, it's often something that I don't plan.  It's people around me, say, "I want you do to this," you know.  And so I always meet the challenge.  But it's always something within my ability to do and something that I have demonstrated that I, you know, could do.  When I ran for office, I, I had divorced my first husband--separated, we weren't even divorced.  He had been a former state rep [state representative] and I worked for the federal government--for the state.  But my salary was paid for the federal government.  Good example.  And I lived in a condo in Oak Park [Illinois] and rent, I think at the time, was like six, seven hundred dollars a month.  And I had no other income.  And so I was drafted to run.  They went and circulated my petition. I kept saying, "You're crazy, I'm not going to do this.  (Laughs) I'm not going to do this because I can't afford to do this."  You know.  And I did have to give up my job.  So everybody said, "We'll put together a pool of money. We're going to pay your rent. We're gonna do--."  Well of course, they don't.  In the end there were two people that did it.
Story_ID: 57820
Speaker 1: You were talking about when you were first being encouraged to run.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I wasn't encouraged, I was drafted to run.  So that's another whole story.  They circulated the petitions and they took them to file them and then they said, "Well, you've got five days.  Now you got to do this because we don't have anything else."  And this was because of the women movement at the time.  And the person that we had in--they had in office was a male, very chauvinistic--refused to talk to the women, had called the police to drive them out of his office.  And so these were basically white women in Oak Park [Illinois].  I lived in Oak Park at the time.  I think Oak Park was about 5 percent total minority.  And I had a lot of friends in Oak Park and--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: 1975, I think.  When the draft--yeah, had to be, because he ran in '79 and took office in '77, yeah, so 1975.
Speaker 1: So you ran.  You, you actually entered the race.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they entered me in the race.  And I prayed a lot about it, talked to my mom [Cary Branch] about it and my sisters and my brothers and some close friends.  And they said, "Well, you know, you're not going to--if you really want to do it, it needed to be done."  It was a hard challenge and I've never walked away from a challenge.  Yeah.  I've always had a strong faith in God.  And, and I always get my message clear when, you know--and I felt within myself that that was what he wanted me to do and I did it.
Speaker 1: What things, what other things did you start to learn about yourself during the first campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, you learn a lot about yourself in, in, in politics, in campaigns.  The first thing you learn is (laughs) that you don't know how it really is to be an elected official or a candidate.  It's very easy when someone else is running and you're involved helping them, as I've always done since I can remember; fourteen, fifteen.  And I--then having a husband [Otis Collins] who, you know, was a state rep [state representative].  And, of course, you look over their shoulders and you always tell them what they should do or not do.  But it becomes different when you actually get out there yourself and you're the one that's on the line and have to make the ultimate decision.  You learn a lot.  And it's a constant learning process.  I don't care--there's nothing you can do to really prepare yourself to be a politician.  It's a learning process.  That's the only thing I see.  There are some basic fundamental things that you need to know, you know, knowledge that you need to have.  But you need to have that for any kind of job that you, or career that you pursue.  But if, if you learn and recognize the things that you don't know, trust and respect people around you and try to make sure that the people around you has a variety of different kinds of expertise that you're going to use, I think you can be successful at it.
Story_ID: 57821
Speaker 1: What is your husband's name, the one who was state rep [state representative]?
Speaker 2: Otis Collins.
Speaker 1: Now let's go back to being a wife of a state rep.  In addition to what you just said, give me an example of one thing you may have experienced watching him as state rep.  Then when you got in kind of the same position, you know, you got a little insight, "Oh, that's how that works."  Do you have a little example you can share with me?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess my husband and I were so much.  He was--he was more or less independent himself and, I mean, an independent thinker on his own and had a deep seated pride in his race.  And the kinds of things that he did in a in a sense that--he came--his political career started differently from mine.  He was a part of a Democratic Party, an organization.  And they were the people who got out and elected him.  And they had certain kinds of things that they would expect from him.  And they really never had any real respect for poor people and for African Americans, to be perfectly honest with you.  At that time they didn't.  They thought they had people there that would just do their biddings and that was it.  He had--he had conflict with that.  And he would do some things that I wouldn't understand that I--because I knew it was like something that he didn't want to do and he would do something.  He had a line, don't get me wrong.  And that's why he ended up out of there.  Because he got to the point where he just--he would not, you know, go along with any of their, any of the things like that.  And, and to stand alone back there then--they would always challenge you.  So there were things that that I understood by being with most of the other politicians who--black--who came--and African American--that came from that same experience.  I came from a whole different experience.  You know, I, I was there on my own. Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, senior was against me--not junior because junior was already there.  But I didn't have a problem with that challenge.  And the Italians and Jews controlled the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and I had no problems with challenging them, you know.  My husband's background was different from mine, so therefore I--I could understand.  Once I became elected, I understood things that he did better than I did before.  That often would cause some conflict and I won't get into those kinds of things, you know.
Speaker 1: What years did he serve?
Speaker 2: I think from--he served seven or eight years.  When was it?  I think he went down in '60 [1960]--had to be '65 [1965], '64 [1964], on that orange ballot.  I think in '64.
Speaker 1: It sounds like your husband's experience of was a bridge between that period when they said--there was a period and a, a group of African American politicians that they called hacks because they were controlled by the white, you know, power brokers, if you will.  And it sounds--and then it moved from the so-called hacks into the period of the independent.  Like your husband was leading kind of on that, where it was treated--
Speaker 2: The white, no, he--I don't want to get into that too much because that's a lot of my book.  But no.  He, he, he went into politics--he was much older than I.  And so he he was in--Congressman [William] Dawson on the South Side, you've heard of--he was his political godfather.  And so being much older than I was, he came from that other period.  And as you said, I couldn't understand a lot of things that were going on because there was a tremendous age difference between us as well, you know.
Story_ID: 57822
Speaker 1: I went to teachers college [Chicago Teachers College, now Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and--two years--and then I went to University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Circle Campus].  And I finished there and then I started taking some graduate courses, University of Illinois.  I never did get my master's degree.  And at the time I went, you know, went down state and I started in Sangamon State [now University of Illinois at Springfield, Springfield, Illinois].  And it was just really too much.  I, I couldn't--I couldn't handle being a legislator and, you know, going back to, to grad school at the time.  So I, I didn't. And the separation from my husband [Otis Collins] and I--that, that posed some problems too.  But I, I guess my, my--I always wanted to be a lawyer.  And I haven't never really achieved that goal and sometimes I even think about it now.  All my colleagues used to tease me about practicing law without a license on the floor because I could always cite constitutional law.  I would always get them, you know, on different things when, when I felt that they were doing something wrong.  But that probably was my biggest ambition: to be--to be a--to be a lawyer.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 57823
Speaker 1: What was it like for you--well actually, what did you like most and what did you like least about serving in state government [Illinois General Assembly]?
Speaker 2: Well, what did I like most?  I think it's the opportunity to perfect change that would impact the lives of people in a positive way.  From personal gratification, I get--I would feel just wonderful when a senior citizen that I didn't know walked up to me and said, "Oh, I just thank you.  It's just so wonderful to know you.  You don't know that bill you passed for prohibiting them from cutting off our heat in the winter helped me through the winter because I used to have to pay my bill and choose between eating or paying my gas bill.  I thank you for that."  Or some kid that had graduated from college or--I've had two or three doctors that said, "Had it not been for you, I never would have went to school."  I used to have a GED class in my office.  And I still did full time social service on my own, volunteer.  And I would help--I organized the first--and I don't want to get into that too much either--but I did organize the first teen unwed mothers organization and had those girls with babies getting back.  First of all, empowering them to to take control of their lives.  Got their GED.  They went--got them scholarships--and they went to college.  They came out and they got jobs.  And when they come back I don't even know who they are.  They'll come back to me and they'll say, "You don't know me but I know you."  When the last election--a young man came, white student, living in Oak Park [Chicago, Illinois].  He was a student then, he's a man in his thirties now and he's running for state rep [state representative].  And he knocked on my door and he passed out his literature.  And he said, "You don't know me, but I know you."  I said, "Well, who are you?"  I said--he said, "You should." And he was telling me about himself.  And he said, "Guess where I got the money from to go to school.  You gave me a scholarship."  I said, "I did?"  You know, so it's those kind of things.  And little kids: I take them--I used to--I do a lot of mentoring and I take kids to Springfield [Illinois] on field trips and different things like that.  Or I'll go into schools and let them make a law and I would introduce that law. Bicycle law was a good example. And I enjoy doing that.  I really feel good.  Those are the things that make me feel good.  When they threw out the people on general assistance and they just, you know, they did a sweep, a broom sweep.  And they put the mentally retarded out there, mentally ill and everybody.  They just had those people wondering in the streets when they cut out general assistance.  And I went to [Governor Jim] Edgar and we talked about it and we got those people separated: the mentally ill people on disability where they should have been, the addicts into drug training.  And then the other people, got them six months and then the work fare program where they could go and things like that.  And people say--come to me and say, "Thank you for doing that."  I get pleasure out of seeing people being helped.  Making a difference is what what I liked.  What I didn't like is something that's reserved for my book.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the travels back and forth?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Travel, I didn't like that.  I didn't like to travel.  I'd much rather have been able to spend more time with my son and my grandchildren.
Story_ID: 57824
Speaker 1: What would you say, since this--there will be a CD-ROM in schools and libraries, for kids in middle and high school on African Americans in the [Illinois] state legislature?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it just should be in the legislature.  I think it should be African American history and a full recognition of the, the, the contribution that African Americans has made to the progress of this nation.  And we built this nation, to be honest.  So it's not--it's not so much that it should be focused on African American children.  If we're going to be one nation and if we're going to progress, we're going to have to deal that.  This, this millennium is a time when we have to focus our energies on becoming one nation and fulfilling the promise of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States.  Otherwise we will perish.  The pre-requisite to that is getting away from all of the "isms."  You know, I can recall making a speech just before the--the turn, you know.  We started this new millennium and I said that, you know, I would just like to see in writing, you know: not transferable to the next millennium, all of the "isms", all of them.  Racism, sexism, cronyism, all of all of this stuff--no "isms" can be transferred to the next.  And seriously, if that--if I had a magic wand, that's what I would have done.  So that's what we got to do.  People got to know more about each other in order to trust and respect each other.  You can't just see the negative on the television.  And when you look at the prisons you see all--mostly African Americans, 90 percent, and Hispanics.  When you go to the juvenile detention centers you see same thing, black kids.  One would presuppose that the only people who commit crimes are African Americans and Hispanics, and that sporadically whites commit crimes.  Well, we know that's not true.  Now that, that will tell you it's either we only commit the crimes, or it's something seriously wrong with the criminal justice system.  And see that, that's where I am right now.  That's my focus right now.  I chair the committee on the family court and juvenile detention in the county and I serve on litigation.  That's where all the cases that comes, challenges before the court--any lawsuits brought against the county of Cook [Cook County, Illinois] that--they come before that committee.  Whether or not they go to court, whether or not they settle the cases, whether or not--how much they settle the cases for, comes before us.  So I'm spending a lot of my energy and time right now trying to figure out, how do we make this system fair and just and make justice truly blind because it doesn't exist today. And white children have to be able to see black children, black people in a positive light and understand the positive contribution we've made in order to respect, you know, each other.  And that's why I want to see this kind of thing given to--and, and no such thing as Black History Month or Jewish--you know, you can talk about the Holocaust at a certain time--but that ought to be a part of history.  Because this country is made up of people from around the world, and what bad happened to the Jewish people, the black people or to the Italian people or whoever, they are part of America.  And, and their story ought to be told as an example of what not to do and the consequences of that.  How those kinds of things keep us from moving forward as a nation.  And to be--you know, if we're going to have a dominant powerful position, respected position around the world, we need to clean up our own house first.
Story_ID: 57825
Speaker 1: Your years in the, in the senate [Illinois State Senate]--what do you think is your most important achievement?
Speaker 2: God, I had a lot of them.  Well, there--there were (laughs) a lot of them.  I'm trying to reserve those for the book.  But the fact that I was the first black female ever to serve in the history of the Illinois Senate, I, I think was a major breakthrough. And then the second fact was that was the most chauvinistic place--and again I want to reserve a lot for my book on that.  It was not only chauvinistic in terms of relationship between men and women, it was a private club, practically made up of all lawyers.  Mostly lawyers made up the Senate and rich folk made up the Senate--businesspeople, but mostly lawyers.  And I was able to--and there's no such thing as you were in a leadership role or chaired a major committee or anything of that nature.  When I went there my first year, I was appointed chair of the Black Caucus.  And, of course, when we organized--and that, all that goes in my book, to the book--but I, I became the first female to serve, to preside in the Senate [Assistant Minority Leader].  And that had never happened before, black or white.  So not only was I the first African American female to serve there, I was the first female all around to serve in in a leadership capacity where I presided over the [Illinois State] Senate.
Story_ID: 57826
Speaker 1: Give me some more information about your current work as [Cook County] Commissioner.
Speaker 2: Well, basically that's--I, I'm focusing on juvenile detention.  We are now focusing in on the problems facing youth and, and the juvenile detention, and alternative diversion programs to keep them from having to go, and making sure that there is fair and equity when it comes to children entering the system.  Children are diverted from the systems--other children.  White children are, and our children are not.  And there--there are some problems and circumstance that adds to that problem and that is the lack of parental involvement, and control at our level.  So that plays a factor.  That plays a role wherein these kids--when something happens, they can pick up the phone, they can call the parents.  They know them, the police know them.  And they'll--the, the kids never go into the system and they take them home.  So we have to deal with that--with that whole problem.  So that's what I'm focusing in on.  The other problem I'm focusing in on, and that is abuse of, of behavior modification drugs.  That is a major issue.  It's a health issue.  It's becoming a health hazard, not only in our schools, but we have parents now who just doesn't want to be bothered with the kids. And they've given babies Ritalin and Prozac and other kinds of things to that they don't have to be bothered with them, to keep them quiet, to calm them down. And the pharmaceutical companies are--are abusing it because they are prescribing it--doctors are prescribing it and they are connected with pharmaceutical companies.  So they want you to take a pill for everything.  And so I'm working on that.  That's a big issue which we have an investigation that's coming up on that.  I passed a resolution in the County Board just since I've been back.  You know, I had the accident.  So I have that pending now for hearings and investigation--the, the Prozac one.  I have the predatory lenders--you know, mortgage lenders that are taking all these people's homes.  I have the new tax assessments for West Town [Chicago, Illinois], which is my district, where they have doubled and tripled the taxes of most of the homeowners.  So we getting ready to, to massively appeal those kinds of things--as I did when I was running for the county board.  We did a tremendous job on getting people's money back at the time.  They got money.  Made me feel good.  People walked up to me, "Oh, I got a thousand dollars back.  I got two thousand."  A lot of people didn't even know that there was an assessment freeze, of which I was one of the sponsors in the senate.  And after you get sixty-five years old and they raise it to--if you're earning forty thousand, if your annual income is less than forty--forty thousand or less and you're sixty-five years old, your tax assessment can't go up.  It will remain the same.  People didn't know that.  And so they, you know, they'll walk up and say, "Hey, I got this money back and I got this much money back."  It makes you feel good.  So that those are some of the things that I'm working on right now.
Story_ID: 57827
Speaker 1: When and why did you run for Cook County Commissioner?
Speaker 2: '88 [1988], yeah.  Well, again I was drafted.  I had made up my mind to give up politics and I left.  I, I resigned the [Illinois State] Senate.  I told everybody I wasn't going to run again.  And I resigned because I had--I wanted to come home and I wanted to spend time with my grandchildren.  And at the time when I--after I did that, some of the elected officials and friends were saying, "You, you can't get out of politics.  You got to run for the county board.  So you've got to do that."  And they circulated my petitions (laughs) again.  And I said well, you know.  I had to--o re-evaluate it.  I'm too young to retire and I'm too old to look for another, you know, new career at this point, so why not.  And so I did it.
Speaker 1: It's been an experience.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  It's difficult there to do good but that's the--reserved for my book.
Speaker 1: How is it different working at the commissioner level than working as a senator?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, it's a different kind of body of politics because you play a dual role.  You play an administrative role.  You serve, you don't play--you serve an administrative role and you also serve as a--in a legislative role.  So, in addition to making laws, we also are the administrators of, of Cook County [Illinois] government.  Like, we run Cook County Hospital, the boards, and things of that nature.  So we pay all the bills and things like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 57828
Speaker 1: Can you give me an idea of, over the period of your political career, how you have balanced your political life with your personal life?
Speaker 2: I think that's a very difficult thing to do for all politicians.  I think some people do it a little better than others.  And I--and I think that that contributes to the fact that among politicians--you probably have the highest divorce rate among politicians than any other profession because of that.  Because it's--it becomes very, very difficult to balance your personal life with your political life because your pers--your political life is something that--there's there's too many sporadic kinds of things, uncontrollable kinds of things that play into what you have to do.  And so you often have to make sacrifices and stand up your kids, stand up your husband, your loved ones.  You lose contact with your friends.  The friends that I had when I went into politics I rarely--I, I have rarely even seen those people anymore because you don't have time to go to lunch, to do social kinds of things together.  You, you just walk in on another whole realm.  And so you lose touch that way.  And that's--that's not a good feeling.  You--so that's difficult to do.  But you, you balance it the very best that you can.  You spend as much time as you can and you try to make the things that you do memorable and quality, you know, time that you have with your family.  But for me it's been very difficult because, here again, being a first black woman and then in leadership, it was a lot of things that I feel fulfilled that trip on minority before.  And so I got a lot of things that ordinarily that I wouldn't have wouldn't have had an opportunity to do.  People would call upon me to do to fill that that 'quota,' I would say--what they would be saying.  So it was difficult.
Speaker 1: Your son--you had one son?  He was born during or before your political life?
Speaker 2: He was born before I went into politics, yeah.  But he was raised primarily when my first husband was--went in, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he--at what stage was he when you went into politics, a teenager?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, yeah, a young teenager when I went in.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't quite as bad?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 57829
Speaker 1: She asked me what I would like my legacy to be and it's kinda too hard to really just put into short words of what I want it to be.  I think it probably would be my respect for government and what government in America stands for and the fulfillment of those principles and values literally.  Not, you know, not from a political perspective, but for people to--from the things that I've done and the speeches that I've made publicly on the floor, the fights that I've made for different kind of, of--against different issues and for different kinds of programs or institutions.  I think I would, would like to see people continue in government with honesty, integrity and sincerity of purpose, notwithstanding political party affiliation. And that is becoming obsolete today and that's what frightens me, you know.  That's people--it's about who got the most money.  I see America, I see politics becoming something for sale, you know.  Who can, who can have--and now even though they're talking about campaign reform, it does not include the rich people being able to run their money.  You can spend as much as you want, you know.  When you can spend 60, 70 million dollars of your own money to run for government, to run for President, to run for U.S. Senate without any controls or restraints, that frightens me.  But I want it to be people with the courage to run.  Understanding that people vote and with the commitment to get out there and put forth their program, their plan and articulate it in a way that people will be able to understand it.  See, I've always won without any money.  I, I've never been able to raise any money because I've never, you know, of any nature.  I want to see that happen.  I want to see that continue because that's the only hope we've got to insure that you have decent, honest people in government that's not controlled by special interests.  And if we lose that--and, and I'm an example that it can happen, it can work.  Because they've seen me, they've seen me there.  They've seen me win all the races.  And I've never had any money, it came from the people.  If we lose that, we've lost it all.
Story_ID: 57830
Speaker 1: Tell me the kind of challenges you overcame running without a big purse.
Speaker 2: Well, first thing, I beat the Democratic Machine when it was all powerful under the mayor, senior [Mayor Richard J. Daley].  And the candidate was even a friend of his. So I won.  I had no organization.
Speaker 1: How did you and your people do that?
Speaker 2: We got out there and we worked.  We, we put the right issues out there and we worked hard.  It was very hard to do that, but we succeeded.  And never, never yielding to those things that I thought was wrong.  Trusting in God and, and, and in doing the right thing.  Trying to do the right things.  Not that I'm perfect--I'm not projecting myself as that.  But I'm talking about right things within the framework of politics and the jobs, you know.  There's a--I used to hear a saying that there's a right way even to do wrong, yeah.
Story_ID: 57831
Speaker 1: I'm going to end on a fun note.  What did you do for fun?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow!  I love--right now, my, my great love is golf.  I like to do a lot of home entertainment with my friends--I love that--family.  That's it.  Music, listen to music.  I like to play cards, yeah, you know, groups playing cards and things like that.  And I like to travel too.
Speaker 1: Can you remember your very favorite vacation and where did you go?
Speaker 2: I told you: Mexico.
Speaker 1: I thought one, one trip to Mexico stood out from all the others.
Speaker 2: It did.  It did.  As I said, I've been--Jesus, I've been to every continent except Antarctica, I think.  So (laughs) but the one that stood out--I guess I also enjoyed (unclear).  It's not that beautiful there but the beaches are beautiful there.  I like the Virgin Islands, I do. I like the Virgin Islands.  I've been there three times, so.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Story_ID: 57832
Speaker 1: We'd just like your opinion overall of this?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I--up until I just talked about it, I really didn't know too much.  You mean this program?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, The HistoryMakers, what is--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --And what you're trying to do. I think it's, it's very important that we do it.  And--but I do think it should be done in a way that--with, with some kind of a certainty that it's going to be utilized.  And that's, that's a great concern.  We do--and I've seen too many things, good things, done and it didn't go anyplace.  And so I don't want to see this as being just another one of those things.  It has great potentials for doing something.  And I think the ultimate goal and purpose ought to be clear so that it can serve that purpose.  And you're going to have to do a lot of work in order to make sure that it happens.
