Story_ID: 636199
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Eric Carmichael.  And, it's Eric, E-R-I-C, Carmichael, C-A-R-M-I-C-H-A-E-L.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 6, 1964, here in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess, technically, I'm an entrepreneur.  My core business is, is investments.  We get involved in investment brokerage, the pension funds and insurance companies.  Then, we're also active in real estate and specialized opportunities where we might be able to find a distressed asset, turn it around and make it work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is, is Tuesday, April 2, 2012.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the Savoy conference suite [ph.] in the King Lincoln Gateway Building [Columbus, Ohio].
Story_ID: 636200
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.  And, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Everybody knows me, knows it's chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I would say, fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't--I'm not big on vacations, so, my favorite destination is always home.  I love travelling.  But, I love getting home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, it's been reg- most recently is that life is good, God is better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636201
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  Now I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Albert L. Carmichael] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first so we can keep 'em separated, then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Rosanne, R-O-S-A-N-N-E.  Her maiden name was Brown, and married name Carmichael [Rosanne Brown Carmichael].
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born July 29, 1939 here in Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  I mean, how, do you know--how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I don't go that far back.  I can go back to my great-grandparents.  And, and some of that I have to cheat, my, my aunt, my aunt who's our family historian, she helps me out.  But, there was--we had a--my grandmother, my grandparents on my mom's side were, were Catherine--she, well, she ended up being a Miller when she died, but, she was Catherine Brown and, and she came from the Mattison side [Catherine Mattison Miller].  And, her--and then my grandfather was Robert Brown [Robert Brown].  And, I believe Grandmother, Catherine, was born in Cambridge, Ohio, I believe.  And, her father was a minister, George Mattison (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, where is Cambridge?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Cambridge is about, about an hour and a half due east of Columbus, right where Interstate 77 and 70 [Interstate 70] intersect.  And, then, her, her parents, you know, Mamo [ph.], who I call her and she was a, she was around, Mamo was around, at least until I was probably twelve or thirteen years old.  And, matter of fact, I thinking, she died the year 'Saturday Night Fever' was in the, in the movie theaters.
Speaker 1: About '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: About '77 [1977] I think, about '77 [1977], '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: So, this is your great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: That was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I remember her.
Speaker 1: What was her full name?
Speaker 2: Her, her name was, (pause) her name was Bertha Mattison [Bertha Nickerson Mattison].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I believe.
Speaker 1: So, she's from your father--
Speaker 2: My mother's side (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from your mother's side?  Your mother's mother.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, she was married to, to a minister named George Mattison.  And, and, she was a, she was a nice lady, tough lady.  And, the older I, I got, the more stories that--she helped raise my mother and her siblings as well as, my aunt's children.  So, they, when they get to talking about her, they talk about how tough she was.  She wasn't scared of anything.  She carried a little black jacket in her, in a bag, and went down dark allies and up dark staircases.  And, you know, she used to raise poultry, chickens and turkeys.  And, if she heard 'em clicking and clacking too much, she's liable to fire a shot out (laughter).  And, she was just, she was a real character.  But, she was, she was always sweet to us and, and I remember her very well.
Story_ID: 636202
Speaker 1: Now, on my d- on my mom's [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], on my mom's father's side, my grandfather was, his name of R.T. Brown, Robert T. Brown [Robert Brown].  And, he was, he was--Granddaddy was somebody interesting.  We didn't, I didn't know him until I was probably eight or nine years old.  And, he, he was in Indianapolis [Indiana].  And, I believe he grew up in, he was from Meridian, Mississippi they said.  But, he grew up in, he grew up in Brazil, Indiana.  And, then he had gone on, he was an athlete and had gone on to run track and play football at Butler University [Indianapolis, Indiana].  And, he had a brother and a sister, Aunt Alma [ph.], and, and Uncle Bo [ph.], I think they both were younger than he was.  But, he was somebody, he was really interesting.  And, then I can't remember what his mother's name was [Alma Cherry Brown].  But, but, I have a picture with them and they're just dignified looking people, they were.  But, it was really cool and one of the things, you know, when you don't know somebody and you lo- you know, and Granddaddy was a very stern man but, he liked wrestling and he like to fish.  And, he liked us, but he just wasn't one of those touchy feely type of guys.  But, but, we used to sit there on the porch in Indianapolis and not have whole lot to do.  But, you know, I'd, for some reason I was smart enough to figure out that I could talk to him.  And, and you know, of course, he was the type of guy, you probably didn't wanna talk too much; he'd get--you'd get on his nerves.  But, but one day we were talking and I was just starting to get into track and field and, so he was--I said, "You know, I heard you were a pretty good track man."  He said, "Oh, yeah."  And, so, he told me he was a quarter miler.  And, I was starting to understand speed, even though I didn't have any.  And, Granddaddy told me about how they had to dig their holes for their, for their starting blocks and they run on cinders and how they, how they didn't have stop watches and they--or, the same way we do now.  And, they didn't have electronic timing.  Of course, was, you know, kind of standard.  But, he also, he said, that, there were just somebody assigned to grab whoever came across first, and somebody else second, and third.  And, then they'd sort it out at the finish line.  And, so, now, he ran in high school and he ran in college.  But, he kind of started telling me about him being a quarter miler and how that was his best race.  And, that he--I said, "Well, what was your best time?"  And, he told me 50 [seconds] flat.  Now, I'm--at that time I was thinking 50 flat was pretty good, and this was in the late '70s [1970s] I was talking to him, maybe 1980 at the, at the latest.  And, I was thinking that's a pretty good time if you're just running on these synthetic surfaces let alone back in the day.  I said, "Man, at 50 flat, you must've been beating everybody."  He says, "Well, no.  I came in third."  And, I kind of swallowed, I said, "Well, Granddaddy who, who could beat you if you ran at 50 flat?"  He said, "Well, Jesse was first," and then he told me another guy's name who was second.  And, I had to go back and explain, "Jesse Owens?"  And, he said, "Yeah.  You know, I used to race him all the time."  And, so, you know, sometimes--so, his, so his stature for me, he was already a cool grandfather 'cause he took us to the wrestling matches, and allowed us to watch Dick the Bruiser and Koko Ware [Koko B. Ware] and Bobo Brazil.  But, to find out he used to race routinely against Jesse Owens and beat him sometimes, was probably the coolest thing that could've, I could've found out.  And, so, that was the--those are my mother's side.
Story_ID: 636203
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] talk about growing up, any of that stuff, about how, what it was for her to grow up in Columbus [Ohio] here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she didn't really grow up in Columbus.  She grew up in, she grew up in Canton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my mother didn't have a lot of fond memories, I don't believe, growing up.  She was, her family dynamics are funny.  There was a lot of, number of kids, I think, she has one sister and I think five brothers total of which, you know, at any given time there were five or six children.  My grandparents [Catherine Mattison Miller and Robert Brown] divorced fairly early in her life.  And, which is one of the reasons why we probably didn't, we weren't connected to him.  He was in Indiana working in the stockyards and the butchering, butcher business then.  So, sadly, you know, she, she kind of grew up having to fight a lot of different battles, I think, both physically and emotionally, mentally.  And, it's, it was tough, they, one thing that's interesting, she does tell us how, back in those days, you know, my grandmother might have to find ways to make the money stretch in between payments or work or when money was tight.  And, so she'd have to establish credit at different stores and if she was not able to pay, they'd have to go to the, to a store that was further.  And, so, every once in a while they tell the story of, when, when they would get together they would talk about how far they used to have to walk to go to the store to get food for dinner or for the next day or what have you.  Which, you know, you know, when you're walking miles and miles, it's, it takes some of the fun out of being a kid, you know.  And, then, what she does tell me sometimes, they used to laugh, they all have one thing that they don't eat.  Each one of my grandmother's and--excuse me, each one of my aunts and uncles had something that they didn't eat.  Like, my mom was Chunky bars because, you know, in order to get a Chunky bar you couldn't eat just one Chunky bar; you had to get like eight or ten of 'em because the storekeeper would know that wasn't on your mother's list.  And, so, when you have to try to eat the evidence on your way home of this Chunky bar that you've added, you get tired of Chunky bars.  And, so, you couldn't pay my mother to eat a Chunky bar.  One of my aunts won't touch, I think it's a tangerine she won't touch.  She had to, she had to eat, you know, probably a dozen (laughter), and that knocked her out of that, so.  So, they, they had their, their fun.  And, then, then my favorite aunt, my Aunt Jackie [Jackie Brown Griffin] is funny because she was the little one.  And, because she couldn't carry as much, she always got to take care of the bread.  But, they would always laugh, even if we had a family event, they would say, "Well, Jackie, don't--we'll bring the bread, don't worry about it."  Because she was so small she didn't understand the way she was gripping the bread would always squeeze the sides.  And, so, it never was a real good looking loaf by the time she came home with it.  So, even to this day, they joke with her and say, "Don't, don't let Jackie carry the bread," so.
Story_ID: 636204
Speaker 1: I think they lived there in Canton [Ohio] until, 'til she was, until my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] was in the, maybe in high school.  And, then, she came down here [Columbus, Ohio] and ultimately finished up school in, in night school.  I believe, you know, she might even had been married at that time.  But, she, you know, went to work and made her way.  Real proud of my mom.  She was able to turn everything around and anything negative she made positive.  Got herself--she believed in education.  And, so, she really focused on her education.  And, like I say, got--went to night school, I believe after my brother [Albert G. Carmichael] was born, finished that up before I was born.  And, then, she ended up, I think, it was a sore spot with my father [Albert L. Carmichael], but my mom wanted to go to college.  And, and I don't think my father was much into that for her.  But, she ended up, after they divorced, she ended up--started school and she finished up the December of my freshman year in college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], she finally was able to finish her degree.  Of which she told us, if she can get A's then--and raise us, and work full time, then we didn't have any excuses, so.  That's, that was how she looked at life.
Story_ID: 636205
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Albert Leroy Carmichael: Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Leroy, L-E-R-O-Y, and Carmichael, C-A-R-M-I-C-H-A-E-L [Albert L. Carmichael].
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My dad's birthday was June 3, 1921, and he was born here in Columbus, Ohio, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Not very far.  I could just go back to my grandparents.  My, my grandfather's name was Paul Carmichael, I believe it's Paul F. Carmichael--Paul, Paul Franklin Carmichael [Paul Carmichael], I believe.  And, I never met him.  He and my grandmother moved here from Georgia, I believe.  Either from, either from Rome, Georgia or from somewhere thereabouts, something like that.  They, and they, there some, Grandma must've, she was pretty feisty.  So, there's some--one of my, one of my cousins was saying that, kind of alluding to the fact that she was, she had to move in order to not face further punishment.  You know, like, somebody bother her and she went after them and which was not cool for a black girl to do.  And, so, she found herself had to relocate to save herself.  She, her family were Mitchells.  And--
Speaker 1: Now what was her name?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Her name was Emma, she died Emma Mason, but, I believe she was, I believe she was Emma Watson Mitchell [ph.].  I got family that are Watsons and Mitchells on that side.  And, I believe maybe she, her folks may have remarried or something like that.  But, she--and then she came up here.  And, she was born around, she was May 3rd and she was born around 19--excuse me, 1893 I believe.  And, let me see, they're Newnan [Georgia] or Rome, Georgia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Newnan is the other place though?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, the story is that she may--she probably had to leave town because of some--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --charge against her for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure is was, I'm not sure they needed charges then (laughter).  But, you know, and I don't know if she, you know, who messed with her, but you know, that probably that, that probably wasn't a story that would've--I was old enough to hear at the time.
Speaker 1: So, this was a white person she had a conflict with?
Speaker 2: Apparently, there was some, some conflict that, that--and she was the type that, you know, Grandma was a good, good Christian soldier.  However, she, she did believe in getting even.  She used to tell us that somebody would try to pull her hair, and she might not be able to beat 'em straight up, but she'd lay for 'em from behind a log with some rocks.  And, she said, "I had pretty good aim too."  They knew don't do that again so (laughter).  But, I have to look into that and find out what happened.  But, anyway, they, they came, they came up and she came here and she was, you know, I guess around, must've been turn of the century, you know, early on in the turn of the century.
Story_ID: 636206
Speaker 1: And my [paternal] grandmother [Emma Mason] is where my strength come from.  You know, she was, she started having--when my grandmother--she's my, been my spiritual rock.  And, when my grandmother started having children, she looked up and, and my Aunt Pearl [Pearline Carmichael Carter] came first.  And, when, and Pearl came and then my Uncle Joe [Joseph Carmichael] would've been the second.  But, when that happened, my grandmother, she covenated with God, came to a covenant with God that if He were to protect her long enough to see her kids grow up that she would serve Him for her life.  And, she did, kept her word.  And, He blessed her and her children, and then they in turn kept the commitment to serve Him, which a hundred years later, still protecting us.  So, I always look back at Grandma and know that's, that deal is what we're still operating from today, so.  She--so, she got here to Columbus [Ohio] and, and she, you know, did a lot of different things.  I think, did a lot of day work and laundry and things she had learned to do.  And, you know, she could cook.  And, she had a, she had a restaurant in, at some point, she had a restaurant during the Depression era [Great Depression].  And, she used to serve beans and soul food and whatnot to some of the trolley drivers and bus drivers of the day, downtown here in the Flytown area [Columbus, Ohio].  And, it's interesting because she, she was always able to do different things.  But, unfortunately, I think, one of the, one of the things about her, again, I mentioned she had a, had a temper.  So, apparently, one day along the way, my grandfather, my paternal grandfather [Paul Carmichael], he must've said something or hit her or some kind of way, and she said the last she saw of him, he had some hot oil on him as he was flying through the backdoor with the, with the screen door still locked.  But, you know, she hit him with the hot, with the hot frying pan oil.  So, he, unfortunately, he doubled back and, and burnt the house down.  This was--she left and--he left in 1929, and she ended up having to raise the kids for, through the Depression, first part of the Depression without help.  So, it was a tough time.  They, they were burnt out.  Then she ended up meeting a guy named Jim Mitchell and--not Jim Mitchell, but Jim Mason [James Mason], Mr. Jim as my father [Albert L. Carmichael] would call him.  And, Mr. Jim, I guess, the two then, once they--he used to flirt with her.  As she would walk by and he'd say, you know, he was interested in getting to know her.  And, she said, "Well, you don't wanna deal with me, I got kids."  And, he said, "I love kids."  And, one thing lead to another and he found out she had a bunch of kids and he followed her home.  And, next thing you know, she was, he was playing with the kids in the yard, and they stayed together 'til he died.  But, he was a chef and a cook.  And, the two of them together had this restaurant, and they made things work.  And, I always heard good things about him.  But, I don't, I never met him.
Story_ID: 636207
Speaker 1: I take it on neither side of the family are there any stories, are there any stories that go all the back to slavery, or Reconstruction or how, you know, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: You know what, we, sadly, we don't have, we don't have too many of those stories of the transition, you know, in slavery and, or in Reconstruction.  My, I, I have a uncle who's a bit of a, he has a Ph.D. actually, and he's a bit of an oral historian himself.  He has a bookshop called Black Arts Plus [Black Art Plus, Columbus, Ohio], a guy named George Miller.  And, now, he, he's on my mother's [Rosanne Brown Carmichael]--he's my cousin on my mother's side.  He may know better about some of those kind of histories.  But--because there was, because there was some land that was in the Mattison family back in the day in Alabama, let's say outside of Talladega [Alabama] or somewhere, Gadsden [Alabama], Talladega area.  But, but frankly, I've never really been down that part, and I don't know any of my relatives or any extension and that's not really something that we spend a lot of time thinking about, talking about.  I suppose maybe early on in life, maybe that's probably better 'cause I might've had a lot more resent- resentment, you know.  And, what is interesting though in dealing with this question, thinking about though, I was at a bar one night and we had a little, we used to have a restaurant and bar, and a guy was, met this guy and he was French.  And, he asked me where I was from and a few things, and, and I told him how I was from here and he said, "Your parents?"  I said, "They're from here."  And, so, he went on and kind of admonished me a little bit.  And, he said that--when he told me where he was from, he gave me this family history back some four hundred years to a particular, to particular villages and communities in the southern of France.  And, yet, me, as an American, I only go back a couple of, a couple of generations (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Generations.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Of which, you know, I kind of have to quickly point out that that was offensive.  That based on our history, we as--we're doing pretty good to be able to go back that far.  And, had we been allowed to stay together as a, as a race of people, we could trace our history back.  But, that was by design, not ours, but powers that be.  But, you know, I supposed it's just never been something that I spend a lot of time thinking about.
Story_ID: 636208
Speaker 1: Your dad [Albert L. Carmichael] grew up in Columbus [Ohio] then, right?
Speaker 2: Fa- my father did grow up--he was born here, raised here, grew up probably within a thone- stone's throw of this building [King Lincoln Gateway Building, Columbus, Ohio] for the most part.
Speaker 1: Now, this part of town is where the Lincoln Theatre is.  What's it called?  What's it called?
Speaker 2: It's now called the King-Lincoln district [Columbus, Ohio].  It had been the Bronzeville neighborhood.  There's an area a few, maybe about seven or eight blocks up, Poindexter Village [Columbus, Ohio], they call that the Blackberry Patch.  And, across the freeway to the west of us was an area that as decimated by the, the--urban renewal and the introduction of the freeways, and that was called Flytown [Columbus, Ohio].  And, my dad, he grew up in the Flytown area.  And, of course, it was called Flytown because of the, all of the flies (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, when they were around during the summertime and everything.  And, there was mostly blacks and immigrants and, you know, it was--
Speaker 1: Were there like, I guess, slaughterhouses nearby?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, you know, there were train lines and slaughterhouses and icehouse, you know, there were different, different other food (unclear), produce houses, a little bit of everything.  And, what, was always interesting with my father was, you know, my dad was, he knew a little bit about everything in Columbus.  And, and for years, I didn't even know that you could buy ice from the store if you were having a cookout.  And, because my dad knew about the icehouse, which was a place that was along the rail lines and if you took a container over there or some old boxes they could, you could find these big chunks of ice.  And, they would be, you know, at certain time of the day, maybe, you know eight, nine o'clock in the morning you could go and find these big old chunks of ice.  And, you just throw them in your box.  And, you throw that in the back of a trash can and whatnot and that became your ice to ice down your watermelon, your sodas, and things like that.  And, you know, for him it was like, why would you pay for ice?  You know, it was (laughter), it was unfathomable, so.  And, for the life of me, I haven't been able to--I don't think that place exists.  But, you know, that was just the--it was called the icehouse.  And--
Speaker 1: He just knew all the spots and---
Speaker 2: My dad knew every hookup place, every wholesale place, and he also, you know, my dad was a--drove a truck for a clothing company, Hart Schaffner and Marx [Hart Schaffner Marx], which had a store brand here called Walker's [Walker's, Inc., Columbus, Ohio].  And, he was custodian for the, for the State of Ohio.  And, he knew a bunch of other guys that were, like his guys, right.  They were all these mostly blue collar workers that were kind of, they were kind of smart and industrious.  But, they knew, well, you know, Jimmy works here with these folks here, and, so, if you wanna get a slab of, a side of beef, he knew somebody that worked with the butcher house, he could get something on discount there.  And, somebody was--he needed boxes for such and such and such and such, or paper, he knew the people from the Blue Box.  And, he, and he tell me these place, like, "Well, just go over there and see such and such, and tell 'em that you're my son, and he'll get you what you need."  And, they'd give you a good price on it, or what have you.  And, for the life of me, I would say, "Pop, I don't know where the Blue Box Co. [Blue Box Co., Inc., Columbus, Ohio] is."  He say, "Sure you do."  And, he would start to explain about where it was relative to this train track and relative to--go down this alley.  But, that was just, my dad just knew where all those places and little spots were.  I mean, he didn't shop at the mall.  He shopped w- (laughter) he shopped at the loading dock, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 636209
Speaker 1: And did your dad [Albert L. Carmichael] finish high school here in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Did he go?
Speaker 2: My, my dad, my dad probably went to the seventh or eighth grade.  He was born in '21 [1921], and again as he was coming of age, he didn't have a father at home.  And, he had gotten comfortable with the idea or the notion of eating on a daily basis.  So, Pops' trigger was getting out of poverty and trying to help his family and his mom [Emma Mason] eat.  And, I don't think he, I don't know that he ever disliked school, but he liked the notion of making money.  So, his, his thing was if somebody was making a dollar he wanted at least make fifteen or twenty cents.  So, whether it was shining shoes or selling newspapers or finding, you know, deliveries or working in the, working the parking lots or whatever, that was, he kept working.  So, my grandmother would always talk about, it was almost like cops and robbers to hi- to my grandmother, my dad.  Because my father was gonna go out and make money regardless.  He was not gonna stay in school.  And, my grandmother's job was to keep--catch him and beat him, and send him back to school.  And, his job was to get out as quickly as he could to get back to make some money.  So, it was, it was an interesting time.  So, he didn't go past the seventh or eighth grade.  And, but, he was, he was really brilliant, he was smart, had a head for numbers.  One of--I miss him 'til this day.  One thing he said about my grandmother who, unfortunately Grandma couldn't read or write, but he said that no matter where he went, he found that Grandma had already been there.  Whatever corner he got to, he said, "Mama's been there."  And, that's kind of how I used to be--sometime I'd talk to him about different challenge, business challenges and different other things I had.  And, he didn't always necessarily understand what you call it, you know, but he understood the mechanics.  And, and he had a gift that way.
Story_ID: 636210
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So (laughter), my--first of all you have to understand my parents was--there's an eighteen year difference.  And, my mo- my mother [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] was, she's still a pretty lady.  But, apparently back in the day they used to compare her to the black Ava Gardner.  And, so, she, she was comfortable and smart and she was getting into be who she was.  And, my dad had been married, I think for, to a woman eighteen or twenty years, and he got divorced and he was out on his own.  And (laughter), one of his stops--my dad use to have one of--he, one of his hustles he would stop by the athletic club down the street here [Athletic Club of Columbus, Columbus, Ohio].  And, the black people that were either playing numbers or maybe owed some money or borrowed money, or doing different things, there was a network of people that would come to the back door to see the black, you know, servers and so forth.  And, my mom was a waitress at the athletic club, and so, so as my dad would come by there, he, I guess, he kind of noticed her and then she was asking her friend, "Who's he?"  And, he say, "Oh, girl, you don't know him?  That's Al Carmichael [Albert L. Carmichael].  He's got--he works two jobs, got a hustle."  And, my dad had a little corner store on the West Side [Columbus, Ohio].  So, you know, that was, that was some big time stuff, when that was, that was like being P. Diddy [Sean Combs] before P. Diddy came, right.  So, my mom, of course, wanted to know who he was.  And, so, so she found a way to interact with him.  And, so, then, you know, my dad was a big flirt.  And, so, she after a few times at the back door he invited her to come out and, and you know, he's--was rather charming.  So, they (laughter), they met and he had a plan, and she had a plan, and I don't think it, I think they were both too young, or they were at different stages and it never worked out.  So, they divorced when I was about five or, five or six seems like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636211
Speaker 1: You were ra- then raised by your, your mother [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] or your grandmother, or?
Speaker 2: No.  My--I have a brother [Albert G. Carmichael], and my brother is a year younger than us--he's a year older than me.  And, so, once we, once my parents divorced then my mom, you know, we stayed with my mom.  And, my dad [Albert L. Carmichael] had a--we moved out of my dad's house.  And, my dad had bought this duplex that he was, he was in the process of buying this duplex, and he was gonna rent it out with the thought that one half of the rent would pay for my brother to go to college in, you know, fifteen, twenty years and the other was gonna pay for me to go.  And, so, you know, that was kind of, you know, it was probably a pretty good plan.  And, but, when they got divorced it ended up becoming where we, we lived.  So, I grew up in that house with my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, my dad stayed there, you know, stayed in our lives, of course, and, but, you know, through visitation and child support and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they, they split up when you were about six years, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, I think, probably split when maybe I was four.  But, they definitely, definitely divorced (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you just have the one, the one brother?
Speaker 2: I have the one brother, and then I have a sister [Teresa Harris Perdue] that I grew up with.  Then, I have a sister--so my dad, after the divorce, my dad had a daughter through another relationship.  And, so, my sister is about eight years younger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, she works with the State of Ohio here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, we weren't raised together but she's doing really well, so.
Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities, their talents, their hobbies, the way they look, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's easy.  My, I, I look like my father pulled me out of his back pocket, you know.  I'm big like my dad.  I'm left handed like him.  We have some of the same temperament, unfortunately.  And, and (laughter), and I'm sure through most of the time my mom was raising me, it was almost like sleeping with the enemy.  She can, she would really, couldn't stand my dad about certain stuff.  And, my dad (laughter), he, he, he would laugh because the punishment that I would get was, you know, relative to me, reminding her of him, right.  And, so, so, you know, who's a kid gonna go to other than--when the deck is stacked against him, you know.  So, I'd go to Pop, and say, "Hey, Pop, she's crazy.  She's--this is the punishment.  She put me on punishment for two years.  Who gets two years punishment, you know?"  And, so, he say, "Well, son--," he, all he could do is laugh and cry at the same time.  And, he would, "So maybe she'll, maybe she'll cool off."  And, of course, eventually, you know, they'd come to a head.  But, he'd just say, "Well, thank god, she's not the judge," you know, so.  Now, the other, the thing that we all have in our DNA on both sides is a tremendous amount of stubbornness, which is both good and bad.  It allows you to get thing done, but boy, you don't wanna be on the, on the--if I lock my heels in it's on both sides.  I know why they got divorced 'cause I got DNA from both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636212
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The earliest childhood memories that I have were being a young toddler.  And, I used--my father [Albert L. Carmichael] worked two jobs, so he came, he would come home, you know, must've been 11:30, 12:00 (clears throat), and at the time the porch was made of wood.  And, he had his big size thirteens, and when they hit the, hit the wood deck I could hear him.  And, my earliest memory was sliding down, on my butt down the steps to meet up with my dad when--as he was putting his key in the door.  And, he'd put his key in the door and I would be there, maybe I got halfway down the steps and he'd look over and see me.  And, he'd grab me, and he would grab me up, and he'd take me and he would cut a piece of Sara Lee pound cake out of the refrigerator.  And, he would, he would sit down with me and tell me stories or sing a little to me and give me some Sara Lee pound cake to gnaw on (laughter), and nibble on, gnaw on, what have you.  And, that that was--my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] said that I had made up my mind I was gonna make him like me.  And, and I guess it was working.
Story_ID: 636213
Speaker 1: You know, describe your neighborhood and where you grew up.  And, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So, I don't have a whole lot of real memories about that house with my, growing up there with my dad [Albert L. Carmichael].  Although, there was an apple tree, and, and I remember those green apples and eating those and, you know, gathering those up and we a little, big old thing.  Those are, I remember that.  But, then the next, then I remember this crazy house that we lived in that was almost like being in a horror movie.  It was, you know, I don't really like thinking about that place.  It wasn't really a good place in transition.  But, then as I grew up over in the area called Linden here in Columbus [Ohio], it was known, Linden-McKinley High School [Linden-McKinley STEM Academy] was the, was in the area and that, that school was, it was, had been going through a transition and the neighborhood was changing.  It had been primarily a predominantly white neighborhood I believe.  A lot of immigrants and that, but it was changing and we were part of that process.  And, man, it was, it was great.  I mean, I can think about the sounds--sights and sounds I remember were that were exciting to me, still are.  You know as a Saturday afternoon and people are cutting the grass and getting ready, so it looks nice on Sunday.  And, you smell the grass in the air, and you know, there was a guy that used to come around (laughter) and he used to have one of those old lawn mowers that you have to wind the thing up and pull the string.  And, and he only had like three fingers.  And, you know, you try not stare at 'em.  But, it turns out, I'm think, you know, did he lose those cutting grass?  Well, it turns out he lost 'em playing with firecrackers, that's what he said.  But, you know, it could've been anything.  It could've been in an industrial accident.  But, that kept me from ever really wanting to play with firecrackers, right.  But, but, you know, and then there was the ice cream man coming ar- along and his name was, we had the same ice cream guy.  His name was Ernest [ph.].  And, I hardly ever had any money but just the thought that the truck was coming by, you know, was kind of exciting.  But, that was some of the best times of my whole life because we were, we lived right across the street from the playground.  And, much like 'Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids,' they've got there, eight, seven or eight guys that were, well, there was probably about fifteen or, fifteen or twenty of us that made our core group of guys, from the time I was seven or eight years old.  And--
Speaker 1: And, this is in which neighborhood?  This is in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is, this is Linden-McKinley area.
Speaker 1: Linden--okay.
Speaker 2: Linden area, and the community was called Gladstone because it was Gladstone Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio].
Story_ID: 636214
Speaker 1: In that community [Linden, Columbus, Ohio], you know, there were, I guess it makes sense because it was part of the baby boom.  But, we were on the playground every day.  Whether I was playing baseball, or football, or basketball, and we were the young kids that used to come out and play.  We were the, you know, I think I was on that playground probably 95 percent of any day, of any of my days in life, you could've found me on the playground.  And, we, you know, come out and, and there was probably about, oh, ten streets' worth of kids that would come out.  And, so, then, in each group every three or four years, they'll be another group of kids, and so we, we had some of the big kids that used to pick on us.  Like, or we would have to stay on the small, small side of field and then the bigger kids used to be on the other side.  And, then, you know, you were sort of proving your manhood by playing with these other guys and they were just trying to light you up as a kid, and it, but it made us tough, you know, made us tough.  And, then as we got older, some of those older kids, they kind of looked after us and as they went on to the high school [Linden-McKinley High School; Linden-McKinley STEM Academy, Columbus, Ohio] then we became the folks that had to watch and monitor for the young kids.  And, so, it was, it was like being in a gang but all positive, you know, we were running all the time.  My mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], she didn't allow us to stay in the house and so we were, you know, we had to get out, from out from under her feet.  And, and my brother [Albert G. Carmichael] and I we were, we just went out there and did our thing, and--until we were, you know, until we were old enough to start, you know, we would start cutting grass and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --delivering papers and things like that.
Story_ID: 636215
Speaker 1: Now, was Gladstone [Gladstone Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] your first elementary school?
Speaker 2: No.  I never went to schools in the neighborhood [Linden, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As it turned out my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] was a, initially started off she was just a--my mom believed in education tremendously.  But, through circumstances, we ended up going to a school, Second Avenue Elementary School [Columbus, Ohio], which as, which was in the--Second Avenue was in, you know, maybe about ten minutes away.  But, the problem was, she being a single parent, this was before latchkey.  So, this was, there was a place that had like a Head Start type program that she was able to get us involved in, allowed us to go to Second Avenue.  And, then we went to a nursery school before and after school.  And, then, after that we ended up going into busing around to different schools that my mom found out where the mayor or the college professors sent their kids and that's where we'd go.  So, we'd be on the bus sometime an hour, an hour and a half but it worked out.
Speaker 1: So, what, how many different schools did you attend then growing up?
Speaker 2: Two elementary schools, excuse me, three elementary schools, which was Second Avenue.
Speaker 1: Second Avenue, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, elementary.  Then, I went for a half a year to an experimental school run by these hippies called Metropolitan School [Metropolitan School of Columbus, Columbus, Ohio].  I got kicked out of there for fighting and taking over a playground--a playroom hostage with a 2 x 4.  (Laughter) And then--
Speaker 1: How did, how did this happen?  How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six?
Speaker 2: Six, yeah.  And, they didn't believe in corporal punishment.  And, one day they just did, they just made a major tactical mistake.  Because one, I didn't have very much consequence to my actions.  Two, you don't tell a class full of six year olds that we're gonna take half of you to the police pet museum or the police pet zoo today or next--tomorrow and then we're gonna wait a couple of more days and then we're gonna take the other half.  Six year olds don't process that too well.  So, when the other kids came back talking about how much fun they had, it was, I couldn't handle it.  So, I was supposed to go on the second round, and I couldn't handle it.  So, I just said, "Man, stop telling me about that stuff."  You know, I felt like I had been cheated.  And, we were playing with blocks and I had found out I had a two by four and next thing I know I was chocking somebody and (laughter), 'til finally one of the teachers came in and, you know, and I was swinging and one of the teachers came in.  And, my, my buddy he, he came un- got under the table and he talked me out of it.  He said, "Aw, we didn't have that much fun anyway, Eric [HistoryMaker Eric Carmichael].  You didn't miss that much," (laughter).
Story_ID: 636216
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about school now, you, you went to--
Speaker 2: Three elementary schools.
Speaker 1: --yeah, Second Avenue School [Second Avenue Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Second Avenue.
Speaker 1: And, Metropolitan [Metropolitan School of Columbus, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Metropolitan, which lasted about six months or so, got kicked out of there.
Speaker 1: So, what now, you were telling us how you got kicked out before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I, I acted up and took over playroom hostage with a 2 x 4.  And, when I, I just sort of snapped and then before I knew it, I was choking this kid and teacher got scared.  And, then finally they got me isolated and one of my friends came up and he was telling me, "Aw, you know, you didn't miss anything.  It wasn't that fun."  And, so, he kind of, you know, talked me down off the ledge a little bit.  I can see why people, how people find themselves in prison having gone just a little too far, right, and staying a little too long.  So, that's probably what happened to me.  And, then I looked over and, I looked over and I realized they didn't have corporal punishment.  So, that was one of the things, I didn't have any real responsibility for my actions.
Speaker 1: So, were you used to corporal punishment at home?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And, my mother [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], she didn't not believe in sparing the corporal punishment.  So, yeah, she, well she got me, she got me home, she said, "Well, this is enough of this."  So, my brother [Albert G. Carmichael] and I had to go back to Second Avenue and yeah, my mom wore me out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, back to seventh--Second Avenue.
Speaker 2: Back to Second Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had some of the best, some good experiences, some great teachers, got back on the honor roll.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, this all in the early '70s [1970s], right?  We're talking about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Seventy--
Speaker 1: You were six in 1970?
Speaker 2: That was '70 [1970], '70 [1970], '71 [1971] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-one [1971], Right.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Story_ID: 636217
Speaker 1: So, in 1975, I got the most powerful lesson in life, which was given to me by Dorothy McMahon [ph.].  And, Mrs. McMahon was like my fourth grade teacher.  And, she, Ms. McMahon let me know that we are responsible for our own actions and that was the most important lesson in life.  She was my favorite teacher then.  She's my favorite teacher now and now I'm taught by Nobel laureates.  She probably taught me the most valuable lesson in life that you had to be responsible for your own actions.
Speaker 2: So, was there an incident that--?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was acting up in the back of the class.  Probably got finished, got a little bored.  Didn't know how to sit down and quiet down.  And, so, she asked me to do something in which, you know, I did.  But, then I got bored again, you know.  You see, I was one of those kids that got finished with my work fast.  And, so, Mrs. McMahon had had enough of it, sit me outside the room, and said, "Mr. Carmichael [HistoryMaker Eric Carmichael], just wait out there and I'll come get you when I'm ready for you."  And, then when I found myself out there bored, I also found that I could go down the steps.  There was two sets of steps.  And, one step, set of steps I could go and I would never have to go in front of her door.  And, I roamed the hall and found myself back behind the door thinking I got away with it.  Only to have Mrs. McMahon come up the other set of steps with, with papers in her hand, you know, like mimeographs.  And, she said, "Oh, Mr. Carmichael, good to see you back.  I'm a get the kids settled and I'll come over and give you some swats in a few seconds."  And, I tried to talk my way out of getting those swats.  And, told her how I was helping the janitor do some things and clean up some things and throw some trash away.  And, she says, "No.  I told you to stay here.  So, you have to be responsible for your own actions, and you're gonna have to take these swats."  And, so, I did, and that lesson has stuck with me the rest of my life.
Story_ID: 636218
Speaker 1: And, what's interesting about Second Avenue [Second Avenue Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] was we went to the daycare center across the street.  So, any punishment you got at Second Avenue at the school, you represented this daycare center as well, which was primarily a black daycare center, black teachers, and so forth.  So, if you got three swats in the school, you got three swats at the daycare center, plus you had to sit quietly; you got a time out for the rest of the afternoon.
Speaker 2: So, this daycare center, it's like an after school program?
Speaker 1: After school program as well.
Speaker 2: After school daycare?
Speaker 1: Right.  But, a lot of love.  It was a wonderful place to be.  Mrs. Hooks [ph.] was our main teacher, and Mr. Nelson [ph.] was the main principal.  Mrs. Hooks just turned ninety-five on the 23rd (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was that name of the place?  Of Mrs. Hooks' center?  What was name of the center?
Speaker 1: Northside Childhood Education Center [ph.] I believe it was.  And, it was--but, yeah, so, it was interesting, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], was you know, you get your swats and then you get, say three swats at the school, three swats at Northside.  Then, they would call your parents.  Now, you call my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], there was no, I wanna investigate this and get to the bottom of it.  Because if she got the call, that meant I did it.  And, that meant that I was trying to embarrass her and make it look like she didn't know how to raise her kids.  And, because she was working, she didn't have time to stop everything she did and come down and sit with us at school.  Although, she would every so often, check into school.  And, you'd look and see her.  She'd be in the back of the classroom making sure everything was all right.  And, (laughter) so, so, invariably, once she got home that meant you were, you would get some more when you got home.  I look like my father [Albert L. Carmichael].  I had my father's mannerisms.  So, she would call him up and say, you know, "You need to come take your son."  Which my dad had two choices: either let it go, had to listen to my mom, or get me as well.  And, then the, then invariably this was during his lunch hour and second job.  So, he would bring us over and take us to the, to my [paternal] grandmother's [Emma Mason].  And, he had a truck, and usually it was just me.  Sometimes my brother [Albert G. Carmichael] was getting in trouble, too.  But, usually it was just me.  And, I'd get--take some swats in the back, so after the third or fourth (laughter), fourth sets of swats for the day, made for a long, long afternoon.  But, the worst part of the day was just have my grandmother look at me and say, "Baby, I heard you were bad today.  I'm so disappointed."  Anyway, so, I kind of got out of most of that kind of silly behavior and stuff.  And, I think, Mrs. McMahon [Dorothy McMahon (ph.)] helped wake me up to, you know, seriously, getting more serious about life and so forth.
Story_ID: 636219
Speaker 1: Then I went to Ridgeview Junior High School [Columbus, Ohio] which was a f- it was a school near Ohio State's campus [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and a lot of their professors went up there.  I'm sorry, we went to Cranbrook Elementary [Cranbrook Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] and then that fed into Ridgeview and--
Speaker 2: Oh, Ridgeview, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ridgeview.  We were there for three years.  And, then we got to, then I started off at the alternative school [Columbus Alternative High School, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Now, is this during the age of busing when this was taking place, or is this (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was, this was the, this was in the foothills of the busing program.  They came up with a, they were being challenged at the court, at the court level about Columbus' busing program or lack thereof, and, and desegregation.  And, so, we could get bused, you could get bused to a school as long as it help change the racial balance.  So, we could get bused from a black neighborhood to a white school at the school board's expense, as long as we were going to a school that was predominantly white.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But, it was your choice, you know, your choice to go, right?  If you wanted go there.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  My mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] could figure out where she wanna send us and we could go.  And, whether or not that was for someplace in arts programs, some people, people who had music programs, some people had, you know any number of things that they offered.  And, in my mom's case, again, she was figured, hey, she couldn't send us to private school, she sent us to the best public school she had out--available to her.  And, it was, I think, it was called the Columbus Plan.  And, so, that's kind of how it started.  Then, in high school, originally when we left ninth grade, our high school experience was supposed to be that we were gonna be bused as part of the, the new desegregation plan.  Now, interestingly enough, that was the first introduction that I had to just out and out racist behavior at the institutional level.  My brother [Albert G. Carmichael] and I were working at a job through the CETA program [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973] where we cleaned up the school buildings during the summer and we got a paycheck.  And, we, you know--this was like a government subsidized deal, and we got a paycheck.  And, we came in, we worked for the school across the street from us and we worked for the custodian who handpicked us to work with him and a couple of other guys from the neighborhood, and then we cleaned up the school.  And, as we got finished cleaning up all the desks and chairs and, and the furniture in the schools, they came back and said, "Hey, we're gonna have to move this stuff out."  We're gonna bring new stuff in because there were gonna be white kids of a certain age come in.  And, then so they were gonna, let's say, have kindergarten through third grade here.  And, fifth, sixth, and seventh grade kids were going come, you know, let's say, they're gonna go to another school.  So, they swapped those kids and the smaller desks, and the, and they brought new equipment in.  So, as the white kids were coming they were gonna get a different set of books, they were gonna get a different set of furniture and things.  And, our job was to wash all of it and get ready like we had done previous.  Well, we got all that done and about a month before school started, they got a report from the, from the attorney general which said, excuse me not attorney general, but the, Judge Duncan [Robert Morton Duncan], the judge on the case [Penick v. Columbus Board of Education, 1977], federal judge on the case and he said, they're gonna wait until the following year to do busing.  So, the same trucks that brought that equipment down, and the new equipment in, came back and took that stuff right back out.
Speaker 2: So, did they bring the old stuff back?
Speaker 1: Brought the old stuff back.  Actually, they didn't bring all of the old stuff back.  The custodian, Mr. Miller [ph.], we couldn't understand it, and he explained to us that, he explained to us that the, that that was bad and that wasn't right.  But, at least he got the first choice of the leftover furniture in the warehouse to be able to bring back, and that's the stuff that we cleaned again.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, it sounds like a busy summer.
Speaker 1: It was a very busy summer and it was an eye opening summer, and we kind of worked until the end and we got it ready.  But, but, that's where I realized that, you know, we were just kind of on our own.
Story_ID: 636220
Speaker 1: What high school, so, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I started off high school then--
Speaker 1: So di- you went to Columbus East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: No, I went to--
Speaker 1: Went to--where?
Speaker 2: --I started off at Columbus Alternative--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --High School [Columbus Alternative High School, Columbus, Ohio], which we did half day at Alternative High School, and half a day at Columbus North, which (unclear) Northland.  Northland High School [Columbus, Ohio] was my home school.  So, Columbus Alternative was the prep school within the public school system [Columbus Public Schools; Columbus City Schools] they had designed so that it would allow us to go to school, and, hopefully, have a better prep school, college prep education.  And, I lasted there for, until the end of my junior year.  When I got there to Northland, excuse me, to the alternative school, the principal and I kind of found ourselves at odds.  And, he told me that the next year I was gonna be dead, in jail, maybe if I was lucky I'd be in the [U.S. military] service or graduating from another school.  But, I wouldn't be at his school because he started the school and it wasn't big enough for the both of us.
Speaker 1: So, what were you doing to cause that kind of message?
Speaker 2: I'd get in a fight here and there.  I was one of those guys that, you know, you just weren't gonna pee on me and tell me it was raining.  You had to, we were, you know, I believe I was one of those--kind of a bit of a rabble rouser.  I supposed I spoke up and, you know, spoke up and spoke out, and sometime it wasn't popular.  And, this guy, his name was Tim Hill [ph.].  Tim Hill was the, he was the principal, founding principal for the alternative school.  And, so, yeah, so I had wanted, and I had wanted to, I kind of really wanted, they had, they had--you had to be really disciplined to be at the alternative school.  My brother [Albert G. Carmichael] was good at that.  I wasn't.  You know, I was really more of a guy that was looking for more traditional high school experience.  But, it all worked out.  I ended up getting over to Northland.  My mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael] threw up her hands and decided she didn't care what happened to me as long as I graduated from high school and went on to college.  She was not--she didn't care.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, your brother is older than you, right?
Speaker 2: A year older, yes.
Speaker 1: A year older.  Okay, so, he--
Speaker 2: He ended up going to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] studying, he got an engineering scholarship and ended up getting a degree in math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he, so your brother, was he the first person in the family to go to school?  I mean, to go to college?
Speaker 2: No.  My mom had gone and she graduated when he was a sophomore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I had my grandmother, I believe she had gone--maybe my grandmother, maybe even my great-grandmother had gone to some college experience somewhere and had graduated.  But, I'm not sure exactly where.
Speaker 1: Now did you mother go to Ohio State, or did she go--?
Speaker 2: My mom started at Ohio State and she finished at Ohio Dominican [Ohio Dominican College; Ohio Dominican University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She's retired now.  But, she had been involved with social work.  She'd been involved with--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --primarily social work.  She worked for the welfare department, then she worked for the, for the transit authority [Central Ohio Transit Authority].  She worked for me--with me for about five years, which that was another experience, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636221
Speaker 1: You were at Northland.  Now, what did you, so, the end of, I guess, well the end of your high school--
Speaker 2: That was my senior year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) career is at Northland High School [Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right.  Which was great.
Speaker 1: So--okay.
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: So, what were you involved in in high school?  What did you like to do, and?
Speaker 2: I was an athlete.  I played basketball when we were over at the alternative school [Columbus Alternative High School, Columbus, Ohio].  And, we weren't, we didn't have, we weren't allowed to have official, any scholastic teams but we had like this basketball team.  And, we played radio stations and fundraiser events and other JV [junior varsity] teams, and we played, we played bands and things like that.  So we used to have a lot of fun.  TV personalities come out, we'd sell tickets, and, and we get, you know, everybody come out, you know.  And, it was really a self made, self run, self coached, self managed student basketball organization.  But, we had a lot of fun.  My brother [Albert G. Carmichael] and I did that.  And, then when I got to Northland, I was playing football, was on the track team, and I was, you know, just thoroughly enjoying myself being around the, the whole traditional environment with pep rallies and things like that.  And, pizza sometimes after the game; just, you know, kid stuff, once in a lifetime.  It was pretty cool.
Story_ID: 636222
Speaker 1: So, you had pretty good grades growing up?
Speaker 2: I had--I came apart during my junior year, and I had had a couple places where I had gone on strike and didn't really perform.  I thought my chemistry teacher was racist.  So, I boycotted the class and didn't do the math 'cause I figured, you know, I thought I was hurting her.  Since she already had her, her degree, it didn't really bother her as much.  So, I probably failed the class.  I had to get an A in summer school (laughter).  But, I had pretty decent grades.  And, actually, and got better grades and got, had good scores, and fortunately my high school coach was a, he had been a teacher of mine.  He had me biology class when I was in tenth grade.  And, he decided that I should go to an Ivy League school.  And, my, and so he kind of helped promote that.  And, I think, and so, sort of, he--had the grades I had, I had decent grades.  I had good test scores.  I was, you know, coming along.  I was playing ball well.  And, so, he, it kind of just started falling in that direction, and then I was getting recruited by a lot of different schools academically, and athletically.  And, coincidentally, today is the thirtieth anniversary of my visit to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and to University of Pennsylvania.  It was thirty years ago today, and that really changed my life.  And, they ended up sending me to Philly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--you graduated in, was it 1981 or?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], okay.  So, you came out of school in 1982, and went to University of Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Yeah, University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, anything about high school before we leave high school that stands out that we need to talk about, or?  Or did, did you have like a--well, when you were a senior [at Northland High School, Columbus, Ohio] were you thinking about Penn at that time as a--or did you have any thoughts about it at all?
Speaker 2: You know, there was a--I had a job once where I was working, I was working in a, a store.  It was a, a gift shop.  And, a guy saw me working and it was the owner's brother in law, and, you know, I was mopping the floor and cleaning up or doing something.  And, he just was a nice man, and he just asked me what I was interested in doing, and how old was I, and what I was gonna do?  And, I told him my age, and told him what I was interested in.  And, he said, "You know, if you're interested in business, you should start at the Wharton School of Business."  And, he planted that seed and I was like, yeah, okay.  I didn't know anything about Wharton.  I didn't know anything about the Wharton School of Business.  So, I didn't think too much about it until Penn was one of the places that came calling.  And, when I was looking at the information, I see this Wharton School, and so, I was able to kind of circle the wagons there.  And, I don't know, it's a, I had thought I wanted to study, you know, international business and international relations.  And, I had a few things that I knew I wanted to do, and that's pretty much it.  So, I started at that level, and I pretty much tried to make the most out of the opportunities that were presented to me.
Story_ID: 636223
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that stand out?  Or who, or, what was the, who were some of the people there that you remember that were significant?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  I remember everybody.  I had great professors.  I had, I thought I wanted to be sociologist which is one of the reasons why this project is fascinating, until--my professor's name was Eli Anderson [Elijah Anderson], he's from Chicago [Illinois].  And, he's now--gets quoted a lot and said, "Eric [HistoryMaker Eric Carmichael], yeah, that's cool that you wanna be soc- sociologist."  He said, "We'd welcome you in the profession."  He said, "But, you know you have to get a, probably get at least a master's [degree] if not a Ph.D. to be able to teach."  And, I couldn't see myself in school that much longer.  So, so, I thought twice about that.  And, talked to a guy a couple of days ago, he's now the professor, he's, excuse me, the, the head of the college metrics program at Governors State University in Chicago [University Park, Illinois].  His name is Anthony Andrews.  And, I met, now Dr. Andrews, when I was working security at the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that was another one of my other little side jobs, and you know, he found out that I was from Columbus, Ohio, I'd played ball.  He went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and had played for the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts] for a minute, and then had, then had gone on to get his graduate degree at Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas].  And, when he found out from Columbus (clears throat), we knew some of the same people here.  He had gone to school here and got a master's, I think, and taught here.  And, we got along famously and he's the one that convinced me to study economics.  And, then I, he allowed me to TA for him a little bit, and then he pledged me.  One thing about pledging was, he said, "I'll help you," I told you he was brilliant with statistics and the economic analysis, and, so, he said, "I'll help you," and, he had a chalkboard at his house, said, "but, you have to be at my house like 6:45 in the morning, and I'll give you lessons for like forty-five minutes, and then I'll get ready for my, my, you know, 8:30 class."  And, I would call him, tell him I was on my way, and ride my bike to his place.  He lived a little off campus.  And, he would tell me what he wanted: "I want donuts, and an orange juice.  I want chocolate milk, and an Egg McMuffin."  So, he would put his order in with me and I had to go get the stuff, be at his house, can't be late.  So, it was almost like a pledge process.  And, we laugh about it now.  I talked to him this weekend and we laugh about it now.  And, you know, he, of course, he takes credit for--he's been here to the building [King Lincoln Gateway Building, Columbus, Ohio] and other places, and he takes credit for everything that I have accomplished based on him being hard on me during that pledge process (laughter).  He--that was important, and a great friend and we came, drove back and forth here a couple of times, and he was like a big brother to me at little bit.  He used to call me the rookie.  And, some great coaches and a bunch of friends had house parents at one of the dorms: Cookie [ph.] and Ralph [Ralph R. Smith].  Ralph was a law professor.  Cookie was, worked for the dental school and they just took us under their wing and raised us, you know.  We could go there and hang out.  And, Cookie liked to feed you.  She liked to give you--she'd make brownies and, you know, nothing, she'd like nothing more than having good fun around the table and laughing.  And, we loved nothing more than hanging out at Cookie's and eating, and talking about the '6ers [Philadelphia 76ers].  And, they had this wide network of friends that came around.  It was just great.  And, then of course, there were people--the neat thing about those environments was, especially being a black kid in a primarily white environment, there were so many people that you came along that would cheer you on, even if they weren't real vocal about it.  If they were the ladies behind the lunch counters.  If they were the, the dining hall managers or the cashiers, and different other folks that you, I mean, there were a lot of good white folks too, don't get me wrong.  But, there were people that looked at you as an extension of them and their children and their histories, and that was something that will always stick with me.
Story_ID: 636224
Speaker 1: So, did, did you, did you participate in track at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, I should have, Coach Moon [ph.] though, the track coach, he wanted me to throw the hammer.  But, I didn't know anything about it, but, the hammer, but I, he watched me play basketball, looked how I was built.  He was a former Olympian, he said some kind of way my hips, the ratio and the way I moved, said I would be a great hammer thrower.  But, eh, I didn't, I should've checked it out because, I mean, some of those women at the Penn Relays look so good in their spandex that I probably would've done anything had I--had he just used the right bait, I could've been out there.  He wasn't the bait.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Were you--
Speaker 2: --(laughter) you know, but--
Speaker 1: You know you mentioned the Penn, you know, the Penn Relays.  Anybody that's familiar with track, knows--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --those famous Penn Relays. See Franklin Field there and all of that.  It's like--
Speaker 2: It's a real, it's the Penn Relay Carnival.  And, it really is, in the last few years, the last ten or twelve years, maybe, maybe the last, yeah, twelve or fifteen years, the Jamaican community has been adopting that as almost like one of their, almost Olympic events.  So, the Jamaicans come from all over, and the, and a lot of Jamaican teams, high school and collegiate teams and, you know, of course, their Jamaican nat- national athletes are out there.
Speaker 1: Usain Bolt, now, being the fastest man in the world.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah, he's, he's run the last couple of Penn Relays.  I mean, and you know, that's, it's almost like a home, home event for the Jamaicans these days.  And, there's a guy who represents the, represents the Jamaican federation [Jamaica Athletics Administrative Association] and, and he's a, he represents PUMA [PUMA Group] as well, sneaker company, apparel company, named Q.B. [ph.].  And, Q.B., his agent represents a lot of Jamaicans, and so, Q.B. is, he'll always tell you, "Man, I told you, told you this is coming," you know.  And, the Jamaicans are just, just flying.
Story_ID: 636225
Speaker 1: You mentioned a conversation topic in, at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was the 76ers [Philadelphia 76ers], and now this a, you were in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] during the age of Dr. J [Julius Erving] and all that, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  That was, that was part of the draw, of course.  The coaches lied to me, they said, they told me, you know, that--my whole neighborhood in Columbus [Linden, Columbus, Ohio], believe it not, were '6ers fans.  You know, some of us had t-shirts, this was before throwback jerseys.  You know, so we had to, take an old t-shirt and the magic market and make, you know, your--Darryl Dawkins is number fifty-three, '6ers jersey, your Mo Cheeks [Maurice Cheeks] and Dr. J jersey.  And, so, so, the coaches, when I was getting recruited told me, "Oh, yeah, we get tickets.  And, we just hang out in the locker room with the '6ers and all that."  And I thought, wow, you know, hey, sign me up.  And, you know, it was a great education and my favorite basketball team.  And, so, I ended up--never got any tickets from them (laughter).  But, I did, you know, meet a number of folks and ended up for a while there one of my jobs--I used to have a bunch of hustles.  And, one of my hustles actually was working for this guy doing security, and I ended up getting a job with him doing giveaways for the '6ers events.  And, there was a guy who, just like the ticket master now, Al [ph.], and Al used to be in charge of all of us.  And, we'd give away, it might be LCD watches, or it might be the replica rings when they got their rings, the championship rings after the championship in '83.  And, posters, Dr. J posters.  So, it was great.  And, then you got, got paid to go watch the rest of the '6ers and then you got some stuff to take with you home.  And, of course, all the people that had--used to look after me, I'd have like a little something for their kids.  So, it was kind of cool.  But, '6ers were, were--that was fun.
Story_ID: 636226
Speaker 1: Who were some--was there any teacher or anybody that served as like a mentor for you at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: You know, at Penn, I would definitely say Cookie [ph.] and Ralph Smith [Ralph R. Smith] were the, that, that was family.  They really kind of adopted me and, and to the point where, you know, Cookie just called me one of her sons.  And, you know, Ralph said I was too old for--to be one of his sons but, but he always claimed me (laughter).  And, you know, and my roommate, and my roommate, one of my roommates was from South Jersey, from Lawnside, New Jersey, about twenty minutes outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And, you know, when you're away from home, distance was only eight hours driving, but it was like light years away when you're broke and you're in school.  But, it was, but by, but being able to fit into a family in some kind of way, it was cool.  And, and Cookie and Ralph ended up adopting a boy who was about four.  And, I went with Cookie as she was bringing him home for what was supposed to be a site visit, a home visit.  And, he never went home.  And, he became my bro- my little brother.  And, so, I used to just roll with him, and he rolled with me.  And, you know, he's about, Chris [ph.] is almost, he's got to be close to thirty now, you know.  But, they're just my family, you know.  The--my friends, the Smiths in Lawnside, their son Wes [ph.] was their middle son.  And, each one of their kids had a close buddy that the family adopted and considered to be one of their children.  So, they had three natural sons, and so I am the, I'm son number five.  The oldest one, he had his friend, Carlton [ph.], and then I'm the fifth son.  So, I could go there and go to church with them and I can sit around, read old Jet magazines, you know, that they, they kept, and help out, you know, with--they were the, town, the town--Mr. Smith, one of the town historians.  And, so, you know, so we would hang out over there.  And if they had a cookout then I was part of it.  If there was furniture to be moved, or work to be done and I was part of that too.  And, sometimes we just, you know, you know, we, we just, they took me in and--as did Ralph and Cookie.  And, then other people, you know, you meet along the way, they were, they were equally as important.
Story_ID: 636227
Speaker 1: So, you focused on business at the Wharton School, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And, so, so you graduated in 1985 with a B.A. in--?
Speaker 2: Right.  Actually, I finished up a little early.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I actually, I played ball--I played football.  I played football at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and had great experiences there and, and was just come across some old pictures but that was a lot of fun.  Got a chance to see, meet people that I'm still in touch with today.  Got involved with the, a few different organizations but most of them were, you know, involved in the athletic side or the black student association, Black Student League.  And, then the Black Alumni Society later on, and, so we just celebrated our twenty-fifth reunion, I think, of graduation.  See what happened with me was, I got off to a decent start my first semester.  Then, my second semester, I was thinking about pledging and ended up coming home with a 1.0 GPA [grade point average], which I had to go back to school immediately.  In like I got the grades Wednesday or Thursday, I was a plane Sunday, in class on Monday for the rest of (laughter) summer session and, and never looked back.  And, before I knew it I was--I went from being behind the eight ball to, in front of the eight ball and I found myself looking at, I think at the end of my junior year, I just needed like seven classes to graduate.  So, I was able to finish that up with the summer session and a fall, one full session in the fall, so, it worked out pretty well for me.
Story_ID: 636228
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what aspect of business were you looking at?
Speaker 2: You know, I had started working with a guy who--named Ralph Sturdivant.  Ralph, Ralph was a broker with Prudential Bache [Prudential Bache Securities; Jefferies Bache Securities, LLC] at the time.  And, when we were at, when he was at Bache, he wanted to bring somebody in.  And, I had been introduced to him through one of my roommates and teammates, who was working for another guy, Malcolm Pryor.  And, when Ralph mentioned his interest in having somebody, young black kid come, maybe come work with him, my buddy told him about me.  We--I met him.  We got along enough.  'Cause Ralph was, he was tough.  Boy, Ralph was a real taskmaster.  He was like the tough drill sergeant, you know.  And he, you didn't know if liked him, you didn't know--you knew you didn't like his tactics and you didn't know if you liked him or not.  And, then, eventually, once you sort of broke that certain barrier with him, you knew he was doing everything for your own good.  So, I went through his training program and his, his process.  It was kind of like Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.] in 'Off-' 'An Officer and a Gentleman.'  And, including, many cases Ralph threatening and challenging me to a wrestling match (laughter).  He said, "You ain't that big.  I can take you."  (Laughter) But, anyway--
Speaker 1: How big was he?
Speaker 2: Ralph was, physically, Ralph was probably about 5'9", and I'd say Ralph was about 185, 190 pounds versus me, I was--probably my playing weight then was maybe 285.  I'm not, he had me convinced that I might not have been able to take him.  But, Ralph was like a junkyard dog where you wouldn't, you know, you wouldn't wanna fight Ralph.  He definitely wasn't gonna fight fair, so (laughter).  So, you don't wanna go in a cage with Ralph.  But, I tell you what, he was, but, boy he was, you talking about somebody taking you under their wing.  Ralph did that for me.  And, then he brought me into his organization.  And, you know, and then he and I worked together for a while and then eventually we came over to, at the time what was Pryor, Govan, Counts [Pryor, Govan, Counts and Co., Inc.], and got--I was in college when I got started with him, and then stay- worked with him through summer.  And, then when I graduated, full time I worked for him.  And, then one thing led to another.  When I talk about we got to Pryor, you know, I was doing Ralph's grunt work and learning the business from the ground up.  And, kind of never looked back, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, you were there, you were--that's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: That was Philly, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that was in Philly, and what I should tell you though is that Ralph, Ralph and I probably worked together for about four years or so, I think.  And, then, Ralph decided he wanted to go into a portfolio evaluation and measurement business, which was not quite what, was a strong suit for me.  But, it was, it was something he wanted to do.  And, so, we sort of went our separate ways with--under the Pryor banner.  And, I just did the operations in the back office and did the trading that I was taught, that Ralph taught me how to do.  And, I kept that going.  And, then I came out here to Ohio, started a little bit at a time, developing a business.  And, then Ralph left the firm prior to, Ralph left the firm probably maybe around the time I started coming back here to Ohio.  And, and built a nice business and we stayed friends.  And, I used to always enjoy visiting with him, hanging out with him.  But, unfortunately, he ended up dying.  He had a scuba diving accident and, and I, and we lost him.  It was--yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: Let's see, probably about '96 [1996] or '97 [1997].
Story_ID: 636229
Speaker 1: Now, what was really good about it though, was much like, you know, the officer and gentleman [in 'An Officer and a Gentleman']: we weren't adversaries anymore.  He was, he was able to--he had learned how to let me know he loved me and trust me, and--trusted me and I had an opportunity to say thank you.  And, and he had, and Ralph [Ralph Sturdivant] had, had a chance to come out to Columbus [Ohio] and hang out with me.  Which was a weekend that was one of my favorites because I got chance to, you know, take him around and you know, he went to church with me and met some--he saw what I was doing.  And, got a chance to take him to my office and, and it was organized like he would've organized it.  And, so, he was--that was a pleasure.  And, then, even his widow has had a chance to come out on a couple occasions and have been up here in this, in this suite here [King Lincoln Gateway Building, Columbus, Ohio].  So, it was--her name is Aleta [Aleta Sturdivant] and she, she used to tell me, you know, how much Ralph loved me and I appreciate that 'cause it's mutual, you know, and I--for he and his family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what was the name of the business that Ralph had?
Speaker 1: His, his, the company that he started and--is now known as Sturdivant and Co. [Sturdivant and Co., Inc.], and it's based in South Jersey.  And, his brother, Al, Albert Sturdivant is the, he and another one of our colleagues, a guy named Harvey de Krafft are the, are the primary owners.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Good, good folks.  Good folks.
Story_ID: 636230
Speaker 1: When you were in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] were you aware of the business activities of [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble?  I know he was starting to do some development things in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  You know what, I can't, I was not as aware.  I didn't know a whole lot about North Philly other than what Tim [ph.] was doing.  But, you know, I heard, of course, of the Philadelphia International Records.  In fact Ralph [Ralph Sturdivant] and Kenny Gamble and, and Mr. Leon Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff], they were all friends of one another.  And, there was this one lady that was, everybody had a common bond with a lady named Miss Leona [ph.].  She was a cook for everybody.  And, all--everybody that knew the Philadelphia International Records people, knew Miss Leona and her cooking and so forth.  Now, what Mr. Gamble was doing, I really wasn't aware of it until years and years later.  I mean, probably seven or eight years ago, maybe ten years ago when I started seeing it different, seeing some of the pictures and seeing some of the work he was doing with the houses and so forth.  You know, I think there's a lot of people that probably felt like I did which was that the local communities, there's a lot of great housing stock and opportunities and infrastructure was there and we ought to be able to leverage this and make some better, more livable communities.  And, hell, even in Philadelphia there's some of those brick and mortar buildings that you couldn't, you couldn't build them for what you could buy them for today.  And, so, why not rehab 'em as opposed to tearing 'em, tearing 'em down?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That's the kind of stuff I know that Gamble was doing in Philly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think he was living--he went back to live in those properties as well which is admirable in his, on his side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636231
Speaker 1: So when you came ba- did, did family draw you back to Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: You know what, I never really left.  I had, I never got Columbus out of my system.  I always thought this was a great place.  I always thought this was gonna be even a better, more attractive place once people, the more people knew about it, once we started to harness technology.  I couldn't've foreseen the Internet, well, I didn't foresee the Internet.  But, what I did think was that, people would run and look up and say, hey, you know what, it's a better quality of life for me to be in Columbus, have a fifteen or twenty minute commute as opposed to being in New York [New York] and have my (unclear) have an hour and a half or two hour train trip to get to, you know, some office there.  And, I thought, the more I traveled to places like Tampa, Florida or, you know, or some places down in the Carolinas, I thought, Columbus doesn't have to take a back seat to any of these places, it's got a, it's got its own, it's got its own network of people and things and good quality of life.  So, I always thought that Columbus was gonna do well (cough).  And, further what I thought was that Columbus had the benefit of having two things for me.  One was a low barrier to entry: I could come to Columbus and I could do my business, and do business, and I didn't have to know three or four different levels of mayors and administrations.  I can make my own friends, and more importantly make my own enemies.  Because, you know, as you well know in some of the bigger cities if your, if your guy who sent you becomes at odds with the other guy, then you get half of his friends, but you get all of his enemies.  And, you might not have done anything.  So, that was important for me to have my own--be able to establish my own relationships with my own friendsh- friendships.  And, the other thing was, you didn't have to be a billionaire.  In New York to get a development, if you wanted to develop a bus stop with a hot dog stand, you'd almost have to start off in New York as being a mil- a billionaire to be able to make it happen.  In Chicago [Illinois] you have to have a few hundred million dollars to be even of consequence.  Here in Columbus, you might have a good idea, and if you can show that you have the wherewithal, you might be able to it, get an opportunity to get that shot to get it done.  Now, that's a pretty good deal.  Now, when I moved back here to start looking at doing business, I looked over and I thought, man, this is pretty cool.  From the office that I had established, I looked around and if I said, listen, within a half hour walk of this office, there were insurance companies, there were pension funds, there were state organizations.  I tracked something of the neighborhood of $300 billion, at the time.  And, it's grown even more since then.  So, like if I just get a piece of that, I can be okay.  That's what I did.
Speaker 1: That makes sense.
Speaker 2: I thought it made sense.  But, you know what, I wasn't so convinced that it was gonna work.  So, I kept my house in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I made sure my boss at the time knew, if it didn't work, I wanna be able to come back and get my job back on the trading desk.  I still got the house.  I just haven't needed the job, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you, what did you scope out here in Columbus that was a good opportunity when you first came back that?
Speaker 2: You know, I thought it was, I always thought it was gonna be a great place.  And, what I had envisioned initially though was, I wanted to have a six or eight person office which was gonna allow me to--you know, six to eight person professional office and maybe close to ten people all together.  And, I thought, man, if we can put this together, and we can go after stocks, go after bonds, we can go after banking deals, and we can kind of make this thing work.  You know, we can make enough money so that even the secretary, the administrative assistant, in our, on our team could make seventy-five hundred thousand dollars, right.  Everybody can be well taken care of quietly under the radar screen and nobody's any matter or--you know 'cause everybody did well.  And--
Speaker 1: So this is like 1991 when you come back, right?
Speaker 2: I moved back here in 1990, January of 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Full time.
Story_ID: 636232
Speaker 1: Is there an initial opportunity that you found here that, that--I mean, a deal or anything that you got involved in early on?
Speaker 2: The thing that really, we got involved in a couple of transactions with the Ohio Department of Development [Ohio Development Services Agency], some pool bond programs and that sort of thing.  But, what really, really, I'd say what really took us to the next level, and was the most strategic thing for us revenue wise was the Ohio housing financial agency [Ohio Housing Finance Agency] was doing first time homebuyers bonds.  And, we were doing some $400 million at a time, and they were generating for us, you know, mid-six figure income streams.  And, that was huge.  It also allowed us to get around the state and meet with different people doing these deals.  So, we kind of took from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you focus on de- now, see, well this building here [King Lincoln Gateway Building] is a development on the East Side of Columbus [Ohio], did you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you really focus on trying to revitalize this neighborhood in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Not, not, particularly just this neighborhood.  We were just doing, we were doing rifle shots.  We were, we would just see an opportunity and as it came available we would try to jump on it.  One of the things that happened here with this project was that the developer, the original developers had walked away from the deal and it was left undeveloped.  And, so, we had been watching this dirt for some time.  And, so, when my buddy came and told me, he said, "Man, you know, those guys walked away from the deal."  And, told me how much they--the dirt, he said it was gonna be like thirty thousand dollars, was how much they had to agree to pay for the dirt, which was, you know, maybe about an acre on this corner.  And, I said, "Thirty grand?  Man, I'd buy that."  And, so, that conversation led to, well you know, you can buy it.  But, we're gonna need you to develop it almost immediately.  And, we started playing around with ideas from that point on.  And, a little bit later, here we are.  And, subsequently, we had done some other things internally into the community and, you know, probably a little, some other stuff down the street but different communities here and there.  A little one or two, one or two projects here and there.  And, then we have probably done scattered sites, maybe thirty-five, forty houses spread mostly on the, on the East Side, but mostly a little bit further east.  And--a little further southeast of here.
Speaker 1: So, when was this project here developed?
Speaker 2: This, this project's about seven years old, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something like that, I think.
Speaker 1: So, back in nine- 2005 or so?
Speaker 2: I think so.  That sounds about right.
Story_ID: 636233
Speaker 1: Okay, just give, give us sort of a runtown -down of some of the highlights of what you've been doing in Columbus [Ohio].  I know, we have a note here that in '92 [1992] you were a board member of the ch- Columbus Housing Partnership [Columbus, Ohio], and--
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  Actually, yeah, I joined the Columbus Housing Partnership in about '92 [1992] or so.  And, in 1992 and they were, it was a nonprofit developer of housing for low and moderate income residents here in central Ohio.  And, it was pretty exciting.  It was a learning experience.  I learned a lot.  But, interestingly enough I learned it was both about the number of housing units that were built.  But, also, you know, doing other deals as well and the tax credits that flow because of it.  So, it was--once you got this learning curve it was pretty interesting.  I think, I ended being involved with them in some capacity or another, a board member secretary, then president for about ten years.  It was ten or twelve years; it was a long time.  And, I stayed fairly close with them.  I believe in the general mission of CHP.  And, and again, this is part of what I'm saying about developing here.  We use real money when we do our deals.  That is to say that as a firm, or my partners and I, we are investing hard dollars.  We bought this dirt.  We pay for, you know, the bricks.  We pay for the mortar.  We pay for the glass and everything else in hard dollar, real terms.  And, we were gonna try to rent the place--rent, sell, lease, whatever, on a profitable basis.  CHP and some of the other nonprofit developers, especially to the extent that they have, you know, especially I think to the extent that they have tax credit dollars, they're able to be a little bit more creative and sometimes they'll put thirty, forty thousand dollars more in a deal than they could never get back out.  Everything we've done had to balance up; we couldn't spend more than we, we could sell it for because, you know, we'd go broke that way.  They're--sometime as a nonprofit developer, they had certain luxuries we didn't have.  But, CHP had probably at the time, had about three to four thousand different properties.  But, but, a lot of them were leasing deals.  During my involvement, we actually were able to go up the street here and do a few deals and then we ended up taking over two or three streets.  Not taking over, but two or three streets doing heavy li- some heavy lifting.  And end- we ended up putting up there a number of lease purchase deals so that people can go in there and find, you know, brand new infill housing they can actually own, using and utilizing the benefit of CHP's nonprofit status, utilizing and benefiting from CHP's involvement as a, you know, developer.  And, so, that was pretty exciting.  So, sometime you blend in homeownership options to stay, mixed along with options to lease and in between.  So, that's kind of how that works.
Story_ID: 636234
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co. [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.]
Speaker 2: So, Pryor, McClendon, Counts had started off when I joined the firm as Pryor, Govan and Counts [Pryor, Govan, Counts and Co., Inc.].  There was a guy named Greg Govan [Gregory Govan] along with Malcolm Pryor and Allen Counts [Allen W. Counts].  They had gotten Pryor, Govan, and Counts started back in the day, I think it was, started about ninety- '83 [1983].  And, Malcolm Pryor was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Allen Counts and Greg Govan were up in New York [New York].  And, it turned out Allen--let's see, Allen stayed in New York, Greg left the firm and then Malcolm was still in Philly.  And, then we end up merging with a guy named Ray McClendon [Raymond J. McClendon] who's out of Atlanta [Georgia].  Ray had been like the former chief finance officer for the City of Atlanta.  Smart guy, smart as shit.  Ray came aboard and provided additional structure.  At that time, I was employee maybe number nine.  But, Ray, Ray brought his brand on and his team on and we probably ended up collectively growing to maybe about 115, 120 people all together.  And, it was considered, widely considered the largest and best operating of the, of the minority owned broker dealers in the country.  Unfortunately, Ray ended up getting--running the file on some--and got indicted, convicted, and sentenced for some inappropriate behaviors.  And, I don't remember when that happened.  I think it was around '97 [1997], '98 [1998] when Ray and ended up getting indicted.  But, anyway, after a couple of years, it became too much baggage to carry over the goal line.  He ended up going to jail.  Our firm got, really got sold, selling in the process, and we ended up making, we ended up making plans myself and my business partner and then our team here in Columbus [Ohio] to pick up and go elsewhere.  Then, we bought an interest in a company called Greentree Brokerage Services [Greentree Brokerage Services, Inc.] in maybe about '96 [1996], '97 [1997], and joined the guy, the founder there.  His name was Warren West.  We went with Warren, and we were doing our thing and operated there for about--I think we were there for about five years at Greentree based in Philly, had the presence here in Columbus.  And, then, yeah, I think that's about all I can tell you about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636235
Speaker 1: What about New Millennium [New Millennium, Inc., Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: So, New Millennium, New Millennium--what was interesting about New Millennium was New Millennium was a company we got started.  One point we were thinking about starting our own broker dealer- which is highly regulated, you know.  Broker dealerships are regulated by the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission], and FINRA, or the financial, financial--what does FINRA stand for?  NASD used to stand for National Association of Securities Dealers and FINRA is now is the financial--I can't remember now--financial regulatory association [Financial Industry Regulatory Authority].  And, so, we say, hey, we don't, some stuff we don't need, we just have knowledge.  We don't need, we're not dealing with registered securities.  We're not dealing with a lot of really difficult stuff.  We might, we might be putting training together, consulting, something like that.  Or, helping someone figure out how to access a market, or how to figure something out, how to raise money for something.  Not even using public, these public, these public ideals or, you know, not going public, not going into markets.  And, so, we said, hey, we'll create this other company, and--that doesn't need to be regulated.  We'll use our chips, use our own money.  And, so, we did that, we established that.  Mac Williams [McCullough Williams III], and myself were both partners.  And, quite frankly, just did that in '95 [1995] and it's been growing ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, let's see--
Speaker 2: Now, what's interesting with New Millennium, it has spawned other ventures too.  You know, we've done everything from, you know, housing, first time housing programs, rehab, training, consulting.  Worked with corporations.  We've worked with nonprofit organizations, government.  We do monitoring of different programs, fraud, waste and abuse.  Basically, anything that we think we are grown enough to do--yeah, I would say grown enough to do, we're able to do that.  And, or, bring talent in and bring resources in and figure out how to make it, make it work.  You know, one time we were able to, we were looking at distressed assets and we found a car wash and oil lube and we were to buy it.  We bought--put the team together.  Jettison part of it, made some money, then jettison another part of it, made a little bit more money.  Ran the last piece until we had that looking better and cleaner, and then we sold that and, and it was working out pretty well.  The thinking on it was always that if we could do this with our own money, if we could do this for our own chits, then eventually, we could, could show how that worked and then we could take that to the various pension funds or--yeah, pension funds, or institutional investors and we can have them fund it.  If we could show how we could make 25 or 30 percent with our own money that we could then turn around and get them to fund, consider funding it where we might give them a 14 or 15 percent return and, and maybe more, you know.  So, that was New Millennium's genesis.
Story_ID: 636236
Speaker 1: We were ju- we were talking a little while ago about your interest in the--this area is called the King-Lincoln area, or the Bronzeville area [Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, did you participate in the redevelopment of the Lincoln Theatre [Columbus, Ohio] at all, or did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  Not in a heavy way.  I was on the board of the greater Columbus--it was called the Columbus Urban Growth Corporation, which is a nonprofit developer arm of the City of Columbus [Ohio] at the time.  And, the city, the city, the city had a agreement with, let's see, they had the ci- the city had this agreement that ended up getting given to--that ended up getting transferred to the, to the urban growth corporation.  And, the plan was to, to have the then owner, and I cannot think of the gentleman's name.  But, anyway, he owned different properties around and some of 'em in different states.  And, this place was--had fallen in disrepair and had been saved from the wrecking ball.  But, but we ended up working with them to get it stabilized and get it secured up.  And, then the city and the county came in together and did the renovation.  Interestingly enough though, this building we're sitting in now was kind of the catalyst to get that done.  Because, because they didn't start turning wrench over across the street, nor across either at the, at the condos until we said we were, we were moving forward with our deal.  So, so it all kind of worked together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, this, this building we're in right now, the Gateway Building [King Lincoln Gateway Building, Columbus, Ohio] is--was a project of Gideon Development Partners [Gideon Development Partners LLC, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Gideon Development Partners, right.  Which actually owns a third of the, two thirds of the process and this was our, Gideon was McCullough Williams [McCullough Williams III], Tony Hutchins [A. Robert Hutchins] and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And, and the building houses, I know there's a restaurant downstairs, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Zanzibar [Zanzibar Brews, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We had a dry cleaners that was operating, they just shut down.  We thought we had somebody coming in for that, but it's not working, hadn't been working out.  The Columbus Housing Partnership [Columbus, Ohio] has a group there.  They have about fifteen people, and then Columbus State Community College [Columbus, Ohio] is also working.
Speaker 1: Is that the, yeah, the second floor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the corner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the corner down in the retail space.  Now, what's interesting, as you go around the other corner you have the City of Columbus has accident investigations which is a twenty-four hour operation.  They even have a small garage where they can pull cars in and take a look at 'em to do accident investigations.  The second floor is all police internal affairs [Columbus Division of Police Internal Affairs Bureau], and then they had a waiting room on the first floor.  And, then they have, then we have the fire department has a professional standards bureau [Columbus Division of Fire Professional Standards Unit], which is up on the third floor here.  So, that back half of the third floor is all fire department, and--it's all fire department and their people in, particularly, folks that are investigating, you know, bad behaviors, complaints, things like that, of that nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636237
Speaker 1: Now, you're also on the board of the Greater Columbus Arts Council, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's that been like?
Speaker 2: Arts council is a board--I think I've been on the arts council board for about six years or so.  But, the arts council is a board which, which basically divvies up the, the city's and to some degree county art proceeds that come from the hotel occupancy taxes.  I've been on the board for about six years.  And we have big organizations, small organizations.  So, we do everything from, you know, five hundred dollars to, you know, help somebody underwrite the costs for entering, entering an award somewhere to, to f- three hundred thousand or five hundred thousand to COSI, the science of industry [COSI Columbus, Columbus, Ohio] or the Wexner Center [Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus, Ohio].  And, The Kings Arts Complex [Columbus, Ohio] probably gets a couple three hundred thousand dollars a year.  What I'm mostly--and, we also run the, the art festival here in O- in Columbus [Ohio] in July.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636238
Speaker 1: What do you wanna tell us about Pacific American Securities [Pacific American Securities, LLC]?  Now, you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, Pacific American Securities, I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I just left Pacific American Securities about a month ago.  Our firm had been based in San Diego [California], see it was based in San Diego.  The focus was primarily institutional brokerage.  We worked with pension funds and insurance companies, helping them buy and sell stocks and bonds, mostly stocks.  And, and that was cool.  But, now I've gotta figure out where I wanna focus.  I see, continue to see opportunities there on the pension fund side, but I see a lot more growth in the international market.  And, so, that's probably where I'm thinking of, spend time moving forward.  We do 'em both, but a lot of great stories on the international side, a lot of growth there.  Our U.S. markets are still struggling to stay relevant moving forward.
Speaker 1: What, I guess, what countries I guess are major players in terms of the international (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there's a lot of growth in what they call the BRIC countries, which are, which are Brazil, Russia, In- let's see, Brazil, Russia, India, China, and to some degree South Africa, or we'll say southern Africa.  And, there's a lot of growth there, money that's to be made.  Things have been--you know, people have ignored it for a long time, content to fly over it.  Which is one of the reasons that a place like Columbus [Ohio] is attractive for a guy like me, people are content to fly over it.  You know, so, I wanna be the guy that comes in and let me help discover it, you know.  Same way with, you know, you got a market like some of those Africa markets.  The people are content to fly over.  Why not swoop down there and figure out, hey, they need, you know, fresh drinking water.  They need good stable housing.  They need power that stays on.  And, some of this stuff is relatively old technology for us that we ought to be able to try to do something with it, and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 636239
Speaker 1: Do you have like a business philosophy?
Speaker 2: A business philosophy?  Not really.  Just try to do the right thing and, you know, try to hit singles and doubles, not try to hit home runs.  If that makes sense to you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A little bit (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, what happens is a lot of people wanna win at all costs.  But, it's not a win, if two people go in a room and only one person comes out happy, it's not a win.  If two people come in the room and only one person comes out happy, it ain't a win.  If, if--so, I don't wanna do any- just anything to win.  I want to win at, at any cost, but for everybody that's goes in the room.  Does that make sense?  And, I think if you do that, (gesture) you don't have to look over your shoulder, you pay your taxes, you move forward.  Not real complicated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636240
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to someone in school now about what aspect of business they should be focusing on, or is there anything you see down the road that--?
Speaker 2: Well, my absolute advice to someone that was in school now would be, whatever you do, marry rich, you know (laughter).  And, if you choose not to listen to my advice, diversify.  And, 'cause you'll never know when you're gonna wanna say, hey, let me see that first piece of advice again (laughter).  My first boss, I remember showing him a picture of where I bought my first house.  I was twenty-two, and it was just shell, it was gutted and I needed to put about, I put about--I bought the shell for $10,500.  I put about thirty thousand dollars into it.  And, I wanted it to be my, you know, coming out party.  See, so, I go (laughter), so I go to see my boss, I'm twenty-two.  I got this first house and I'm showing these pictures, a shell, $10,500, you can see through the studs, down through the floors.  My boss says to me, he says, "Eric [HistoryMaker Eric Carmichael]," and I'm just surprised I can be.  Most everybody is looking at it like, me, fool.  But, my boss looks at me, he says, "Eric," he says, "great," he says, and of course, he loved a man with a mortgage 'cause it means you kept going to work.  He looked over and he said, "Now, what you need to do is every year try to buy another house until you get to be about thirty."  He said, "By that point, you should have close to ten houses, and if you get those ten houses, you're collecting rents on 'em, some of 'em might be paid off by the time it comes up, and you'll be in a better shape (unclear) to have that kind of income coming in changes how you look at the game."  And, he looked at me as he would, and he'd say, "Now, if you get married, all bets are off."  And, he just start laughing.  He threw the pictures back at me, and told me to go back to work.  Over the years, I did two things.  I bought a couple more houses, but I then got married.  But, as I hit a couple tough spo- patches, where I did hit, get some of that revenue coming in, I understood what he was saying about both (laughter), so.
Story_ID: 636241
Speaker 1: Did the housing crisis hurt you at all?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when the, when the, when the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It hurt--
Speaker 1: --the big fall of 2008?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it killed us on two, two different--two or three different levels on--.  My big picture model was, my big picture model was simple.  I wanted to, I wanted to rehab these houses.  And, you know, growing up in the hood, you gotta know the difference between what you do that lasts, and the people that come in, have good intentions but they don't, they don't understand the hood.  We used to have a guy that used to come in to the hood, to our neighborhood [Linden, Columbus, Ohio], and every first day of summer he'd come and I can see him out of my bedroom window.  And, he would, he had--he used to drive this old Chevy [Chevrolet], and he'd get on the roof top of the Chevy and he'd be parked underneath the, the basketball rim and he'd put these nets up.  And, he'd do the nets, each one of 'em, probably about 8:00, 8:30 in the morning, and he'd put these nets up.  And, I suppose that was his way of helping the people in the hood have some nets to shoot on.  And, so, we would, I, you know, grab the ball and tell my brother [Albert G. Carmichael], "Hey, we got nets, we got nets."  And, then we'd go out and get some of our young buddies and we'd go out and shoot basketball with these nets.  And, you know, that slowed down the game a little bit 'cause you got the ball to come through and you waiting for 'em and they were fresh nets and so forth.  But, and we'd do that, you know, by the time we got finished playing with them, then as older kids started getting up and around, they started coming over.  And, they're like, "Yeah."  So, they, they like to hear the swoosh and the swat where the nets, the ball came through the nets.  And, eventually what would happen would be that at a certain time, by the end of the afternoon maybe the beginning of the evening, somebody, one of the bigger, older, taller kids would jump up, hang with one hand on the rim and with the other hand unhook the nets.  And, he'd take it down and take it back to his house or wherever he wanted to--.  And, so, that was it.  Those--the nets were gone for the rest of the summer.  Now, the guy who was putting those nets up, it made him feel good I'm sure to put the nets up.  But, he didn't know anything about the hood.  He didn't know I'm sure how long those, these were gonna last.  So, I thought, as a hood guy, I could help figure some of this out.
Story_ID: 636242
Speaker 1: Our market was simple: we wanna buy distressed assets through foreclosure, shared sell, short sell, divorce, you know, anything that causes something to be bank owned property, anything that we could get our hands on that was below market, you know, thirty cents, forty cents to the dollar.  And, we figured we could put money in it and along the way we would upgrade the electric, upgrade the plumbing, using dis- dis- discontinued product.  For instance, older tile, but we'd get enough to do the job.  We'd find commodes they might be off white as opposed to, or bisque as opposed to white or something of that nature.  And, we could get really good quality stuff for cheaper prices, but then it would last.  And, then, if we can get end of rolls on carpets and things like that.  Now, my project was, or my process was simply to come in, renovate these houses, get our stuff wholesale and cheaper, and then renovate the houses, turn 'em over to these first time homebuyers, with appliances for instance.  So now they have one bill to pay, not multiple bills and mortgages.  And, then, leave some equity in that allowed 'em them to get a mortgage at a reasonable rate.  And, then the thought was that we would be able to renovate those.  Do one or two houses on this block, or three or four houses on that block, and then that, that would help change the game and spruce some things up.  And, then the other thing I wanted--and we were using some underutilized workers.  Some people had addiction problems that--were in recovery, people getting themselves back on their feet.  So, we're giving them--they'd be encouraged.  And, then the nice thing about it was to also think that, hey, these folks can do these houses and eventually, we're gonna teach them so they will able to do a house for themselves and their families.  And, where we got jammed up was eventually--and then we could, we wouldn't have to make all the money.  If we, if there was thirty thousand dollars' profit in there, let's say if we walk with fifteen or twenty, we were to the good; we were making money doing these other things.  We leave some equity in the property for the customer.  And, the nice things about it was everybody was on board, everybody ate, everybody did well, except when the bank stopped lending, we couldn't move the houses anymore.  So, we were left with, let's say five or six houses.  We worked our way out of (cough) all but three.  And, then unfortunately, we couldn't borrow anything.  And, then we had properties that we couldn't refinance, nor could we get anybody to buy them because they couldn't qualify for mortgages.  And, then even on my own, I couldn't refinance properties or have places that I owned free and clear.  But, the mar- mortgage market was such that you couldn't refinance, so, you know, what are gonna do.
Story_ID: 636243
Speaker 1: --Some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?  I guess, specifically in Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Well, specifically in Columbus, man, you know, it's so, it's sad, sad to me and I travel around and see a lot of stuff and it, it just saddens me when we, we don't know our history.  And, I'm not great about knowing mine.  I think, think I know a fair bit.  I think we--the more we knew, if the more history we knew about each other and about our, our stock and where we came from, the harder it would be for us to, you know, have something stupid tattooed on our, ourselves or walk around with our butt hanging out of our pants.  If we knew our history, we would do better about ourselves.  If we knew our history, we would take better care of our families.  If we knew our history, we would take better care of our women and children, for instance.  So, personally, I think the first step is to know our history and to just put some work in.  Read, and understand, and train, and get to the point where we aren't waiting for somebody who's programming us, one way or the other.  But, we're really looking to get--to make smart decisions to change our- ourselves.  In the movie, the gentleman who has the Harlem Children's Zone [New York, New York] in the movie, 'Waiting for Superman,' he, Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Canada]--I can't remember his name.  But, but he's the founder of Harlem Children's Zone and he says, "Hey, man," he says, "I knew everything was gonna be okay because, because when things are this bad Superman would just fly in and save the day."  Until he realized Superman wasn't coming.  There was no Superman; we were waiting for a man that didn't exist.  And, that's when (laughter), you know, that's when he, he realized that Superman wasn't gonna come and so they had to find a way to save themselves.  But, if you're only listening to ridiculous stuff on the radio where people are only talking gibberish followed by, "See what I'm saying?  Know what I mean?"  Hell no, I don't know what you mean.  You didn't say anything.  You don't have a plan.  You're not articulating a plan.  Or, the other day, I was listening to, last night I was listening to conservative talk radio.  And, there was a guy, I wanna say his name was Reverend Jesse Jenkins [ph.] out of California and he was on this guy, Sim- Simmons--Simpson [ph.], his talk radio program.  And, he was talking about--this is a black minister out of California who was saying how all this stuff was a trick of the, of the, of black people to get folks to--and conservative--excuse me, of liberal minded people to get people to focus on stuff that didn't have anything to do with anything, and the Trayvon Martin case was a further example.  And, that, you know, it was, that Reverend Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] had never apologized for Tawana Brawley; and Jena Six was just made up and so forth.  And, so, you know, I'm not saying that some of these things are not, you know, these are--some of these things are not--hadn't gone too far.  But, in the end, the guy he says, "Oh, well, here's somebody who speaks for black America."  Well, we need to be taking control of our own voices.  We need to be taking care of our own futures.  And, we should not be, we've got to find a way to grab hold of those things.
Story_ID: 636244
Speaker 1: But, most importantly, we've got to find a way to control our own economic destiny.  That's one of the things that hurts us.  We find ourselves not owning and controlling very much of anything.  And, so as a result, we look up and we don't have any ability to hire one another.  We don't have no ability to be smart enough to spend money in our own communities.  We don't have any ability to support one another's efforts.  And, and more importantly than that, we don't know why it would be important to be in that position.  So, we're sort of, you know, they say a man who doesn't know his history is destined to repeat himself.  And, so, then when you bring somebody up like a Dr. Claud Anderson and PowerNomics, and you talk about controlling your destiny.  Or, you talk about, you know, the, the powerful wisdom of somebody like a Booker T. Washington.  And, talking about being able to be merchants and being craftsmen, and tradesmen, and taking pride in that, and controlling your own destiny.  Then all of a sudden you're being, you're looked at like, what the hell are you talking about, you know?  Well, you know, again, you don't know your history, you're destined to repeat it.  And, I think we are getting to the point where--I don't know if we get as many chances as we have had before.  So, in other words, we had other chances before.  You can make a mistake and you can change, you can change, or one person could change a dynamic for their community, for their culture, or for their family even.  But, part of the problem now, when you make certain mistakes these days, some of the mistakes are financially unrecoverable.  And, so, when you go--it's one thing to go in the hole and make a mistake, you find out that you cosigned for a TV for somebody that's not gonna pay. You made a financial mistake there.  It's another thing when you go in the hole and you got a two hundred thousand dollar tax bill with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] that you're never gonna get out of unless you pay it, or come to some agreement, compromise.  Or, you've got a hundred fifty thousand dollars' worth of student loans that you can't pay or, you know, so now you're kind of in boc- in bondage in a hock for the rest of your life.  And, in many cases because, it's because we're not thinking and we're just being held, held hostage to our own wants, not on--not trying to meet our needs.  Anyway--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you're about to get me to talk too much, again.
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no that's, that's good, good stuff.
Story_ID: 636245
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything you've done to this point, and you're still a relatively young man in terms of the people we interview, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, my legacy I suppose--I don't have children.  I don't have, you know, we have been able to do some, some--build some buildings and some properties and change up a few communities here and there, and that's been a blessing.  We've had impact in a number of places when it comes to policy and information and changing, in terms of the dynamics when--as it relates to investment policies and protocols and decisions.  And, that's been a good thing for people in the minority brokerage and investment banking and money management communities, so that's a, been a good part of legacy.  But, you know what, what, what causes me to really step back and think about my long term legacy is that maybe somewhere along the way you've been able to have a conversation with somebody and get them to turn the ship around; they were going one direction, and you got them to turn around and go the other direction.  Case in point: one of my, he's a good friend, guy that was a painting contractor and he started working with us doing one or two projects here and there.  Helped him step his game up.  He's a good guy, and smart guy.  Unfortunately, he made a number of decisions, wrong decisions early in life and ended up being in prison for three or four times, with four or five felonies.  So, he's building this painting contracting business.  He gets a little embarrassed every time I tell the story.  But, when we met him, he had a minivan and he was doing his thing in his minivan.  And, he would come in and he would pop a 5-hour Energy and stay up all night and try to get his job done and move on and make his money and keep it moving.  Until we start talking about different things and he was kind enough to listen to the gibberish and the jawboning of an old man.  And, eventually what he started seeing was the--some of the wisdom in what we were talking about and he started to pay a little closer attention, more so than I had thought.  We talked to him about, you know, some of his professionalism, and not just doing a good job painting but also how you position yourself and you (unclear) your--position your image.  Before I knew it, he had some business cards.  He had some t-shirts made up, sweatshirts with his business name on it.  And, then one day I looked, looked over and I was looking for his van, we were gonna ride out to go get some paint, and, he said, "Well, I'll just ride with you."  And, I looked for his van so we can ride together, and he doesn't have the van.  Now he's got a work truck with his business on a stenciled--business name stenciled on the side with his contact information.  And, when I saw it, I welled, I welled up with both pride and excitement.  It was because, he had explained to me, that we had given him, so kept him business enough doing some project work with some apartments that we had controlled and managed, that allowed him to get a team together.  And, he developed his team, and one of the guys on his team was supervising his group ended up buying his van when he got his tax return, he invested that in a new van for himself or a newer van for himself.  And, then, now the other guy's got his old minivan, he's got the new van, and now you got two groups of folks out here doing business, helping feed their families.  And, this first guy, though he had the five felonies, he's got two beautiful kids, and he's staying out there helping them.  And, I suppose that if I can't have children, and I don't have a legacy to speak of, a lineage, then that's probably about a good as a legacy as I can, can ever hope for: is having a few people like that that are holding it down so that each one teaches one.  He teaches his children, and his children teaches, then, other children and that there are, if I'm fortunate, when it's all said and done I'll have a number of those stories to be able to tell.  And, they'll say, "Well, that [HistoryMaker] Eric Carmichael, man, he wasn't a bad guy.  He taught me something or he shared with me something," and you know, much like I talk about my father [Albert L. Carmichael].  Much like I talk about Ralph Sturdivant, much as I talk about Ralph [Ralph R. Smith] and Cookie [ph.].  I mean, everybody, you know, my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], my [paternal] grandmother [Emma Mason], there's every--somebody--God always provides a ram in the bush: somebody there that stands in the gap and helps teach you something that you need to know at the time you need it.  And, maybe I'll be that blessing for somebody else.
Story_ID: 636246
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you, when you look back at everything, is there, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would've talked to that young guy and I'd had told him, marry rich and hold on (laughter).  You know, this econ- this, this economy stuff (laughter), this economy stuff is for the birds, where you wanna just, you don't wanna be a, you don't have to be a slave to it.  Absolutely, I mean, I think there's some, there's times in which I wish I had zigged instead of zagged.  I wish that I had not, you know, did one trade or the other.  Certainly, there's times in which, you know, you wish you had been able to take a peek at the card before you played your hand, you know.  But, probably really wouldn't take anything from my journey.  I mean, it's been, everything that has happened to me, God did all the good stuff.  The bad stuff, you know, I just have to consider that to be tuition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636247
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did your parents think about your success?  Did they get a chance, did they get a chance to see you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my mom [Rosanne Brown Carmichael], you know, of course my mom is still, still alive and she, she, she's been really proud in a lot of respects.  She, after the crash and some of the things that we were--you know, it changed up how we were able to enjoy life.  Not really me enjoy life, but you know, I didn't have as much disposable income, you had to retool and you couldn't, you know, you couldn't make this deal happen or that deal happen, you know.  So, so that's been a little bit of a challenge.  It was an adjustment for my mom.  My mom has been like a grandchild.  In that, neither my brother [Albert G. Carmichael] or I had children so she got a largesse came from not having grandchildren.  So, without having to pay college tuitions or something, you know, she wanted a car.  She got the car already.  She wanted to go somewhere then, you know, she got the trip and so.  You know, my mom is making more of an adjustment than I have to because of that probably.  But, she's doing well.  My brother's doing great.  And, so, he keeps things going there for her.  But, I remember my dad [Albert L. Carmichael] used to be amazed at what we were doing, and we could do.  And, I would tell him, "Yeah, we did, you know, we did three, four hundred thousand shares of stock today.  Pop, you know, moved $20 million, we had this $50 million trade here or there.  We raised $200 million's worth of bonds, you know."  And, you know, it was all he could do was to keep his chest from popping out and busting all the buttons 'cause he was very proud man to have (cough) one of his boys being involved at that level.  And, and of course, like I said, if he were, if he were around to drive past, I mean, he used to drive past my houses sometimes.  And, and I'd look up and he'd be there and have people in the passenger seat.  I'd come out, "Hey, Pop," you know, and, and say, you know, "this is such and such, and I just wanted to show 'em--they tell me what people aren't doing.  And, I'm tell 'em what my boy's doing."  And, he would bring 'em by and it was embarrassing to me, but he was really proud.  But, what I used to say to my dad was, that he was always amazed at the tricks that we would do, that my brother's travels, he--my brother was in the [U.S. military] service and he traveled around the world and you know.  So, he would--so, my dad and I went over to Germany and hooked up with him.  And, the next morning my brother drive us into Paris [France] and showed us around, and gave my dad a chance to see the Eiffel Tower and touch it.  And, my father couldn't believe this, and he would say how proud he was and how exciting he was that we'd get a chance to see the world in lieu of these things.  And, what I used to have to remind my dad was that the tricks that we were doing were only able, we were only able to do them because he had done what he was doing.  He was on the trapeze with no net underneath.  That we were having the luxury of having a net so we could absolutely afford to take a few more risks and do a little bit different trick than he could do with no net.  If he missed the bar and fell, he died.  If you follow me.  And, he then, in him dying, he took our family, his mother [Emma Mason] and extended family, his girlfriend and her family (cough), my sister [Teresa Harris Perdue], and her child support and the payments there.  All of us were depending on him.  And, people that we didn't even know about were depending on him to come through with the money to meet obligations on a daily basis.  That was who he was.  We, me with no kids, knew that if I missed the net hopefully I bounce up and catch the next rope.  Or, if things got really bad, I could go to my dad's and sleep in one of his rooms or go eat out of his refrigerator until I could get my strength back up to get back on the trapeze again.  And, so, so I think that kind of made him feel good.  He knew that because, 'cause our success, like anything in life, we were just standing on the shoulders of the people that came before us.
Story_ID: 636248
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't mentioned, or anything we need to talk about before I ask my last sc- question?
Speaker 2: No, I think, I think we talked about, one way or the other, I think we talked about quite a bit so, you go ahead and ask.  I'm--I don't know what this last one is gonna be.  I hope I got an answer for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, it's similar to legacy so it's not, not that difficult or anything.  But, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I--it depends on when you're--it depends on when that remembrance is coming.  If, if something were to happen to me today, I would hope that people would say that he's, he was a good guy.  He was a fun guy and we had a lot of fun together.  He was an honorable guy.  He kept his word.  One of the most--he kept his name clean.  That didn't mean that you got to be perfect.  But, one of the tests in life for me, given to me by my dad [Albert L. Carmichael] was, he said, "Hey, I gave you a clean name and I expect that to be what you give to your son."  Whether or I have a son or not, I hope to be able to have a clean name when all is said and done, and that's what I'm working towards every day.  I know I'm--should something happen I've already made arrangements in my will to leave some money for a big ass party, and let people have a good time, and eat and drink and plenty of chicken, and some music and a band.  And, and I hope that people will say, on the way out, "Man, that was a great party.  And, E [HistoryMaker Eric Carmichael] would've had a good time here.  He even provided for a good party on the way out the door."  Now, if I live a lot longer, which only God will know.  But, if I live a lot longer, I think the new way I'm kind of positioning myself is to be like a black Andy Rooney.  You know, a old, curmudgeon (laughter), who just says whatever the hell's on his mind, and just tells it like it is.  I hope that when all is said and done that I'm smart enough, honest enough, and have the conviction whenever possible when you're asked the question, that you give the honest answer, maybe tactfully, but unvarnished and unstrained so that, you know, people don't have to guess where you stand.  And, and you tell the truth.  And, I hope that that's what people can and will say about me: he, you know, he told the truth, and he did the right things.
