Story_ID: 54445
Speaker 1: Good afternoon, my name is Samuel Adams with The HistoryMakers.  I'll be interviewing.  Behind me is videographer, Scott Stearns.  And our executive director is Ms. Julieanna Richardson.  I'd like to begin by asking you for your name and the spelling of your name.
Speaker 2: I'm Augustus Colson.  That's spelled A-U-G-U-S-T-U-S, C-O-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And today's date, sir?
Speaker 2: The day is April 21st, 2002.
Speaker 1: And can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 25th, 1936.
Speaker 1: Our location--address and location?
Speaker 2: It's 5614 Sunny--Countryside Drive in Tallahassee, Florida.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: Commercial artist, journalist, and a minister.
Story_ID: 54446
Speaker 1: Sir, we begin each interview with five questions to just break the ice and get us into our interview.  They're short answers, so.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have no favorite food.  I (unclear) food.  I just like food.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange and green.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: Out of town.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Only what you do for Christ will last."
Story_ID: 54447
Speaker 1: Sir, I'd like to begin by asking you the names of your parents and their spelling, and your siblings' also.
Speaker 2: My mother was Minnie L. Colson.  My father was Willie Colson.  That Willie is spelled W-I-L-L-I-E, C-O-L-S-O-N.  And my mother was Minnie; that's M-I-N-N-I-E.  She was a Bryant, B-R-Y-A-N-T, Colson.
Speaker 1: Your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have four brothers and four sisters.  My brother--oldest brother is Jerome Colson, J-E-R-O-M-E.  Bra--other brother is Johnny, J-O-H-N-N-Y.  I have four sisters, Mary--one brother is deceased of course.  And I have a sister, Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Williams.  A--anoth--a second sister was Carolyn, C-A-R-O-L-Y-N, Demps, D-E-M-P-S.  I have Mary Colson, M-A-R-Y, C-O-L-S-O-N, and then there's Gayle, G-A-Y-L-E, Gwendolyn Gayle Colson.
Story_ID: 54448
Speaker 1: Now do you know your--anything about your mother's [Minnie Colson] parents?
Speaker 2: I know my mother's parents, mother and father.  Her father was Mack Bryant.  Her mother was Pearl Fitz [Bryant].  I know more about my mother's side than my father [Willie Colson]--I--my grandfather's side.  I know nothing of my grandfather.
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: I know that she was--my mother's--my, my mother's mother was Pearl.  Her mother's was Johnson.  Her mother was a Johnson, and they came to this country from Haiti.  And that's as much as I know about, about them.  I know more about the generations after American than before.  But all I know is that they came to this country as slaves and that's as far back as I can go.  I know nothing of my grandfather or my father's family.
Story_ID: 54449
Speaker 1: So--but there are some interesting stories you were told about your father's [Willie Colson] side of the family or how he came about in his living.  Could you speak on that?
Speaker 2: I know my father's--all of the stories I know about my father I got it from my father firsthand because he didn't know his father [Campbell Colson].  But all of the stories and he--his life just went on and on.  I do know that he was abandoned as a child and spent the rest--all of his life--he died at 91--and as a laborer, a sharecropper until-- was sleeping with the hogs, and outside, and being abused.  That was the basic story of his whole life.  And I grew up with him, spent a lot time with my father.  That was my favorite--my favorite idol, the inspiration for my whole life, because his dogged determination to survive is--was inspiration to me.  And he took me every place he went.  He took--had me with him and gave me some words of advice, man, and some little stories that I will never forget.  And that's--that--that's, that's what I know about my father.
Speaker 1: Can you share some of those stories?
Speaker 2: Well, his favorite story that he would always say was how he came into--to--he was regarding about heaven and hell.  That was his favorite thing and because he was torn between these two places.  And his--he say he had an aunt--not an aunt, a lady that raised him.  And she was so mean and she was a Christian woman.  And he said and if she went to heaven, he definitely didn't wanna go; said he would go anyplace else if, if--if this woman was going to heaven, he didn't wanna go.  And so that determined his whole life.  He thought that he could make it by being exactly opposite from what his--this lady that raised him.  And that was his favorite story.  But I wish I had all or a book of all the thing he said.  I'm quite sure if I sat down and I thought about them, I would eventually--could write everything he told me over my 67 years--66 years.  And they would fill up a lot more books than I ever could, because he had a saying for everything that there ever was.
Speaker 1: So what type of man was he?  Just what type of man was he in general?
Speaker 2: A strong, hardworking man.  I mean he was too unbelievable as strong, hard working.  What a free, free-hearted man, do anything he could for anybody under any circumstances.  That's basically what my daddy--if you saw him, he would stop going where he was going, doing what he was doing to help somebody else.  That's the kind of man--I could describe him just like that.
Story_ID: 54450
Speaker 1: And how with your mother [Minnie Colson].  What type of woman was she?
Speaker 2: My mother was a--the controller of my father [Willie Colson](laughter), probably the only person I know that could keep him, all of that energies in check.  But my mother--mother was a soft, gentle, caring woman, fiercely in love with the Lord.  And that's the kind of mother that I had.  She just believed in doing right; that was just her.
Speaker 1: And what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She stayed home and raised the children.
Story_ID: 54451
Speaker 1: Now, do you know the story of how your parents [Minnie Colson and Willie Colson] met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he told me how they met, because he had--he never saw her.  They was in the good old days when you had to go to the house and see everything.  You had to see the mother; you had to ask for to come to do all this kind of thing.  But he had never heard of this, this lady because she stayed home.  She wasn't quite the oldest, but she was somewhat guarded.  But so he went to see to the back fence when he was passing by and saw her in the yard.  That's how he saw her, in the backyard hanging her clothes on the line.  And of course he messed around and got caught (laughter).  And that incident, him getting caught, drew them together, and that's how they met.  She was out in the backyard hang out clothes, and he just kept going.  He would make it his business to go by there every--whatever wash day it was he would go by.  And that was the limit of his conversation, just passing by enough to say something without looking 'cause he couldn't stop because my, my grandfather [Mack Bryant] was a--ooh, he was a task master.  And so that's what he had to do.  He had to--he, he had to steal looks and say one or two words.  He probably didn't have too many words other than that do say anyway, but that probably helped him out.  But he met her.
Story_ID: 54452
Speaker 1: What type of education did your parents receive?
Speaker 2: My father [Willie Colson] told me that he went to school one day, and the school wasn't then.  And that was his--that was his education.  He learned how to read when he was about 65.  He learned how to read by reading the Bible.  And, and he just got in it and, and he taught himself how to read.  And he--and he was a grown man, 65 years old, when he learned how to read.  He had no education.  And he said that when he went to school, the school wasn't even open.  He must have went on a Saturday or something.  That's--that was his education.  But he taught himself, and he had this--he had the brains and the wits.  I mean he, he could solve the problems.  Yeah, he knew when to hold 'em and when to fold 'em.  He wouldn't talk if he didn't know what to say, but I, I seldom find when he didn't know what to say.  He always have--his, his favorite saying was--to other people was "you worry about that; let me worry about this."  And so that probably bailed him out, but he had a, a legitimate answer.  That was him without an education.  If he had one, boy, it would've been nice.
Speaker 1: And your mother's education?
Speaker 2: My mother was basically a school teacher.  She went to about maybe, as it went in those days, about the 6th grade, the 6th or 9th grade.  But school teaching was in her blood.  And so she had the school children in the neighborhood.  Everywhere she could teach, that's what she did; always found somewhere to stop somebody and share with them what she knew.  And that's what she was.  She thought she was a school teacher.  Because in her day, she would have qualified for a school teacher, 'cause schools teachers when she was a child they didn't have more than 6th to a 9th grade education.  And she was a very smart, smart woman.
Story_ID: 54453
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory I was--I'm two year--I was two years old.  And I, I can know pretty well too, be--because later years I haven't been able to associate different things.  But when I was two years old I think I burned down the house playing in the fireplace--an open fireplace with an open broom, and I caught the broom on fire.  And, and I was trying to beat it out, and the broom caught the paper on the floor, and the paper on the floor caught the wallpaper on the wall, plaster on the wall.  And before we knew anything, the house was burned down.  I remember, and that was two years.  I had to start at the school.  We were living in a little town called Greensville, Florida.  A cook's meal sittin' outside.  My daddy [Willie Colson] was a, a first logger and the a sharecropper.  And so that's what we were doing he--in this little camp where he was a logger.  And we would spend these times alone.  And that's how--that's how far I can go back is, is when I was two years old.  But everything after that, I can document it by incidents.
Speaker 1: So do you know what happened after the fire incident?  What--
Speaker 2: After the fire--
Speaker 1: --did the family do?
Speaker 2: After the fire happened, we moved in--we went back home.  I do remember going back to Chaires, Florida where we lived with my [maternal] grandma--parents [Pearl Bryant and Mack Bryant] lived.  We went back to Chaires, Florida until my dad got another job.  And the sharecropping was the only thing, so they caught the truck--the bean truck and they went to Delray Beach, Florida.  And so I remember that, going away to--came back and I do remember--I do remember six years old, because at six years old I went to school for the first times in Greensville, Florida.  My dad then fell off a truck, a log truck, where he was a logger, and he got so badly mangled we had to go back to Chaires, Florida.  And then--until he got out of the hospital.  He was unable to do any logging then for quite a while.  We moved back to--we moved to Tallahassee [Florida] then.
Story_ID: 54454
Speaker 1: How old are you when you moved to Tallahassee [Florida]?
Speaker 2: I started at the school I was seven years old when we came to Tallahassee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--what's the community like here in Tallahassee when you get here?
Speaker 2: We moved to Tallahassee in Frenchtown, in the heart of Frenchtown.  It was the middle of the war [World War II].  And I do remember it was in the middle of the war, and I saw a lot of amphibious vehicles, jeeps, army troops patrolling the streets, all up and down Frenchtown streets.  And we moved in and we didn't know at that time--my father didn't know.  He had never been to town, didn't know where we were moving.  We were moving in a big house on the corner of Carolina and Macomb Street, and that was right in ha--middle of the red light district.  And I remember that's where I--we moved.  And I started to school, first grade, at old Lincoln High School.  And town communities were pretty rough.  There was thugs on every corner, and it was a different lifestyle from a country boy who had never seen the country.  So when I went to school at Lincoln and had these thugs in 1st grade.  They were about nine, ten, eleven years old, and they probably had been there for quite a while.  And I would not--ooh, I would not respond to anything that was going on around me, 'cause these guys looked extra hard.  So it was easy for me to go back to 1st grade than to go to 2nd grade, so I spent my first year in the first year in the 1st grade again 'cause I was afraid to go to school in the first grade--in the 2nd grade.  So I stayed in the 1st grade again.  And my mother didn't know whether I had--was still in 1st grade until my report card came out.  And then I was repor--promoted to the 2nd grade.
Story_ID: 54455
Speaker 1: What was your household like with the chores and responsibilities of your brothers and sisters (unclear)--was--how, how was the household run?
Speaker 2: It was a kind of dictatorship, you know, very stern.  You had these--you had the chores.  You just had to do what you were told and, and that was it.  We didn't have--noth--nothing, nothing like today.  You had chores.  I had to get up and--you had to rake the yard, cut wood, make the fire, you had to boil pots.  And distinctly I remember working from the 1st grade all the way up.  There was just chores.  There was no, no this, no quarter to do that.  We just had to work; we had to work.  My, my father [Willie Colson] worked all the time.  He would come home in the afternoon and, and he'd work again.  He was nonstop.  And my mother [Minnie Colson] just stayed there and ran the family.  And I would rather be punished by my mother than to be punished by my father, because that meant I had got two punishments.  I got one by my mother, and I got another one when he got home.  So I took hers great, and I tried to be a good one.  I never succeeded, but that's how it was in the family.  The mother ran the house; the daddy ran the job and the house, and, and that's it.  You just--fear was at--that, that fear and respect, unheard of these--in 19--in 2002, but that's what it was back in 1942.
Story_ID: 54456
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I only do one thing as a child and that was draw, on the wall, on a table cloth, anywhere, on the yard, in the sand.  That's the kind of child I was.  If you took me out of that, I was unbearable.  I was into everything and, and I got my share of beatings every day because I just had to--I just had to vent all this energy out.  And nothing took my 100 percent interest other than artwork.
Speaker 1: And where do you think that inclination at that age came to draw?  Did you see something?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I knew of--I, I don't know of any other relatives since then who possess that kind of interest in the arts.  But at that age, I saw nothing around me wanna do it, other than the fact that I had this ability to do it.  And it just came out--you just discovered it at this early age.  I had nothing to look forward to or to get it from some other person.  It was just something that was there.  And it was inside of me fighting to get out. And--
Story_ID: 54457
Speaker 1: So what was the community like you were growing up in here in Tallahassee [Florida] when you moved here in Frenchtown?  What was the neighborhood like, the people there?
Speaker 2: After about two weeks, after we discover where we lived, we moved out off of--off of Macomb Street in Frenchtown to another part of the town.  And that was what I con--considered the community then.  It was still in Frenchtown, but it was in a more--in a residential upscale--you know how we live in the ghetto and then we live a little bit further in the ghetto?  Well, that was one was where everybody in there raise your child.  Everybody would just--the whole community.  It was just a people united.  There was just everybody there.  We had schoolteachers on our--two or three schoolteachers on my block.  Just everybody knew everybody.  And of course we weren't allowed out of the yard and to do any other kinds of things like rest of the kids.  Our house was a different--it was a community within itself.  Everybody outside of our house they did what they wanted to.  But in my house, that community, we were run by the mom [Minnie Colson] and dad [Willie Colson].  And, and that meant from the church, home, school, which my sister sang about: church, home, school.  That's our whole life.  That's the way we did it.
Speaker 1: Now in your community, were there any individuals there who really impressed you, people who were living near you in that neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do remember they--they didn't impress me so much when it was going on.  I wasn't aware of the impression, but that were some very impressionable people there that were--Ms. Acqualina Howell, she's not deceased; she was a schoolteacher.  Ms. Byrd was a schoolteacher.  Right--well, in my neighborhood there were over five or six schoolteachers right in the same within one block of schoolteachers, preachers and ministers.  And, and I grew up with these people all my life.  We never left out the community.  We just, just--we just lived there.  They ran our house, ran our lifestyle.  I ran away from home when I was about nine years old, but--and I didn't get further than three blocks away.  So--because everybody I had to pass knew that I was--knew who I was.  And they were stop and offer me food and dress me up for my journey, and the next thing I knew my father would be walking up.  And so that's the kind of community we lived in.
Speaker 1: Why were you running away from home?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be like everybody else in, in the community.  I wanted to be like the guy that didn't have to be in at six o'clock, and the one who was going to the football games, and the basketball games, and shooting marbles, and doing all the things that kids were doing.  We didn't do that at my house.  We didn't do that at--, so that's why I would run away.  I wanted to be free, and that's why I was running away.
Speaker 1: So there in your household things like that weren't--why weren't they?
Speaker 2: My family was strict, strict hardcore Pentecostals; they were.  And they were weren't like anybody else.  Well, you know--if you know Pentecostals in the good old days--no, you wouldn't know it--back in the 1950s--'49' [1949] and '50's [1950s]--we couldn't shoot marbles, definitely couldn't shoot hooky.  You couldn't play basketball.  We couldn't do nothing on Sunday.  We couldn't be out after six o'clock.  So as far as I was concerned I was living in slavery, and that's why I was running away.  That's why I wanted to be free.
Speaker 1: So did you--how did you vent any of this?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I, I just sit--I sat and waited my time.  I just said--I just sweated it out.  And when I was gra--old enough and grown enough then I found out I was already free.
Story_ID: 54458
Speaker 1: So how was the church you attended?  What was the name of the church you attended, and what was that like?
Speaker 2: The church that I attended was in the heart of Frenchtown, right across the street from what is now a drugstore, on the corner right off Tennessee Street on Macomb in a lodge hall.  We--the lodge was upstairs.  And our church was started--and it was started by a bunch of missionaries out of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--the Mount Sinai Holy Church of America.  Three or four evangelist missionary women who had--was unsatisfied with the Church of God in Christ.  And she said God had sent her out on a mission.  So she was one of the very few first women to go out and separate from the main body of the Church of God in Christ.  And called it "Mount Sinai."  And she came South with this vision, establishing churches, and she established churches from Philadelphia all the way to Florida.  And this little place where they had the tent meeting was where my mother [Minnie Colson] stopped by day.  She was a hardcore A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal Church] And she stopped in and she saw what she call--they were called the "manifestation of the Holy Spirit."  And she looked here and she saw this, and she went back the second night.  And by the third or fourth night she had gotten a new salvation.  She was saved again.  She was already a Christian believer, but now she said she was filled with the Holy Ghost and she wanted to be this.  And then she introduced this to my father [Willie Colson], which was quite a--and my father was the one that did--remember that didn't wanna go to heaven (laughter).  And so--but by her insistence--but he didn't wanna leave his wife either, so he slowly--he went into that church [New Covenant Holy Temple?] and became one of its longstand--he was a member in that church until he died some--over 50 years he was a member in that church.  And that's where I was raised up in that church.  So now besides being already enslaved at home, I was enslaved by this church body too.  So that's where I was rai--and I was able to break free I think around about 1950, or '52' [1952], or '53' [1953] or something like that.  My dad being a sharecropper, they would have to go on these seasons, tobacco's in Quincy [Florida], berries in Georgia and all the different places.  And I had started going to school at Lincoln [High School].  And by now I'm growing a little older.  And whenever we would get back from these trips, it would always be after school had started.  So I begged them to let me stay if I could get a job.  My dad said "If you get a job and make as much as you're making, then you don't have to go."  So I found a job working at Benny's Drugstore washing dishes.  And so when I brought home this first check of 18 dollars, that was upping my pay about five dollars over what I was gonna make if I went to the fields, so I stayed home.
Story_ID: 54459
Speaker 1: I wanna know about what things you learned and what influences to your character and who you were as a child did you gain from the church.
Speaker 2: I wasn't so much interested in the church when I was in the church.  When I was--when I was in there--because in 11th or 12th grade [at Lincoln High School] they allowed me when they went away then that church didn't existent no more, when they went away sharecropping.  So I was free then to go to church with my friends.  Then I went to church with the Primitive Baptist friends.  That's where everybody was going.  And I went to the Primitive Baptist and quite naturally did things differently.  And so that's my first ties with the church, official ties.  I was in the other church, but I never went through the baptism, and I never was--I never was saved according to that church doctrine.  But I was converted, and I was baptized in the Primitive Baptist church, and it didn't influence my life too much.  And I was just a person growing up, and so--but what I had received as a child in my home meant more to me than what I had learned in the church.  So that's what guided and influenced me, what I had learned at home.
Speaker 1: What, what was that?
Speaker 2: That, that, that was--that my mother and little of my mother and my father, my family, and love for people and respect for people, and always that, that has stuck to me more than anything at that time I didn't learned in church, love for people, and hard work, and working for what you want rather than stealing, and hooking, and crooking.  That meant more to me than anything I had ever learned in church.
Story_ID: 54460
Speaker 1: So your school--you start attending--you go--is it Lincoln [High School] from 1st through 12th?
Speaker 2: First through 12th.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like while you were at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: I didn't enjoy school--I, I can't remember school until I got to 6th grade.  In 6th grade they have a teacher--they introduced us to art.  And there was a teacher that--there was no art in that school, but this--he was hired by the county [Leon County].  And he went from school to school on a certain day.  And of course I didn't learn anything but how to take three eggs and make a turkey, and five points make a star, and this kind--but it opened up a whole kind of other new avenues for me.  And it gave me a class where I can go and sit there all day and do exactly what I want.  And that just burst me open, man.  That just--and it--and then, then the school discovered what I could do, and I was making posters and signs, and designing jackets, doing bumper stickers and license plates.  And so I was--I was really rolling then.  I was--I was enjoying what I was doing, and I did it all the time.  That's, that's what school meant for me.  Now from 6th grade all the way through 12th that's all I did was artwork.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that teacher from 6th grade--
Speaker 2: Nesby.
Speaker 1: Mr. Nesby.
Story_ID: 54461
Speaker 1: Now, when you're looking back at your childhood, growing up here in this area in Tallahassee [Florida], what sights, sounds, and smells bring you back to your childhood?
Speaker 2: Paint.  When I hear gospel music.  I'm not very diversified in--when it comes to music.  I can listen at almost anything.  But if you take me away from gospel--traditional gospel and blues, there is no music as far as I'm concerned, you know, so I just--I listen at all that 'cause I'm tolerable.  I can listen at anything.  But what I really enjoy, I can just freak out on is some good blues and you know, [HM] B.B. King, Muddy Waters, John-Jimmy Witherspoon and all those guys.  And that, that's, that's music outside of the church.  In the church, I like traditional gospel, and that's the music and he sounds that I love that--and the--and the--and the tastes in Tallahassee, I mean you can associate--those days the menu was cut and dried.  Ninety percent of the foods I eat now I never knew them as a child.  I knew grits, chitlins, and that kind of things--fish on Friday.
Story_ID: 54462
Speaker 1: Now sir, now you're in school [Lincoln High School] in 6th grade in your high school area.  And this talent you have for art, at what moment is it realized that you have this talent?
Speaker 2: Well, from--well, I always thought I the talent, even as that little child, 'cause I did it all the time.  And there I was not pressured.  I was--there was no competition.  There was nobody there.  So there was just me and my art world.  And when I got in high school, there were two very well established artists, but they were four or five grades ahead of me.  And that was there--they was--they were Tallahassee [Florida].  It's in their art, and in fact it was phenomenon.  They were twin brothers, and, and, and they could--and they were called the Glenn--the Glenn twins.  I think it was Hodges and Rogers.  They are both deceased now.  And, and, and I looked at their work, and it was just so--it was everything that I wanted to do, that I wanted to be.  And that's when I realized that I was not--I was best in my own little world.  But when I started looking outside of me, that was the next closest thing that I, I saw that I could be.  So, I wanted be--and that was the first disappointment came, because when I saw them work--when I heard them mentioned and I saw them working, and I went to stand and watch and just learn.  And when I came, they stopped.  They wouldn't do anything else.  And that, that really.  And that's something I said I never wanted to do, and I'll never--a lot of people say--asked me.  They say can I--can I stand--you don't mind me watching.  I said no.  Stand--then I'm at my best when somebody's watching.  But these guys, in all their lives, they never would watch me--let me watch them do anything.  So I--that inspired me then.  And I guess that brought that teaching thing out of another aspect of me.  And it pushed me to want to be better and better and better, and I just--just did.  I had a new drive in me, not just to do art.  Then I wanted to do it better.  And that started back in high school, and from there it just went.
Story_ID: 54463
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers besides Mr. Nesby who noticed this talent and nurtured it in you?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody--all the teachers did because they all had me doing things.  They always had, had--wanted me to do something for them.  And I got interested in other aspects of my life.  Like I was very well interested--never was heard of journalism, didn't know that was--what that was about until I was in the 11th grade.  And then I turned in a paper and teachers just had a big X on it and gave it back to me.  And I said what--and I was with the football team.  I was supposed to be getting ready to go on the road, and I was waiting to catch the bus.  She said "You're not going any place until you write a paper."  I said "I just wrote a paper.  I passed it into you."  She said "I'm a schoolteacher.  I' know writing.  I know--I know writing, and I know that you didn't write this."  She said well, "You write something right now.  And you just sit down and write something right now and then you go to the football team.  And what you write now better be just like what you passed in."  Said "What you want me write about?"  And she gave me this subject to write on.  Fifteen minutes later I passed in the paper, and I walked out of the classroom with her standing there scratching her head.  Of course I didn't know this--I didn't know this happened before until when I came back from the room and I saw her standing talking to the principal with my paper, showing it to the principal.  And so then I had launched a new career, and that's when I became interested in something I didn't know about.  See, I thought I had talent in, in art, but when she was insistent that I did not write the paper--so I was figuring maybe she thought it was--it was too good for me to have written.  And that's, that's what really started me--that, that--her name was Ms. Speed (ph.), Josie (ph.) Speed, and an English teacher at Lincoln.  She's the one that, that started me on this--another, another aspect of my life.
Speaker 1: Can I get a few spellings of names--Byrd?
Speaker 2: B-Y-R-D.  That was all I knew her--was her last name.
Speaker 1: Nesby?
Speaker 2: N-E-S-B-Y.
Speaker 1: And there was another one begins with A--teacher that begin with an A?
Speaker 2: Boy.
Speaker 1: And Ms. Ha--
Speaker 2: Ha--Howell, H-O-W-E-L-L, Acqualina Howell.
Speaker 1: Acqua--how do you spell Acqualina?
Speaker 2: A-C-Q-U-A-I-L-I-N-I--L-I-N-I or L-I-N-A.
Speaker 1: That's it, thanks.
Story_ID: 54464
Speaker 1: How are your--how are parents [Minnie Colson and Willie Colson] and family responding to this talent their son has?
Speaker 2: They were responding to it on a different level.  They were--I always thought they respa-- respond just out of proud parents.  And I didn't feel this on the level that they were feeling, 'cause they were always remarking; they was always bragging.  And I was always afraid that I would never--I couldn't live up to what they was expecting of me.  They were calling me "smart," and "talented," and "gifted."  And I didn't feel all these things.  I just felt that I was--had something I could do.  And I didn't think there was a--being talented, I thought it was just something that you could do well and no one else could do it.  And I never just thought about different levels of being talented.  I didn't even think that I was talented.  I just thought it was just something that you learn in the slow learners class.  I mean if, you know, if a person--you know, you don't get an award for being six-foot ten.  I mean you grew to be six-foot ten.  There's no--there's no--you don't--you don't how.  If you can't document it--and I had no special schooling to learn art.  I didn't know--I didn't know--I was writing, but I didn't know what I was writing.  So I didn't--I couldn't take the bla--I couldn't claim--I couldn't claim this special thing.  And that's the way I always responded to it.  My parents, sisters, and whole family, they thought of it different.  They thought they had a brother for a genius, and I didn't feel like one.
Speaker 1: So this writing talent, where does this take you?
Speaker 2: After I started impressing a lot of people with the same kind of response, so I--if I could do it, I said well, why not get paid for what I--(unclear)--so I thought about--then I thought about journalism.  And my dream then was to start me a do-sort of do our own newspaper.  I had no training in journalism.  I didn't know anything about it, so just do your own and you don't need any training.  Whatever you do is okay.  So that's how I got into journalism.  I just loved it, and I started writing, and wherever I was either drawing or writing.  And if I wasn't doing one, I was doing it about the other one.  I was writing what I was drawing, and that's how the two just merged.
Story_ID: 54465
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about the Tallahassee [Florida] at that time, and the segregated society.  Did you ever come in contact with any incidents where you realized I live in a situation that's really not fair or equal?
Speaker 2: I often heard the--but I didn't hear the word segregation when I was growing up as a child.  In fact, I didn't know I was segregated when I was growing up as a child.  The thing that was happening around me was a way of life.  I mean you might hear that somebody burned a cross and you became afraid.  But, so if you didn't want a cross burned on your yard, don't do anything.  When you saw--you going down the street, if you saw a white lady coming down the sidewalk, you got off the sidewalk and walked way around.  You went to the back door; you didn't go to the front door.  And I didn't think this was segre--I didn't know it was segregation.  I thought it was just the way of life, the way I was supposed to live.  I didn't know I was segregated until I left Tallahassee and got to the North.  Then I found out I was segregated.
Speaker 1: Did you have any experiences that were really negative while you were here growing up?
Speaker 2: I--one of my classmates was--he was accused of a rape.  And I remember him being electrocuted, and all of the other things were just like I've--my dad [Willie Colson] would take me by and show me a cross that they would burn on somebody's yard and this kind of thing.  But I never saw no blatant--the beatings and the lynching and all that, I never eyewitnessed this kind of thing.  The only thing I ever saw--I mean I came in contact with was--you knew it happened because you read about it in the paper the next day, and the word got around over town.  But in my neighborhood I never saw--I never saw anything like that.  I knew a lot of people that were lynched and dropped in the river, that kind of thing, but I never saw any of them.  I never eyewitnessed any of the prejudice, but I read enough signs that said colored only and, and posters that says all kind of derogatory things.  I've seen that kind of--I've been spit on.  And, and course in my day there was no busing.  Busing was a later thing that come along.  But I remember walking five miles to school, and school buses was passing me all the time.  So I didn't see why the big issue when the school busing came in, because they had busing all the time, but we just didn't ride on 'em.  We had to--if we saw a school bus coming, man, you hit the ditch.  You got behind a tree or something, because you knew the raw eggs, the rotten eggs, cans, and garbage was gonna come flying.  That's the way-
Speaker 1: So what did your parents [Minnie Colson and Willie Colson] teach you about how you're supposed to live, how you're supposed to be?
Speaker 2: In regard to the segregation?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Just keep my mouth closed and stay out of business.  That's, that's the only thing I knew about it.  Don't see nothing, don't hear nothing, don't be there.  That's the only thing I knew.  Best stay in your place.  That's the only thing they ever taught me about it.  My dad told me that the worse people and--I guess it stemmed from he never knew all of the--the other racist side, only thing he knew was where he was.  And he was knew that--he told--he said only people that ever did anything to me were black folks.  And he said--and he said now those the people you got to watch, the one you have to live with, the ones you have to be around every day, the one you have to go home to at night, the ones--he said those the people you watch out for.  He said but as far as any other people are concerned, if you mind your own business, stay where you're supposed to be, you don't have to worry about them.  Or say the people you relax to and you open up to, those the people that cut your throat.  And didn't learn that until all them years I spent on the road traveling, stranded in trouble.  I never been helped in none of those instances by any black person I ever met, not one.
Story_ID: 54466
Speaker 1: So you have this amazing talent to write and to draw.  And you're about to graduate high school [Lincoln High School].  What are your thoughts on what you're gonna do next?
Speaker 2: I had it pretty well settled.  I didn't wanna do anything after I got out of high school write and draw, until I met my counselor and then the (unclear).  She said you can't go through life drawing and painting.  (Unclear) machines to do this kind of thing for you.  You have to go to college and get you a real education.  I said I don't wanna go to college.  I said all I wanna do is open up my own place, open my own studio.  She-- if you do that, you're throwing your whole life away; say at least you have a chance.  Go to college.  And that's--that--she cra--she, she decided then my fate in life.  She impressed on me that I needed to go to college.  And so that was idea, to go to college.  But, but I found out through the next 40 or 50 years that I paid my way going to college to get a degree.  I paid my way by painting and drawing and writing.  So I oft--often try to reconcile that situation, but that's what I started after I got out of high school [1955], and off to Alabama State College [now Alabama State University in Montgomery] I went.
Speaker 1: Now what was Alabama State College like?
Speaker 2: Alabama State College was--I couldn't compare it to anything, but I do know I had--I had a room--a potbelly stove in the middle of the floor.  It was an old army barracks, and it was cold and obsolete.  That's one thing I remember about where I lived.  I never had enough to eat.  And the whole college experience at Alabama State was a joke.  And my first real battles with real life was in Alabama.  And I always think of Alabama--Montgomery, Alabama because they had really put my head in the right place, that there was another world outside of home.  And that, that sent me on the right place.
Story_ID: 54467
Speaker 1: Now you were up there [Alabama State College, now Alabama State University, in Montgomery, Alabama] when the bus boycart--cott started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there on, on campus when the bus boycott started.  And I'll always remember that day because a student came on the campus.  A bunch of students gathered around him.  He said they just arrested the Lady Cora [Claudette Colvin?] for riding on the--for, for refusing to give up her seat on the bus and said we gonna--said we're gonna go down there and turn this thing out.  And our idea then was not a bus boycott.  Our idea was a race riot.  That's what they was thinking about.  And so they waited there 'til the next bus came by and they blocked the streets, and the bus couldn't pass by.  And all of these students decided, you know, I can try to turn this bus over.  And they had it rocking up--they had two wheels up off the floor--two right side of it up, and they was just rocking it.  But by the time they got the students quelled down and they thought about a new avenue, a new thing for the bus boycott.  And then that's when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and all of the people came together and what turned into a boy--bus boycott.  They decided they would not ride the, the bus anymore.  And of course then that spread not only from a week, a day, a month, and it went on for quite a while.  But before it ended, I witnessed a lot of things in that that I would never wanna see again.  I, I, I witnessed pure hatred.  I mean pure--and malicious hatred and, and--but I got saved from that because I got drafted into the military and then off.
Speaker 1: Before you go to the military, tell us some of those stories of things that you saw that represented pure hatred.
Speaker 2: I saw a little lady--a little old lady, 60, 70, 80 years--well, I don't think--then to me 65 was old--was old, but I don't--I don't think that anymore because I finally reached that.  But I saw people in walking sticks, old ladies and old men, being kicked down the street, beat, washed down the street with water hose.  And, and daily it was a news thing and that's all you could see everywhere you looked.  When you saw a car coming and you have to get off the sidewalk and hide until the car came by (unclear).  And you would definitely wasn't out--I don't think the first year of the boycott I was out of my house after--I had a curfew.  I wasn't out of my house after six.  But I had to work, and I worked downtown at a place, a Guarantee Life Insurance Company.  I was a janitor trying to work and go to school.  And I would work at there and I had to run home every night.  That's--it had to be over three or four miles.  I had to run and hide, run and hide, run and hide to get home, and that's the way it went.  So when I got out of there then that was it.  I got--I just got tired of that because I had a--the coach that was very influential into saving my life, in fact a lot of people lives in Montgomery.  Because he believed in the bus boycott and what was happening, but he, he knew that his football players would get a lot of people killed.  Because if I was going down the street and somebody sicked a dog on me, the dog was gonna be dead.  And if someone kicked me, they was gonna get kicked back.  And so that's, that's the mentality they didn't need.  They needed someone who was gonna be willing to take this abuse for the cause.  And, and that wasn't into--to, to his football team, which he for--he would not let them be a part of that boycott.  We couldn't march; we couldn't do anything.  Well, I went to a lot of meetings.  I took pictures, the camera and all this kind of thing.  I, I went to every meeting I could, but I could not be--I couldn't go my route.  My route was to get my--get me a gun, man, and--and there was a lot of people's thing, get a gun and go out there.  But I realized that it'd have been the worst scenario we could think of if we'd have went out and started a war.
Speaker 1: And how was your writing and your art going at this time while you're in Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University, in Montgomery]?
Speaker 2: It had--it was being documented every day I was--I was writing and the things I had seen.  And I had these oh, big tabloids of things that I'd written and photographed, complete with posters.  I was a regular journalist and didn't even know it.  And unfortunately all of this stuff got burned down in the house.  And our house caught a fire and just everything went up in--went up in smoke, all of this kind of thing.  So I had an influence, but it, it didn't change my memory 'cause I still remember.  I still remember all of those things.  And--but a lot of this thing was being put on hold 'cause other things came into your life then.  Now I had the Army to contend with.
Story_ID: 54468
Speaker 1: Now how does this--how do they [the United States Army] come calling for you?
Speaker 2: A little letter that says "we need you, report."  And they gave me a date, and they didn't ask me if I could make it.  They just told me to report to Jacksonville [Florida].
Speaker 1: And how was that?  How as that experience when you go into--enter into the military?
Speaker 2: That was a painful experience for me to have to go to the military.  Because number one, I did not--I was like--I was a--I was a basically a, a, a coward when you came down to it.  I, I feel the same way Muhammad Ali felt, but I didn't have enough nerve to stand up and do it.  So when they called me, all I could do was feel this pain inside, but I went.  And I went and I went down to Jacksonville, and they shipped me off to Fort Benning and from Fort Benning to Fort Hood with all this hatred.  I wanted to be home.  I wanted my, my art and my writing.  I needed to do all this kind of thing.  So there I was in Fort Benning and Fort Hood getting ready to do nothing I guess but waste two years of my life.  And so--and--but while I was there everywhere I went I was drawing and writing.  And to find these things years later--and I don't remember writing them, but when you read the first line, then you know you wrote it in your--you know you wrote it sometime ago, and you know the situation was when you write it.  And that's what my writing do; it documents where I was at a certain time.  And so I can just look back and read my old memoirs and manuscripts, and I know where I was and what date.  And so my life, even though it's not chronological, it's dated through the things that I have in the little suitcase and briefcase.  And writing--
Speaker 1: So you were chronicle--
Speaker 2: --writing and drawing was always been there.
Speaker 1: So you chronicling your life and each step of the way.
Story_ID: 54469
Speaker 1: What type of experiences were you having while you were in the military these two years?  What--was it enjoyable?  Was it peaceful?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Utter loneliness, just--because when you get so involved in where you are, you can't explore where you are because where you are is someplace else.  But you have to live where you are to enjoy where you are.  You can't live two places at one.  You can't live in Germany and back home at the same time.  And you have to divide these places.  A lot of guys were able to do this.  They were able to live in the military when they're in the military. And when they got out, they lived someplace else.  But I was in the military and I was still living at home.  I was still living in the other world that I wanted to be in.  So it abs--(unclear) because of all this I was losing where I really was.  It was a beautiful experience in the military.  And people going into the military, if they used those experiences to enhance their lives where they are, then your life flows along with you.  But I was living in the military in hate and disgust because I wanted to be someplace else.  But some incidents happened in the military that kind of saved some experiences in the military for me.  And that's when my life in the military took a different kind of note.  Because I met fellows there in the military who--looking at my talent and seeing these kind of things, and, and letting me know that I could use them in the military.  'Cause he talked to his commander and I had to design the patch, the logo for our--the unit that we were in.  And, and then I found myself in helicopters flying from city to city doing maps, plotting locations, doing training aids for the military.  So now I was refocused back into what I really could do.  And so the last two or three years--in fact they kept me in--I stayed in Germany over my time because the Army had a job for me to do.  And so I finally got out of that.  And so the Army--some part of it was able to change my life, and it changed my life about people because I learned people.  When I was in America I didn't know what two--I didn't know there were but two kind of people.  There were blacks and whites.  Them the only kind of pe--no one else existed.  When I got in the military that changed all that.  There's all kinds of people in the military, all kinds of lives, all kinds of things, all kinds of jobs in the military.  The same kind of jobs in the military we have out here.  But if you go in there living back here, you'll miss all of the other job.  Your life could continue right in the military, right wherever you go.  Wherever you go you could take with you what you--what's inside of you.  You can take it with you wherever you go.
Story_ID: 54470
Speaker 1: When do you get stationed in Germany?
Speaker 2: I got stationed in Germany in '59' [1959].
Speaker 1: How what's going on over in Germany that's really creating a tense situation--
Speaker 2: That was just--
Speaker 1: -at that time?
Speaker 2: The great--the big Cold War.  That was the area of the big Cold War.  Can't remember now who the president was [President Dwight D. Eisenhower], but I'll remember the name [Nikita] Khrushchev.  That was the Cold War issue going on in, in Germany--battling for this control, having divided cities and this kind of thing.  And so as a matter of fact, that's one of the reasons why I ended up in Germany because America was given an ultimatum to get the troops out.  And I was one of the troops sent in--God save our country--to get--to make sure that we was not gonna leave.  And there I was over there.  That's the reason I was there, but that never happened and so we had to change our mission in Germany.  It went back to life as usual.
Speaker 1: And were you scared when you realized that this could come--this might come to war?
Speaker 2: You know I had so much hate in me that I was not afraid because looked like I was dying to kill somebody.  And so--and when I was in--and when--I wasn't afraid.  I never was afraid one second.  Even when I was staring at the Russian tanks less than four or five hundred miles of--less than four or five hundred yards away, I was not afraid.  I was waiting for a shot to go off and hoping that I'll be the one to fire it.  And so that's what hate can do to you.
Speaker 1: So our art--once your art is discovered in the military and it's--allows you to concentrate on that again, that's when the hate started?
Speaker 2: I forgot about it.  Once I got involved in my art and writing, I forgot all about the disgust, the reason I was there.  I forgot all about it.  I got--I became wrapped up again into what I was destined I guess to do, never thought about how hard I try to stay out of there and how I hated being there.
Story_ID: 54471
Speaker 1: So what was the life like for you in Germany just for your social liking, you and the black [United States Army] soldiers?
Speaker 2: There, there was no social life for me in, in Germany.  There was no--because it was work all the time.  It was work for me.  When I was--when I went to work in the morning, it was art.  When I got off that's what I did, is art.  I did everything in the Army from writing love letters home to--for my platoon and my company--that would have been a full-time job.  I had--I had my camera, and I was photographing the--whatever city I was in, the fields and the skies, the birds and the livestock.  I was photographing these kind of things.  Then I was drawing on duffel bags, on shirts, on ties, just, just wherever I could draw and paint and art, that's where I was 'cause there was no--there was no social life.  A lot of people thought that the social life I--to that question you could probably get the bars and the bashes after five and on the weekends.  But that was never in me in the first place, so there wasn't gonna be a social life for me.  My social life was when I was talking through my canvas and kicking it.
Speaker 1: Now when you get to Germany, have you escaped segregation?  Is it better over there for blacks?
Speaker 2: Nowhere is better for blacks.  It just might be on a different level.  It's the same for blacks everywhere.  Is saw no haven for blacks nowhere.  The only place you had a haven is when you had a dollar.  But even that dollar was segregated.  The same thing--problems that we had in America I had 'em in Germany.  The same kind of things that was in Ger--in, in America was in Germany.  There were segregated bars, segregated nightclubs, segregated people, segregated barracks.  It was the same thing, same thing wherever I went.  In fact, segregation--the laws that they were trying to pass to get rid of segregation they weren't all that far removed because some of the signs were still up for colored only.  I was--it was just, just like a flashback to me.  People looked at you different.  I don't know if it was differently because of the ca--the country or because of the people who were in the country, but it was there.
Speaker 1: So now when your term in the military is about to come up, are you thinking about what I'm gonna do next?
Speaker 2: I had a lot--they had a good (unclear) out program.  I thought about what I wanted to do.  The only thing I wanted to do when I got out of the military, come back, go to school.  They had drilled that into me, come back and go to school.  So I came back and bummed around a couple of months and got the dust out.  And then I enrolled in Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee].
Story_ID: 54813
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr.--Mr. Colson, now your entering to Florida Agriculture and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida].  What are your thoughts about what you'll major in--what you'll do there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had no, no choice.  I was an artist so I had to into art.  And--but by this time I had been introduced to the commercial aspect of art, and I was no longer--I never was interested in fine arts.  But when I got to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee], I found out it just did not exist.  And so--but I couldn't go anyplace else.  I didn't know any--anything about it.  I didn't have time to explore anything, so I took this art education because that's the only thing I could--suppose I could do was teach.  So I took art education, and they had a little curriculum where you--basic drawing and in your basic painting you do this kind of thing, still which I didn't wanna do.  I was interested in art where I could make some money.  So I had a very understanding instructor even at--Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University in Montgomery] is where I was introduced the commercial aspect of it just briefly because I didn't have time to learn about it.  But Oubry--his name was O-U-B-R-Y.  He was an art--directly over there in Alabama State.  He gave me an airbrush kit.  I had never seen an airbrush; gave me lettering fiches, everything in art.  He was like my father away from home.  He never saw he said someone so interested in art, and he gave me all this equipment.  And so now I had a new outlet for my art, airbrushing, and I loved airbrushing.  I would sit around and airbrushing.  And so I had a touch of it and I--and the [United States] Army introduced me to some more aspects of it.  So when I got to Florida A&M, I was ready to go into this field, but I found out it didn't exist at A&M.  So just had to do it and teach myself, staying in the library, buying magazine and books, and learn from the publishers.  That's how I learned it.  And I'm doing the same kind of thing at A&M that I was doing at--in high school, making poster signs, decals, you name it.  That's what I did.  That's the way I went through, through college doing that.
Story_ID: 54814
Speaker 1: Now while at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University [Florida A&M University in Tallahassee], when do others start realizing this amazing talent that you have?
Speaker 2: The art teacher, and he was also--he was the director of the art program, but he was also one of the instructors.  And he asked in class one day could someone interested--was there anybody interested in doing a, a, a job for him.  So when he saw--when I turned the job in, he said "You did this?"  He said "Man, you're really good at this thing."  He says why don't I give you your classes--you, you do extra work and I can--you can get--you into this.  This what--what you need to do is be in a school, a commercial art school.  So he provided me with all the work that I needed in the commercial art field.  Whenever there was something up he made sure I had this job.  And so there where I was at Florida A&M doing nothing strictly but artwork.  And I said what am I gonna do for my coursework when I supposed to graduate?  Aren't all students supposed to have a show?  He said "Whatever you do while you're here you document it with a camera and save the work, and we'll put that on display.  It said you have to have exhibit, and so you exhibit what you learn."  And so that's who influenced me at Florida A&M, Dr. Howard Lewis.  He was my inspiration 'cause he believed I didn't have to follow this strict, hard set case of rules of learning something that I wasn't interested in.  He was interested me in developing what I was interested in.  Even though the university couldn't provide it, he, he provided it; he provided the occasion.  And as for--at, at A&M I designed everything from the Governor's Ball all the way down to the (unclear) Ball, and the parades--and he just did it.  He just--it was just like a, a--I was working in my career as a student.  And that's, that's how I got into Florida A and M University.  And Florida A and M University became such a part of my learning career till I guess it had mixed into me just like the paint, because I could think of nothing else but trying to promote Florida A&M through my artwork.  So if someone wanted something from Florida A&M, I was there because like I said, my favorite colors by now is orange and green.  So there I was.
Story_ID: 54815
Speaker 1: Now you're going through this process.  Are you earning money while you're doing these things?
Speaker 2: The--no, I wasn't really earning money because I guess that went back to my father [Willie Colson], 'cause he told me he would teach me back then money wasn't everything.  People would come to me and want things to do, and I knew what the job costs.  And when he was doing things for people, he knew what they cost too.  But he figured that people's need for having these things done outweighed his, his need to do 'em.  So I did 'em.  When people came to me I did them.  And a lot of people were, were conning you.  They were scamming, but it didn't bother me.  I just did them.  I wasn't getting any money from Florida A&M [University in Tallahassee] for doing it--for not for having an interest in the school that I did it.  I wasn't getting paid for that.  I wasn't on--I wasn't on that PR staff.  I wasn't getting paid to promote them.  It was just in me.  I liked--I--Florida A&M was just in my blood, and I wanted them--that school to, to get the best.  And in fact if there wasn't being a (unclear) school, I--at least I can give it the best that I had.
Speaker 1: Now you--it--it's a very charmed life you're having.  Because at every step of the way, you seem to be in a situation that is--you don't wanna be in, but yet someone finds out that this talent exists and it frees you.  In the military [United States Army], you didn't wanna be there, and then once this talent is discovered that you have, you--it, it enables you to have a freedom just like the lack of freedom you claimed you had at home when you were growing up.  That art--could you speak to that, how art has provided a method of freedom to you?
Speaker 2: I just became recently interested from that aspect, because in, in my church they say if you have a gift, it'll make room for whatever else there is in you.  And, and art has always made a way for me.  So if I have the opportunity to do it, it'll come back.  It'll, it'll, it'll pay off some kind of way, so I don't have to worry about whether I'm gonna be paid for it because somebody's gonna pay for it.  One way or the other somebody's gonna pay for it.  So I just have, have to worry about doing it.  It kind of hurts when you're doing it.  It hurts mostly when you walk--when you, you don't--apparently there's no thanks or appreciation.  That's when the only time it hurts.  But if you leave yourself alone, if you can lee--get out yourself and get into what you're doing, you can forget about all of the other pain.  Art has always made a way for me.  It has--whenever situation I was, art has bailed me out.
Story_ID: 54816
Speaker 1: Now as you're about to graduate [from Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee], explain how your exhibit comes into play.
Speaker 2: I was trying to find something to put in, in to this museum.  And for what--after I had collected all of the posts, which I saved all the artwork all these years--I had saved it.  That was on hard drive then and so you couldn't save anything.  You had to save everything fit--physically you had to.  So I had these piles and piles of artwork, posters.  I put 'em all on easels, put them all around this big museum.  And I had one instructor who was not willing to let me graduate because I hadn't fulfilled the curriculum.  And it, it must be--have sculpture, metalwork, paintings, drawings, oil paintings and that kind of thing in all the different medias, all of which I had done.  And so graduation less than a month away, so I put on a mad rush.  I painted all the paintings I needed to do in about a week and all the drawings like everything that's in my--that I've dis--displayed.  I did them.  And on all those different projects was over two or three weeks period on each, and I did them all for the whole year--a whole--my whole four-year period, I did them all in less than a month.  I just, just got up there and crashed.  That' the only thing that's--kind of get you when you get 65 or 70 years old when you can't do what you used to do.  And you're not willing to realize that you can't do it anymore.  And so that's the thing that hangs on now, when you used to could do something in five minutes, now it takes you five days.
Story_ID: 54817
Speaker 1: So now you're, you're about to graduate [from Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee], well respected at FAMU for your abilities.  What are the ideas of what's going next with you?  What did you want to do next?
Speaker 2: What I wanted to do next after I graduated from FAMU was finally go back work and get my own place even with the education 'cause a lot of people wanted me to have a degree.  A lot of people wanted an education, so I got it for them.  It wasn't--it was never my idea to get a degree.  I wasn't interested in a diploma.  My momma [Minnie Colson] wanted somebody in her family to graduate, so now they were satisfied.  I can go back to doing what I wanted to do, paint and write.  That's what I wanted to do after graduation, but life didn't--don't work that way.  So--
Speaker 1: So what did happen?
Speaker 2: --so after graduation--let me see why I--what, what serious turn took place after our graduation?  Well, if--the major thing that happened after graduation I think Martin Luther King was assassinated.  It changed the--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) that was the year.
Speaker 2: --changed the whole tempo of the whole society and put everything on hold around the country for quite a while.  And so I found myself waiting that out.  But that--
Speaker 1: So what year is that?
Speaker 2: [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was assassinated--
Speaker 1: In '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] I think.  Sixty-eight [1968], the night--after I graduated I worked a couple of jobs around, trying to get out of--find out where I wanted to go and where I wanted to do.  Los Angeles [California] seemed like a nice place.  Everybody mentioned Los Angeles as a haven.  Atlanta [Georgia] wasn't popular then.  Los Angeles was the place, so I headed to Los Angeles.  But the tempo of the whole world had changed in Los--in, in, in Los Angeles because of the Watts riots [1965].  And, and Los Angeles was a world all of its own, and being there that, that was [Charles] Manson, LaBianca murders [1969], and all of those things were happening and piling out at once.  And so now you found yourself right in the middle of--in the middle of all of that, and your life's set on hold.  And it was in a perfect place for journalism and eye, eye--eye-to eye, you know, say what they call that?  What do you journalists call that when you're right on the spot?
Speaker 1: Eyewitness.
Speaker 2: Eyewitness news.  Well, like I say, I was on--I never did like violence, so--and I couldn't get too close.  I probably couldn't shoot any war stories.  I definitely couldn't shoot any, any the Watts riots stories.  And I didn't even venture across town when the morning that Manson hit the news.  I just sat there and watch the thing, but I did get caught up into that when they had the shootout.  They had the shoot out right in front of me when they--so that's--that was life in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 54818
Speaker 1: You went back to the military [United States Army] though.
Speaker 2: I went back in the military before I even finished A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee].  I enrolled in A&M in, in less than-- I wasn't--less than a semester I was recalled.  I was recalled because of the Bay of Pigs Affair [1961]. And, and the shipped my unit off to--I was in the Reserves, and they shipped us off to be housed in New Orleans.  And there in New Orleans [Louisiana] is a long--is a longshoreman outfit.  So we was on a ship there.  Basically that's what it was.  And we found ourselves out in the--out in the Gulf someplace--(unclear) out of--out of (unclear).  That's where we found ourselves for this training for this Bay of Pig thing.  That's where we were.  And of course that all went down the drain.  It was a big fiasco.  And, and after I got back--shipped back to New Orleans, and just wasted some time down there until it was time to get out.
Speaker 1: Now did you--now for the Bay of Pigs, did you understand what you were going there for or participating in?  Did you understand that or did that keep that from you, that you were--
Speaker 2: I supposed it was--well, the whole operation was a secret.  But the top surface of things, we were--I knew no more than the or--ordinary people knew, that they [the USSR] had bases and missile bases and something in Cuba.  And that was the basic--the whole thing for it, but why we were being --what were we being deployed for, I hadn't the slightest idea.  I just knew that we was out there training.  And the word had leaked out that we were planning an invasion of Cuba.  And that's as much as I knew about it.  And so there I was sitting out on this lonely dog island sitting there waiting to do what, I, I had--I don't have a slightest idea what I was there for.
Speaker 1: So what happened while you were--on that island during the invasion and the others got--what were you doing?
Speaker 2: We were just sitting there on ready.  We had lurched just sitting and waiting.  And then one morning we got up and we read the newspaper that--and, and that's--and everybody else knew exactly--only the people who took part in this invasion and the secret covert operation--the only people who took a part in this invasion--it was different things going on at different times.  We were out there I guess as backup or reserves or something, but we were not supposed to be an official part of the invasion.  Whoever took part in that, they just went in and got their butt kicked and, and dumped out.  The next thing we know we was back on the--going back to New Orleans.
Story_ID: 54819
Speaker 1: So let's bring you back to Los Angeles [California].  You were there when the Watts riots [1965] take off.  You're not participating.  You see it.  But what's going through your mind?
Speaker 2: Like I did through all the other things in America, I thought this is the end of the world (laughter).  That's the only thing you can do, that we gon' get--we gon' kill.  It's the same thing they said about when--with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  They said we were gonna--we were gonna get wiped out; said we was gon' give--he was gonna get all of us killed.  And when I saw they said the same thing about the Watts riot--they said that we was gonna get wiped out because--and we were doing it to ourselves because they weren't burning anything on the--on the other side of town.  They were burning everything right where they lived.  And so I wasn't afraid to--I wasn't afraid in Watts as I was in Montgomery [Alabama] because there wasn't--I wasn't doing anything to me in Montgomery.  But I couldn't hide from me in Los Angeles.  But they were burning down their own community, their own town.  They are burning own people.  They were doing that to themselves.
Speaker 1: Now is it hardest 'cause you understand this?
Speaker 2: I didn't see where that--I couldn't tie that to arts.  The only thing I could tie to art in Los Angeles was their--the Watts Towers.  That's the only thing I could see that came closely resembling art.  And that was a pile of story-high junk, and that's what Watts turn out to be.  The things that--I was never political.  I never wa--right, right for or left.  So I couldn't do any political out on any side of what happened there, but I do know that people were dying and they were losing property.  And that's the only thing that I was concerned about.
Speaker 1: So were you at all scared for your own life or--
Speaker 2: I was afraid for, for your own life as for people as a whole.  That's what I was afraid of.  I was afraid of what would happen if they crush the revolution here in America the same way they crushed them in Russia, Cambodia and all those countries.  That's, that's what I was afraid of.  And the closest thing I ever saw to come to that was in Kent University [1970 shootings at Kent State University in Ohio].  I was hearing what, what they did to the students.  What if they decided--if all the hatred in America was unleashed in one fell swoop just like in some of those other countries.  We would--I didn't see a, a chance.  That's what I was afraid of.  I was afraid of what will the--what will happen if we had a bunch of hate people who were willing to go down for their country.  And that's what I was afraid of.
Story_ID: 54820
Speaker 1: So you're in Los Angeles [California].  It's the early '70's [1970s] now.  What are you doing?  What's going on with you?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles--I went to Los Angeles because--well, I really didn't go to Los Angeles because of a--I had heard that it was a city that had all these opportunities.  I went to see and see could I find my little niche.  But when I got to Los Angeles I found out it was just like Mississippi, and Alabama, and all the other places I had been to.  And that was a great shock then.  I realized soon as I got to Los Angeles it was not the place for me.  In Alabama I could read.  And I know that when I saw a sign that says "whites only" or "colors" the way they say it, and then when I seen the words--I never thought I'd see the word "nigger" in, in, in, in Los Angeles.  But when I got to Los Angeles, I realized that America is America every place else.  And if I want to be someplace where I was gonna be like this, I would rather be home.  At least I knew what was happening to me.  In Los Angeles I didn't know where it was coming from.  And I found it real hard.  I never could get a job; I never could get on a lease, 'cause I was in my own world.  And--but there was a lot of hate inside of me.  You know that it never dissipated except only when I was in my own world.  And so in Los Angeles was--it was no, no different.  I found--I saw a lot of chances--other chances to do things in Los Angeles, but I was still was back--trying to live home.  I was still in Los Angeles trying to live in Tallahassee [Florida].
Speaker 1: Why do you think that is?  You said--you mentioned that same thing when you were Germany and other places.  Why is there that you want to live out what's going on in the world through Tallahassee, that perspective?  Why do you think that exists?
Speaker 2: I guess (unclear)--I guess I fell in love with home.  I guess I was home.  I will never--I will never--I was never someplace else other than right at home.  I'm a home body, a home person.  And friends and people and the atmosphere and the environment is where I flourish best.  And whenever you take me outside of my environment, I catch all kinds of problems in, in every place I was.  And I wasn't gonna be in Los Angeles long enough to discover myself in Los Angeles.  I needed to get out of Los Angeles.  And so I couldn't live two places.  I was Los Angeles trying to live in Tallahassee, so I was never gonna make it in Los Angeles (laughter), and I was never gonna make it in Tallahassee.  I had to make up my choice which one I wanted, Tallahassee or--
Speaker 1: So you--but you're in ta--you're L.A. for a certain amount--for 13--
Speaker 2: Thirteen something years.
Speaker 1: So what did you do for that 13-year time (unclear)--your art and things of that sort?
Speaker 2: I was there in 13 years trying to get out.  And it was hard.  It was the hardest 13 years of my life in Los Angeles trying to get out.  I was in this deep hole out in Los Angeles.  Anything would break out, and it would--you--there's no way that you could get out unless you lived on the out--on the border and all you have to do is step across the border.  But if you lived down in Los Angeles where we lived, there's no way for you to get out.  I felt trapped.  I felt trapped by gang violence, all of the things that I--that, that I didn't know in my family.  I was trapped by all of these things all around you.  They were there, no sympathy, no compassion, no feelings.  That's what I was trapped by.  If I could have just identified with Los Angeles, I got to absorb this new way of life, probably I could have still been in there.  But that was not a part of me.  I just needed to get--I just needed to get out of that.  That's what I always felt.  I needed to get out, so I just had to get out.
Story_ID: 54821
Speaker 1: Now you explained when you were growing up the most important thing that you ever learned was at home that love, that nurturing that your mother [Minnie Colson] and father [Willie Colson] showed and expressed in your home.  And that even existed in other areas of your community, school, you had the teachers, the church, these people that in your community.  Do you think when you moved from that and when you didn't see that in other places you went, automatic resentment for that place where you were built up?
Speaker 2: That's a very possible connection.  I never thought about it 'cause I had--now that you mention it, those two things were being reestablished.  The tie that was into me--outside of me was being met by some other places.  And the same, same things that I didn't like, I was not used to, were being presented over and over and over again.  And so that's a very close possible connection.  I just shouldn't--I, I, I remember the South.  I remember Tallahassee [Florida].  I remember the kind of things that you grew, grew up with.  And if you grew up with this all of your life and all of a sudden, not having the intellect to deal with this in another location, another locale, it's what basically wrecks a black man, the, the image of it.  He'll rather easy to succumb to wherever he come--meets up with and change and adapt to that, rather than to hold on to something in himself that's good.  He just--it's easier.  It's an easier route to just establish yourself to something that's new.  It's easier to--if you're just running with a bunch of gangsters it'll be easier to run with the gangsters than it would be if they try to change the gang.
Story_ID: 54822
Speaker 1: Now what was going on with your art during this 13-year period [while he was living in Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: My art--
Speaker 1: Your art and your writing.
Speaker 2: It had taken a commercial--strictly commercial aspect then.  I mean that was the only way to go.  There's--there was fine artist and very prominent fine artist in--in fact I met one of my old classmates from Montgomery, Alabama [Alabama State College, now Alabama State University] out there in Los Angeles.  He was very well established and in that fine arts.  And they were--he was still doing tremendous kind of work.  But I had never adhered to that, and it wasn't a part of me.  So I went to work at commute--Hughes Aircraft Company, and that's all technical illustrating.  I did logos, brochures and that kind of thing for my own little private self-employed business.  I just, just absorbed myself in another new aspect.  The writing did not--the (unclear) language--it didn't do anything.  I had gotten out of the writing except the technical writing for other people.  I was strictly into the arts and the money that it paid.  And I was making more money than I ever could, but I couldn't keep it because I have a--still trying to live two places.  And--but the artwork, it grew in knowledge and skills.  They started increasing and so I took some camera class--photography classes and I took some art classes.  And I even started tryin got work on a degree over at the University of South Carolina--Southern California.  And there my art was, was growing.  And when I was also getting closer to the time that I was supposed to be--that I--a timeline I'd given myself to get out Los Angeles--wife [Geneva Mordica Colson] is out of school, and I needed to get my child out of Los Angeles.  And I was unaware this timeline, but it was growing.  And before I knew it, it was there.  It's time to go.
Story_ID: 54823
Speaker 1: Now what was the impetus?  What was the motivation to get you to leave [Los Angeles] California, to bring you back to where you call home?
Speaker 2: The great--well, when I came home--when I came home for a class reunion [at Lincoln High School] and I came to Tallahassee [Florida], and here this--all of this--see, they could fool you.  When you come home on vacation--oops--when you come home on vacation, that's a letter that'll set you back years, because it's a atmosphere that you've missed so much it is now multiplied.  People are glad to see you.  And you sittin' there thinking that hey, man, this is it.  Those people don't--they'll glad to see you because--now just don't stay too long.  Your vacation gon' be over.  But I came back and I fell in love with Tallahassee all over again.  I told my wife [Geneva Mordica Colson], I said we got another month or two.  Why should I spend the money to go to Los Angeles and come back.  Why don't you just stay, and I'll go on back up and close the business.  By the time I finish down the month will be over.  And I fell in love all the time--I fell in love with sleepy Tallahassee.  To my amazement, when I came back that--months later, it wasn't sleepy, it was dead.  Well, that's what the impression I had when I saw Tallahassee.  That was it when I came back and saw what was here, a little sleepy town made for the artist where you can then draw, paint, and write.  I Forgot about the most important thing.  How you gonna live?  Nobody's gonna be paying money for artwork in Tallahassee.  But that was the impetus.  That's what got me back.  I came back and I discovered my first love, and I came back.  For my mom [Winnie Colson] it was a major factor because she was a missionary, and she was just still teaching missionary, 75 years old.  And she called me and told me, said I want you to come back and help me in my new church.  I'm gonna start a church, and I want you to come back and help me.  So all these things weighing on me coming together to help get me back.  So I came back to Tallahassee because I love Tallahassee.  But I came back to help my mom with this church that she said she was gonna start down in Mayo, Florida.
Story_ID: 54824
Speaker 1: When I celebrated my 15th year of the "Church Times," the city sent me out this Proclamation and proclaimed that day, the 25th of October as Augustus Colson Day because of my involvement with the "Church Times Magazine."  And the city officials, they came down and presented that to me and-I
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay is there a date on that?  There it is it's--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997] twenty-four.
Speaker 2: This is a "Church Times" issue celebrating that 15th year, and of course I was featured on the cover that year.  That's the issue (unclear)--is that in 19--November, November, November 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay when I had to--I needed some place for you guys to not miss the house when you were looking for it, so I ran out and got a can of spray paint and a marker.  And of course I had known it was gonna be this long, I could have really made really good one to really mark this, this location.  But that is what was created about five minutes before this interview started.
Story_ID: 55351
Speaker 1: You come back to Tallahassee [Florida] and you begin--you become a commercial artist.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us how did that go?
Speaker 2: Came back to Tallahassee and I had no job (laughter) and no place to really get no job.  And so I wasn't gonna go through that employment agency.  And I had always been in business for myself, so I was gonna try it in Tallahassee, knowing no (unclear)--the clientele was different, the kind of money was different.  But I was making--doing pretty good for Tallahassee, had a nice little business, and it was growing every year until Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] called me, wanted to get some job done.  And I agreed to do the job, and then they talked me into--said why don't you come and work for the University, you know?  I said no, man.  I said I (unclear).  No, they talked me into moving on the side of town close--I, I was back in Frenchtown, in fact right across the street where I lived as a kid.  So I came back and they wanted me to move into a better side of town.  And I said well, I don't have to pay, what, a hundred and fifty dollars a month rent over here.  And you wanna take me over to a high rent district.  And I think the rent over there was about six hundred and fifty.  And they told me--said well, look, what if we don't charge you the first and last month's rent.  And all these things I had enumerated to them.  And I thought about that.  And so out of a special deal they made, I went over, which turned out to be a shaft.  It wasn't real.  It was just--it wasn't paper writing; it wasn't documented, and I had learned a new lesson.  I have never been--so I went over and they didn't work out.  I didn't get the jobs.  I did get one job.  I got--the first job I got from Florida A&M was to design them a logo for the centennial.  They were just doing their 100th year centennial.  And so I got the job designing them a logo, and that started the career, with A&M.  I was back doing things for the, the school that I loved, black, bleeding orange and green.  And so they accepted it.  And I never expected to get a job in Tallahassee or any commercial job.  In fact, I would have done the thing for free.  But I asked him for the permission for the vendor's rights for the centennial.  "I'll give you the logo."  Said "No, we don't wanna do that.  We'll just pay you for the logo."  I said "Okay, five thousand dollars."  "Stop by and pick up your check within next week."  I said well--so there I was.  I designed that logo and that was--that was it.
Story_ID: 55352
Speaker 1: That was the beginning?
Speaker 2: That was the beginning of being there [at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida].  So--and I don't how I got talked into going to work for the University, except for I had done a logo for a--one of the dean of the Pharmacy Department.  He had developed a shaving lotion, and I designed a, a logo for him called Smooth Shave, and he loved it.  And so--and he informed me--say hey, will the Pharmacist Department (unclear) me just get a re--get a million--multimillion new facilities complete with (unclear) in the department, our department all combined.  Say why don't you come and work for me, take the job.  Now that sounded a little better, so I took this job.  I said I can really be in Florida A&M.  And he said "But it's gonna do better if you were working for the University because that way we'll be hiring from within.  It will be much easier.  You won't have to go through this whole lineup."  I--no jobs available on Florida A&M except in the paint shop.  I said who cares where it is as long as it's on campus.  And within a month so we'll be calling you over to this new job.  So I went over to work for them in the paint department and never left.  The job never materialized; I never got the job.  And five years had gone by, and I'm still in the paint shop.  But what happened while I was in the paint shop, I was still loving it, bleeding orange and green, because I'm doing all of the things that I always loved to do.  And I'm doing it for the University.  I was designing logos, doing that signage, (unclear) purchase and I'm promoting the University in every way I can and loving it.  And what had really happened changed all that is one day I asked him--I said "Hey, you know I've been doing this five years, and I was supposed to have a job in five years; said why don't you change my title?  Give me a--I told him I don't care where I work, just long as you pay me the money."  Said "Look, man, if you don't like where you are, quit."  That's the way--that's how I ended at Florida A&M.  But in the meantime at Florida A&M I have designed their new logo--University--I don't know how long I had it.  Maybe they were there when I was a kid.  So it's gotta be a hundred years old.  Finally, Humphries come in--President [Frederick S.] Humphries in and he changed it and gave the University a new image.  And I thought I fitted right into it, 'cause I loved you--for the University to have a new image.  They got a multimillion dollar band and football team that's out the world.  And it'd give me great pleasure to work for this kind of an organization, but they were not willing to pay for it.  And, and I really wanted to work for them, and so I got stuck into this thing where my art has not bailed me out.  But I'm just doing it because I love it.  And you are doing it because you--all you want is it done, but you're not gonna pay me for it.  So I designed the license plates, new school image logo.  And so when I walk through any of them campuses, I feel a sense of pride because I can't walk through it unless I see me plastered all over the places.  That's where I ended up from the '80' [1980], '90' [1990], however long I was--no, I didn't start there until '86' [1986]-- '86' [1986], '87' [1987] to '97' [1997].  Eleven years I gave them.  And during this time, I have--I loved it because I have supported and been a part of something that they can't--I don't care how they go, they can't take that away, it's there. I am Florida A&M University the way I see it.  I might not be it to anybody else, but when I look back through the memories and I look back to what is actually there, it stares at you every time a car go down a street, every time you get a stationary letterhead from any, it's plastered right there on the top.  It doesn't say my name, but it says me.  You can't put anybody else name there.  And the--though the University may not last another ten or twenty years, I'll be there as long as the University lasts.
Story_ID: 55353
Speaker 1: Now also during this time when you get there, when you come back to Tallahassee [Florida], you went into your journalism again.
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: And you started a magazine.  Talk about this.
Speaker 2: When I came back with my--to help my mother [Minnie Colson] and, and I was in this business, it's funny how the "Church Times" started.  I needed some way to promote my new business that in town.  So and this promotion that I started for my business really have started a new promotion and new thing in my life.  And so I thought about that most of my business--most places I'm familiar with is the church.  I know all the churches, so I have to get this business from these churches.  So I went to a church program and it was some pastor's anniversary, so I took the program home.  And that Sunday I saw another program from another church.  And I saw all these programs from these churches, and--but I knew nothing about these churches.  I said what about a publication that just promoted churches, just promoted the good will, laugh at good things in life.  So I took the best of those three or four church programs, and I put them where they were just to promote me.  And I sent it out to these churches, threw 'em on a church porch and let them know that Augustus Colson was in town.  And you can get your programs printed.  Anything that you wanna get from anyplace, you can get it from me.  But no one saw that.  The only thing they saw in that paper was some news about some different priests in different churches.  And a lady called me.  She said "Ooh, I love your magazine so well--said when is the next issue coming out?"  I said da, da.  So I went home and, and just "Church Times" was born.  And--but it was being born just as advertising, advertising gimmicks.  In one year growing to two, three, four, five on up until fifteen, fifteen years that I just published it.
Story_ID: 55354
Speaker 1: And after the first or second year, I realized then that what God had in his plan for this magazine had nothing to do with me, because I was trying to advertise our business.  And I didn't for me--in order for me to publish this magazine, I was gonna have to know a little bit about--if I wasn't gonna have a board of directors, and some staffs, and advisors, I will have to know what was being put into the magazine.  So if I found myself reading the Bible, studying the Bible.  And next thing--and next thing is history.  So next thing I know I'm a minister, being added to the flock.  And the magazine is the only thing that's really left out of all those things that I didn't wanna do when I was a kid.  I wanted art and journalism and that is still in the magazine, but I didn't--never thought about being a minister.  That part wasn't in the plan.  But in order for me--for God to take care of the rest of the plan, I guess he--know now that--that's what he wanted me to do.  So that's the only thing that I was--lived with.
Speaker 2: So all those endeavors in regard to the creative gifts that you don't even know where it came from, 'cause you give credit to God for, but you didn't see anyone else--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't--I don't see anyplace else where it came from, no place else except for the people that He placed in my life along the way to steer me into these places, you know, like Joseph.  He's put people in the right places to get me from the ghetto to the palace.  I mean to get me from where I wanted, He put the right people at the right places all along the way, schoolteachers, people--truck drivers along the highway, instructors in the college, drill sergeants in the [United States] Army, people--He just put these people there everywhere just to, to guide you, and steer you, and shove you in the right way to get you to this point.
Story_ID: 55355
Speaker 1: As a commercial artist, what do you think your role is within the black community as a commercial artist?
Speaker 2: I think I've enhance the image in the black community by being a commercial artist because I don't like the way we portray ourselves.  I mean I don't have no problem with how other people portray us, but portray us simply because the way we are portraying ourselves in our businesses, in our relationships, and all this kind of thing.  But I was more interested in our relationships, our, our visual presentations.  Take your life savings and invest it in a business, and then you get your three-year old daughter to paint you a sign.  You're in business thirty years, and you don't' have a corporate image; you don't have a, a brochure.  And I bought this kind of new thing to the black community, and that's--well, now it's kind of widespread.  It's, it's a lot of--it's a--it's a lot different from Tallahassee [Florida] when I came.  I--I've created logos for companies that have used them for twenty years.
Story_ID: 55356
Speaker 1: So you talking about African Americans in this business need to realize their presentation--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: --you were saying.
Speaker 2: That's--image is everything.  And that, that, that didn't exist in the black community, not in Tallahassee [Florida].  It didn't exist so much in, in Los Angeles [California], not in the main stream.  Well, we had the mom-- iIn the industry we called them "ma and pa shops."  They don't have corporate identity.  They don't--a big--a million dollar company, they might have some corporate image.  But when we come down to the Tallahassee level, when I came to this community, they didn't care about what kind of signage, what kind of presentation their business make.  And it's kind of pretty hard for you to be next door side of business that looking good, got customers, and you were next door and your business is falling all down and not realize that you need to shape up.  So I had to make these--you had to teach 'em first of all by basically showing them, just going out and creating for them a brochure, creating from a logo design, creating for them an image.
Story_ID: 55357
Speaker 1: What's your process when a company comes to you, or anyone comes to you and ask you to do their commercial advertising, their commercial art?  What's the process you go through to get the final product?
Speaker 2: My--the step--first step would to be to find out what kind of business it is and what level is that business, and what, what they wanna go.  And of course price is no image, 'cause I could charge five thousand dollars for a logo, and the person down the street probably could get the same logo for fifty dollars or two dollars.  It's just on your ability to pay in.  And you have to feel out each customer differently.  I have to find out the name, what's in that name, and what's in your business.  And you take all of these ingredients and you push them together, and I got to bed and I sleep on it.  And sometimes at four in the morning it's there.  Sometimes it might--I might be two doors from deliver it before the real impact of what I want will be revealed.  I have to stop, go back.  I used to give one--everyone of these images that comes into mind I would put them down, and I would com--completely befuddle a client by showing him everything that I have dreamed of.  And there he's sitting there and he can't make up his mind.  He wants this out of that one, so I eliminated that process very--I asked my wife [Geneva Mordica Colson] which one of these you like best?  She said I like that one.  I can understand that one so I take the rest of them and threw it in the trash can--not in the trash can, in the--on the trash can on the computer.  And I presented them with that one and they love it.  And all because I've asked my wife which one she liked.  And I give 'em one choice.
Story_ID: 55358
Speaker 1: Now do feel that--do you do more work for African Americans or Caucasians?
Speaker 2: I do--well, they--well, no beyond doubt, I do it--90 percent--99 percent of all the work that I do is for African Americans.  It's because--with now because don't get out of--I don't get out of the house.  I don't go further--if--because I was confined.  I took myself out of the market for 11 years.  And I was in a black only environment.  A black only thing and I would creating for just one company, so nobody knows what I--knows me other than outside of Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida].  But a lot of them know me because they knew I worked with Florida A and M.  And when they searching around town, they said oh, well, he works for the University now.  So I find myself doing (unclear) for getting those referrals and doing it, but I don't have a marquee.  I know I'm not listed.  I don't have the ties, because I don't have time to do any work.  And I give my prices so high so that nobody want to hire me.  So I keep a lot of time.  So it's 9--(unclear) 95, 95 percent black.
Speaker 1: So do you see a difference between your Caucasian clientele and your African-American clientele?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a difference beca--in a--the wide, main difference in a commercial aspect is the white clientele expect to pay.  When they come to you for a job, they know what it's gonna cost, what you tell them.  And they know what it costs period.  And they came to you because they're willing to pay for it.  Now nobody wants to pay.  If they can get out of paying, nobody will pay.  But the white clientele, they expect to pay; black man don't expect to pay.  He wants it free.  And if anything he can do, it's quite obvi--anything he can do, he will not--he will find every kind of way not to pay.  He will love every aspect of it until it's get time to pay, then he will find out--a, a thousand excuses so he won't have to pay.  But I've learned to deal with this.  I've learned to deal with it.  I know our--I know our philosophy, our mentality, and our reasoning.  I know all of this, so I can deal with it.  And I'm able to deal with it upfront, cause if you come to me and you want--first of all I let you know exactly how much this job costs.  I'll let you know how much I'm gonna charge you to do it.  But at some kind of way between the time I close the deal, I gonna make you think I'm giving it to you.  But what I'm giving to you is gonna be probably what more than what it costs anyway.  So that's--
Story_ID: 55359
Speaker 1: Now I do wanna ask you and I wanna know this.  What do you think the role of an artist is in the African American community, be it commercial or fine artists.  What do you think the role of an artist is to our--to our people?
Speaker 2: That one changes daily I think.  It change with each set of generation gaps.  The role, primarily I was thinking it's to capture the image and the feel and the as--aesthetics of a particular generation, to capture that in the fine arts.  It does the same thing in the commercial art.  Because what we think, what we dream, what we eat, how we live is captured commercially.  And the way we capture that is gonna determine how it's accepted.  And if you--if you sell a lot of junk, that's the kind of perception you was getting.  That's the role today.  If you--if you create a junky looking sign or a junky looking display, whatever you--that's the kind of impression you created for our generation.  You drive down a street a business might have the worst food in the world, but if their presentation is good, the yard is clean, the sign is bright and shiny, you're attracted to it and you go right in there.  If you go down the street, cat's on the front porch, garbage cans hanging all out, you keep right on by. In fine arts or in commercial art, it's the--it's the same--the same thing goes for both.
Story_ID: 55360
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for and regards to the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hopes and my--is that we would just--number one, that we would abandon the garbage in our lives, that we would let some of the things outside of us stay outside of us, way outside of us, and try to--and get--what if start living within us--if in--what's inside of you is garbage, that's what you're gonna live, outside of you or whether inside or out.  But I hope that we can be transformed and changed from the inside of where we have decency, and respect, and honor, and a lot of appreciation for the generation that's coming behind us.  There is no generation behind us if we throw it in this one.  That's, that's what's my hope is for is that we can try to save the children.  If we can save somebody and give ourselves a new foothold in life, I don't see anything that have changed for us in the 50 years since I've been wide awake enough to notice.  I've noticed that we have gone further and further away from what we were raised on.  I think it changed with my generation, back in the '50's [1950s].  That's when the whole thing--that's when we started a downward spiral.  I hate to think of it in my dreams and nightmares that I was a part of this.  But that's, that's what is my dra--hope is that, that there's gonna be some of us left enough to change the way we live, change what's inside of us.
Story_ID: 55361
Speaker 1: One thing that's been throughout your--our conversation is you never wanted to get away from that love and comfort and nurturing you received at home and how Tallahassee [Florida] always represented that.  And when you went to other places and didn't receive that same feeling, it was--what built up in you was some--not something that you were very proud of.  I wanna ask how can that feeling or what you received in your household through your art be brought to others?
Speaker 2: I think there-- every aspect of my art and my journalism, and all of the things that I can do, I think that could be taken to others is this complete package.  And I think that the magazine has really been my whole salvation to everything that all of the things that I always wanted to do.  And God just showed me the way that I could do everything I wanted to do without even getting out of my living room.  All the art, everything that I think, and I--everything that I can read, and visual, and write about, I can do it all in one package.  So--and whether it's one page, or two pages, or ten pages, in the magazine all that is out there.  As far as me personally for me taking it outside in my heart, in my experiences is to provide this bit of inspiration.  However small and however few people, as long as it get out there, someone will have access to what real love and concern for other people is about.  And if everybody--if everybody, everyone share with one, we'll have the thing covered.
Story_ID: 55362
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy was already created.  And I--and I don't think I will even try to change it.  It's too late to even change what my legacy--and my mother [Minnie Colson] always told me I guess when I was I high school, and she said you will never have a dime, because everything you have--you're gonna give it away (laughter).  So I guess I was doomed to be a professional helper.  And my wife [Geneva Mordica] told me often, said "Don't bring no more stray cats home."  And, and we--and I even got her now where she don't believe it, 'cause now she'll even help me bring one home.  And, and this, this help just, just is out there (unclear)--extended out.  We can't--we can't do a lot of things because the things that we do is all for somebody else, and there's always gonna be somebody else.  And if I always want somebody whenever they say, say--and my daughter always tell me--she said I wanna be like you.  I wanna find me a man like you.  I said Bree, you might as well forget it, baby (laughter).
Story_ID: 55363
Speaker 1: And finally, sir, who would you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: How would you wanna be remembered and what would you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I would wanna be remembered by the images and impressions that I create.  I don't wanna create nothing that I can't be remembered by and, and the reason why I created those things.  I wanna be remembered--that's the only way--that's the only thing that really--that really matter to me.  If man had to, to remember me is when he pass by or see something I've created.  That's, that's if, if it--if it--if I can't be remembered by it, I don't to probably be a part of it.
Story_ID: 55364
Speaker 1: That was take--this picture was standing--taken when I was doing an exhibit--setting up the exhibit and I posed for the little photographer.  He was a fellow classmate in journalism.  He was a photographer.  I think his name was Willie Washington.  And on these posters is posters that I have created for the University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida] student activities, and they highlighted the events, the main event of the week.  The year was approximately around 1964.
Speaker 2: The first magazine of the "Church Times" that I created (unclear) edition.  And that's my mother [Minnie Colson] and my daughter on the cover.  I dedicated that first magazine to her.  She was my inspiration for doing the magazine.  And if I had to make a magazine about anybody, I guess she would have to almost be on the cover of it.  And my second love was standing there by her, by the little bright-eyed daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay in National Pharmacy Week.  All of the odd work--most of the work in that time at the university was commercial and aspect.  And I just photographed everything, and it just so happened that the students were there posing for the unveiling of this photograph for this painting that I had done.  And everything in that book is pictures from that year, 1964 through '66' [1966].  That's one of the billboards that I've done, four by eight billboard--one--it's like all of the posters are in this.
Speaker 2: These exhibits are poster samples from those weeks that I spent at the University designing a poster for each week, some special events during the week, a dance contest--that I'm too close to see that--sponsored by the student union.  And these two are promoting the dance, dance-o-rama at the Grand Ballroom.  (Unclear) placed on an easel every week, sitting in the lobby of the student union building.
Speaker 1: Part of the featured activities of a student union is movies.  In the good old days we had movies every Thursday night, "Cat on the Hot Tin Roof" was featured this one week, and then, then there was a struggle in Vietnam (unclear) ideas discussions.  All of the work is hand painted, before the days of computer.
Speaker 2: This license plate is--just came off of one of my cars.  But I designed this license plate just after the 100 year centennial.  The head of the rattler is a section of a much larger rattler, the original artwork being about four feet tall cropped at the head, hand separated for this particular license plate.  This license plate replaced the one previous--the hundred year celebration centennial logo.  That too was created by hand.
Speaker 1: This is a centennial logo that (unclear) emblem on the left on that first Florida A&M University license plate, completed entirely by hand, paste up letters, and some painting.  This license plate lasted on the Florida market of about one year in actual production.  But some are still on automobiles today some 12 years later.
Speaker 2: This is the actual script with the logo of a play that I wrote in 1993 I think, "I Killed My Old Man."  The program started--opened at a local high school in Mayo, Florida, but we ran it at Florida A&M University for two years, in Atlanta, Georgia, and Connecticut.
Speaker 1: This is a mural created for my class--graduation class (unclear) about a four by--in 1966 by eight by sixteen on canvas.  And at the bottom photograph, a piece of jewelry I created in a metal class, jewelry making class.  It's polished bronze, hand cut.
