Story_ID: 22417
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Thelma Nichols Calbert, Laurie Calbert, and Jackie Calbert.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Roosevelt Calbert, R-O-O-S-E-V-E-L-T, C-A-L-B-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No, I actually used a middle, laughed about that the other day.  My middle name in college and high school was Delano, D-E-L-A-N-O, from [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt, you know, as we were in high school.
Speaker 1: But you just used it, but you didn't, it wasn't really your name?
Speaker 2: Not really officially, but once I used my name officially, I did not use the "D".
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So were you named in honor of President Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Well, we always laugh about that because sometimes I remind people that it's, I was named as Franklin Delano, not the earlier Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Not the Teddy Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: The Teddy, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 13th, 1931, and I was born in Philadelphia, Mississippi.  That's in Neshoba County, if that matters.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and your title?
Speaker 2: I'm actually retired now, and I was somewhat surprised that someone called me about this.  I was very active at the National Science Foundation where I worked from 1975 until the year 2000.  While there, I was the division director for Human Resource Development.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the twelfth of July, 2012.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're now in Reston, Virginia.
Story_ID: 22418
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess my favorite food would be macaroni and cheese.  My wife does a very, excellent job in preparing that, so that's a family favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Royal blue.  That's one of the colors in my fraternity, so I like that color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Perhaps, late spring, early summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, we have a place in Virginia which is called Master Nuton (ph.) near Harrisonburg.  That is very, a good location.  In fact, we were there about a week or so go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a good place for a family reunion.
Speaker 1: Now, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I can't think of one at this particular point in time.  I perhaps have used them, but I hadn't thought about it very seriously.  That's something I'll have to come back to that question because there are two or three things I would like to think about.
Story_ID: 22419
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll ask about 'em separately.  Then we'll get them together so we don't get 'em confused.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Annie Pugh, P-U-G-H, A-N-N-I-E, P-U-G-H.  Now, sometimes, some people put an "m" in there for Matt, M-A-T-T, Annie Matt Calbert.  But it depends on who you ask.
Speaker 1: Now, the Matt, is that her maiden name or--
Speaker 2: Pugh is the maiden name.
Speaker 1: Pugh is, okay, so Pugh is--all right, I'm sorry.  So Pugh is the maiden name, and then Calbert--
Speaker 2: Calbert is the final name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know that.  We haven't been able, we're getting a family tree, and that we have not gotten the exact date of that.
Speaker 1: Do you have a good guess maybe about when she was born?
Speaker 2: Well, she was about eighty-five when she died about, oh, six or seven years ago.  So, I don't know if our family tree has that on there or not.  We started a family tree, and we should not think about the dates.  So if you go back, let's see, eighty years from say, fifteen years ago, let's go back to the year 2000.  And go back about eighty years from there, and maybe that'll give us a pretty good time of--
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty [1920].  That would put us about 1920 which, that would make her kind of young, I think for, if you were born in '31 [1931].
Speaker 2: Well, no, I'm giving you now just a round date.  Let's go back then about ten years from there, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that'll give you, 'cause we were all born--
Speaker 1: So about 1910.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) during that time.
Speaker 1: About 1910 or so, you think?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's a good date.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was just trying to get a ballpark.  All right, now, what--and where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Now, my mother was born, I think it was in Neshoba County, in Waynesboro [Mississippi]-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Dad, we have the thing here.  She was born in 1913, according to this.
Speaker 1: According to that, it says 1913 for my mother.
Speaker 2: Our observers say she was born in 1913.
Speaker 1: And she died in 1995.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995] okay.  And she was born in where?  What was the place?
Speaker 1: I thought she was born in, does it say in Waynesboro? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, it just tells her date.
Speaker 2: Well, it was in that area.  Most of my, my daddy was born in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll get to him in a minute.  Just, so Winniesboro?
Speaker 2: Waynes--
Speaker 1: Waynesboro.
Speaker 2: W-A-Y-N-E-S-B-O-R-O, Waynesboro.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories?
Speaker 2: Really, not very far.  All I know, I met some of her siblings.  I had an Aunt Dessie, I remember.  I remember I had an Aunt Curvin (ph.) and an Uncle Irving and that's about all I know.  But it was about, oh, seven or eight of them I think, a large family.  But we were never very close in terms of family reunions, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Did you know your mother's mother or father?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They had both passed when you were born?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know anything about them in terms of did she talk about what they did for a living?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you suspect they were farmers or were they doing something, some other kind of work?
Speaker 2: Well, (unclear) or perhaps related to farming, if not exactly farmers.  I would think in some area of that.  I don't remember any particular jobs they had or could relate to me.  I just simply don't remember.  We never met them.  That's why I don't know that, and as I said before, I did not meet all of her siblings.  I only met two or three of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, did your mother have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: She didn't talk about growing up at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, do you read anything from that, that it was too painful to discuss or what?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure it was too painful to discuss, although I'm sure that they, like most people, it was a very bad time in terms of finances.  But I don't think it was any worse than anybody else living during that time, living, I guess you could say, simply it was a very bad time in jobs for African Americans.  It was a lot worse for them.  The only thing I do remember, and I cannot give you any details.  They may have had some relation to Indian [Native American], Indian blood.  Now, I can't tell you which tribe that kind of thing.  I don't know any other details.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were all Indian color.  That's, I guess that's not a good thing to say, but I remember that most of 'em were about the same, like an Indian, the color of an Indian.  They were that color.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did they, did your mother grow up in the town of Waynesboro or in the rural area or--
Speaker 2: Well, Waynesboro itself is rural (laughter).  I would say, perhaps, yes, she was probably in the rural area.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she go to school in Waynesboro?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about her schooling.
Speaker 1: So you don't know if she finished school or went to school?
Speaker 2: No, I'm pretty sure she did not finish school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I know.
Speaker 1: Now, could she read and write?
Speaker 2: Yes, she could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, okay, now, did your mother have any special talents or--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure you would call it a talent, a very good cook.  I don't, and I don't know where she learned it.  I don't know of her being an entrepreneur of any kind.  And she had a special talent for making buttermilk biscuits, using baking powder.  And she'd make them taste like rolls, usually yeast biscuits, and I don't know how she did it.  And, in fact, I told my wife many times I wanted to get that recipe from her.  And I didn't get it, and I hate that.
Speaker 1: Okay, she made good biscuits.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and one other thing she did, I remember her, she could make, you know, a stew out of anything, chicken, squirrel, anything like that.  She could do dumplings, oh, she was good on dumplings.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Oh, I forget, banana pudding.  Don't let me forget that.
Speaker 1: So, now, you're the second person I've interviewed today that mentioned a female relative making good banana pudding--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that was from the middle of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I guess bananas were available in Mississippi, I guess, in those days, I suppose, yeah.
Speaker 2: Apparently, yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you just wonder about the, you know, during that time, about the availability of certain fruits and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 22420
Speaker 1: --so bananas were, yeah.  Okay.  Well, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full name is Jimmie, J-I-M-M-I-E, Jimmie Calbert.  Now, some people also spell it J-I-M-M-Y.  But we used J-I-M-M-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his date of birth and place of birth? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  1908.
Speaker 2: Eighteen zero eight [1808]? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Nineteen.
Speaker 1: Nineteen zero eight [1908].
Speaker 2: Nineteen zero eight [1908], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he passed away in 1993.
Speaker 2: Ninety three [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: As near as I can tell, I don't think that's on our--I think probably the same place as my mother [Ann Pugh].  They met there, somewhere in Waynesboro, somewhere in that county.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace his side--
Speaker 2: I do, the only--well, I did meet my grandmother on my father's side.  I remember her being a woman, I guess she was maybe a little over five-feet-one maybe, very fair.  But I think, I never knew my grandfather, my paternal grandfather.  The only thing they would say, say he was a very big man wearing something like a fifteen or sixteen shoe.  That I remember.  Thank goodness I don't have feet like that.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember them, my grandfather's name on that side, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandmother?  Do you know her name?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember her name either.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you did meet your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes, I met her.  I, well, I say I met her.  I don't know why I can remember.  I may have been something like two or three years old.  And she had me on the horse, and I remember us going across a stream, and a very clear stream.  I don't know where we were going or where we were coming from.  I just don't have those kind of details.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so there are no stories passed down on your father's side about slavery or Reconstruction [1865-1877] or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, they never talked about it.  But I'm sure there were stories.  I just don't recall them talking to us about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father get a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: I don't know how far.  He didn't finish high school.  That I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he did go to school.
Speaker 2: He had some formal training.  My guess would be something like sixth or seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, did your father talk about growing up, what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It just was not that kind of family conversation that occurred.  I just simply, or if there were conversations, I don't remember them very well.
Speaker 1: So do you have any idea what his parents did for a living?
Speaker 2: No, they probably, my guess would be farmers like most people during that time, in that part of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I'm just, that's all I'm asking 'cause I don't think anybody watching this is not gonna take it for granted that they were farmer, you know, 'cause I'm asking you directly what it is.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes, more than likely.
Speaker 1: --so you should tell me what you think is the most likely answer.
Speaker 2: The only thing I do know, in some parts of that particular county, and also in what we call other counties related to that, where I was born, Philadelphia, Mississippi, they did have sawmills.  Now, whether or not, I know my dad worked sometimes at sawmills.  How long, I cannot tell you.  But that seemed to be one area for occupation for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's a regular occupation in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Even today people work in the sawmills in the country towns, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, in fact, we passed a sawmill, my wife and I were, went back to our high school anniversary, and we passed by a sawmill, and someone said, (unclear) Philadelphia, Mississippi.  Now, you may have heard of Philadelphia where they had these awful murders during the Civil Rights struggles.  And they said that my dad worked at this particular sawmill.  I don't remember as a child, but they said that he did.  So I imagine that was principal work.  Those who didn't pick cotton worked at sawmills.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  So, so your father, now, did he leave school to work?  Is that what he did?
Speaker 2: I cannot give you the details.  My guess would be that he did.  It, my, my father was not oriented toward education.  Let me say it that way and putting it mildly.
Speaker 1: So did he, 'cause there are some, we were hearing some stories where parents are really excited about education, and there's some where people are not.  So, did he talk against education?
Speaker 2: I wish I could say that he was mildly interested.  No, he was not.
Speaker 1: Did he talk against it?
Speaker 2: No.  It was, what do you call that?  Kind of a muted question, a mute [sic, moot] question.
Speaker 1: So do you think, did he ever discuss with you or did you get any indication by watching his behavior or hear other conversations about what his aspirations were, if he could do whatever he wanted to do?
Speaker 2: No, no, definitely not.
Speaker 1: So he had no dreams of ever--
Speaker 2: If he did, he did not express them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember him, my father liked to hunt, and he liked to do it at night.  I would go on a few trips, not very much.  I never cared about hunting, particularly, at night.  And why, he wasn't bitten by a snake or anything else, but he loved to hunt at night.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, what did they hunt, raccoons at night?
Speaker 2: Rabbits.
Speaker 1: Rabbits.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I never see another rabbit, it'll be too soon for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you ate a lot of rabbit meat?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my mother, that was another one of her special dishes.  She'd make it taste like chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, did your father serve in the military at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 22421
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I wish I had one, no.  I really don't have one because I think they met and married while they were fairly young, but I don't have a particular story.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they met and married fairly young.  And, but--
Speaker 2: Well, it was, I guess it was not uncommon during that time of the century.
Speaker 1: So did they know each other growing up?
Speaker 2: I would surmise that they did, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, how long, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did they attend the same church?
Speaker 2: I don't know about any churchgoing at all.
Speaker 1: Or did they attend the same school when they--
Speaker 2: Don't know that either.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: As I had to say earlier, we're just getting ready, starting the family tree, getting the kind of information that you're asking about.  But we just started it about three or four years ago, and I'm not sure it's gonna be completed now because I'm not sure we're gonna have another family reunion in the near future.  We may kind of in era--I don't mean era in the sense of an era.  But we had one of the family reunions here in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you come to Washington, D.C. for a family reunion, and you go to Meridian, Mississippi, you will see why once you come to Washington [D.C.], you don't wanna go back to Meridian [Mississippi].  So we have difficulty now doing that.  People just simply, they probably would come back to Washington, D.C., but I don't think you'd get them to go back to Meridian.  We had the largest number of people because a lot of my father's [Jimmie Calbert] people live in Hattiesburg [Mississippi].  I'm not sure you've ever heard of Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: Yes, I have.
Speaker 2: But some of them live in Hattiesburg. Meridian was not too far from Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: I think--
Speaker 2: Once you get out of that area, it's, we had one out in California, and that one was very poorly attended because of the distance, where most of the people lived in Mississippi and reunions in California just didn't work out very well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Dr. Joyce Ladner who was president of Howard [University] is from Hattiesburg or Meridian, Hattiesburg--
Speaker 2: I knew her very well, yes.  I know her very well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think she's from Hattiesburg.  And Alice Walker wrote a book about Meridian, you know, so.  Yeah, so these places--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, the highlight of Meridian when we were there was a new train station.  That was it.  You can see, coming to Washington, D.C., and then going back to Hattiesburg, there was just no way you can get people back to Hattiesburg.
Speaker 1: So, once they went down to the new station and used it to get out of there--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was it.  Then it was not too far, and they could drive.  They could drive to Philadelphia to the gambling casinos.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, now, did your--I didn't ask this question.  Did your father, other than hunting, did your father have any special talents or anything that you know of?
Speaker 2: No, I really don't.  I don't remember him playing any sports or anything like that.  If he did, he never talked about it.
Speaker 1: Or sing or play--
Speaker 2: No, he just never talked about his family.  And I wish, I wish I had some stories to tell my children, but I don't.
Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about his father who was so big, you know?
Speaker 2: No, that's the only thing I remember, the size sixteen shoe, they keep talking about.  And he must have been close to seven feet tall.  You can see that in some of our--but now, I'm short compared to some of my younger brothers who may be something 6'5", 6'6", 6'10", and I'm barely 5'10", so I do know there must have been someone in the family very large.
Speaker 1: And if he was coming along now, he'd have an NBA contract waiting for him?
Speaker 2: Well, he thought he was gonna get one anyway, but he got hurt, and that kind of ended his desire there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and their looks, their habits, how they walked and talked, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, in terms of likes and dislikes, of doing things or learning new things, I would say my mother [Ann Pugh].  My father simply just was not interested, and I say this with all due respect, but I like to tell the truth about it.  He loved to gamble.  Now, if you wanna talk about gambling, you could get that.  But I wasn't interested in that.  So in terms of fun or trying to go places, I would say my mother was more interested in doing (unclear) lots.
Story_ID: 22422
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your brothers and sisters.  How many do you have and where do you fall in the lineup?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a set of three and a set of seven.  I'm in the set of three.  I have two older sisters.  I'm the third one.  I'm the only boy in that set.  There's seven other children where we have, I have three brothers, and I think there're still five sisters.
Speaker 1: Can you name them all, I mean starting with the oldest and going down?
Speaker 2: Well, the oldest one who is now dead was Alma.  The second one was Gertrude.  Then we had Mary Ann, Jimmie Sue, Sue, like Jimmie Sue, Shirley and Marie.  Did I get 'em all?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Now, you didn't mention yourself and the other--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was getting the girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, there was three other boys which was myself, James Earl, Horace, Charles-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: We called Uncle Charles.  I'm not giving them in order.  I gave him the first three.
Speaker 2: No, I wanted you to give me in the--
Speaker 1: Well, I gave, those--
Speaker 2: Now, where do you fit in?
Speaker 1: I told you I was three in the seven.
Speaker 2: In the first three?
Speaker 1: In the first three, I was the third one, third child.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're the third one.
Speaker 1: Two girls and one boy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the other family came down, where there were five girls and three, three more boys.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: So you were born in 1931.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: It all, it's the strangest thing.  I remember, and some people may challenge me on this, I was about, maybe two years.  I had what is called pleurisy.  And I can remember being in the hospital, and I saw another person I can remember it was my mother [Ann Pugh] or it could have been a nurse.  I don't remember.  But I do remember at that early age, I remember being in the hospital.  I don't know any other details or anything of that nature, but I do remember that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Now, I remember some other things.  I remember where someone fell on a wooden heater and got burned.  I don't know the details of that.  I was a child.  So I cannot give you the details, but I do remember (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As I told you earlier, I remember my grandmother taking me horseback riding.  That's about the extent of that.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're gonna pause here and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22423
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're rolling again.  Tell me now, you grew up in Philadelphia [MS] or were you just born there?
Speaker 2: I was just really born in Philadelphia [Mississippi].  Oh, we stayed in some places that I'm not sure where.  I remember the name Rankin County, somewhere.  They're all near Neshoba County [Mississippi], Rankin County [Mississippi] and so forth.  But then we finally moved to a town called Canton, Canton, Mississippi.  That's where also I met my wife in Canton, but I remember we moved there.  I don't remember many details, other than I said to you, we were in Rankin County, and it appeared my dad was working in a sawmill there.  But I don't know any details, nothing I remember that's memorable.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you've got a big family here, and so you're doing a lot of moving around.  This, you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --born in '31' [1931].  That's the first, in the middle of the, well, the beginning of the Depression [The Great Depression began in October 1929], I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and things were rough all over the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so your family moved, you know, kind of all around the county you said, for a while?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: My mother's family, I don't think they moved quite about.  Some of my mother's people lived in Laurel [Mississippi].  I don't know if you've heard of Laurel.
Speaker 1: I've heard of Laurel, yeah.
Speaker 2: Her people lived mostly around Laurel in that area.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Laurel, Mississippi, yeah.  Now, these are--
Speaker 2: They'd always seen my mother because my mother was the darker one in the family, and everybody else was Indian [Native American] color, but she was a little bit darker than the normal Indian color, which was interesting.  I don't know why I even remember that, but I do.
Speaker 1: Were there rumors of Choctaws [Native American tribe] in the family?
Speaker 2: Exactly, (laughter) I started to tell you about Choctaw, but I did not, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, that's kind of a Mississippi, you know, relationship.  There's so many.  I think it was Greenwood, Leflore was a Choctaw, you know, half white and half Choctaw.  It had a lot of black people, you know, during slavery.  So, okay, so you moved around a lot.  So how old were you when the family settled in Canton?
Speaker 2: Well, in Canton, it's nothing, again, it's not very memorable.  I have not talked to my children very much about it because it's, it's part of my life that I'm not very proud of.  I'm not very proud that my father did not do more to take us out of the situation we were in.  He, my father worked at a sawmill again in Canton.  They called it the sawmill quarters, if you can make any sense out of it, because they had a little, kind of like a little neighborhood of shotgun houses.  You heard of the shotgun, "shoot 'em till he run now", whatever that song goes.  We lived in shotgun houses.
Speaker 1: Now, what is a, describe a shotgun house for us?
Speaker 2: A shotgun house, where you had two or three rooms and they're one behind the other.  If you open the front door, you can see through the living room on through the kitchen.  And if you shot through there, the bullet would go straight through the house.  (Laughter)  They call it a shotgun house.
Speaker 1: All right. I've heard of it.  I just wanted you to say it. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear) down the hallways.
Speaker 2: Well, some of them didn't have hallways, no.
Speaker 1: We heard about a dog-run house earlier.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I haven't heard of that.
Speaker 1: You ever heard of a dog-run house?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's another--
Speaker 2: Mine was a shotgun.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so--
Speaker 2: So I said, I was saying earlier, I lived in Canton from about fourth grade somewhere until about fifth or sixth.  Now, we lived in something (unclear) area.  They called it sawmill quarters.  It had its own little school, would go to the eighth grade.  And I still don't know why I had the presence of mind to say that that wasn't enough for me.  So I started to attend school in the town of Canton.  It's about 17,000 people in all of Canton.  I would walk to school, three or four miles from the mill town, we called sawmill quarters, all the way to the, what we called the colored school in Canton.  And I would walk past the white school to get to what we called at that time the colored school.  We say now, the black school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the next school?
Speaker 2: My school, we called it Cameron Street.
Speaker 1: Cameron Street School.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I attended there from sixth grade, and I graduated there in twelfth grade in 1950.
Story_ID: 22424
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we gotta go back though to a question I did not ask, and I was trying to gather all the places you moved to.  But if you can think about all those different scenes of your childhood, can you tell me what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember too much while I was going to Canton and living in there because in Canton, we'd always try to raise one hog each year, and we'd kill that hog in hog-killing season.  And we raised our own vegetables, okra, what we call butterbean, corn, things like that.  It was a very poor life, and I always said when I was a child, I didn't wanna have my children living like I had to live.  I simply didn't want that to happen.  I think I conceded that they didn't live quite like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is one hog enough to raise a family?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd grow pretty big, and people shared.  Remember, now--well, I can't say you remember because you might not know that.  Several people had hogs, and they'd help each other kill the hog.  Then they would share that hog.  So they go to the next month, we go to somebody else's house.  They'd kill one of their biggest hogs, and they'd share that meet.  So it was not a matter of just having one hog.  It was hogs that were shared throughout the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some of the things for most of us in terms of vegetables, we would share those.
Speaker 1: Okay, so everybody had--
Speaker 2: The other thing I remember was that we raised more okra than anything.  I cannot stand okra even today, and I will not eat okra.  I may eat some and put some meal on it and fry it, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so tired of okra, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I didn't want to disrupt you, but I just wanted to ask about that hog.  So you were giving me the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that I remembered because you had, you know, you had to put the hog up, before you kill it, you put up on a wooden floor because what they call cleaning out.  I remember also the smell of chickens because, now, that was my job to take care of the chickens, to gather the eggs.  Now, chicken had a disease, as I recall, it was called pip (ph.) or something like that where you had to go in there and take a needle and take a hard shell out from under its arm.  And if you did that, the chickens would live.  That was my job.  So I had to take care of the chickens.  But I remember that very well.
Speaker 1: So the disease is called pip, it was called?
Speaker 2: It was called pip, P-I-P, I guess, and that, it may be a scientific name, yeah, and I don't know what that is.  But I could, you know, my job, skinning rabbits.  That was pretty good.  I never, I don't remember smelling the rabbits as such, but it was my job to skin the rabbits and, you know, cut 'em up and so forth.  But the other sound I recall is the sawmill, you know, ran, of course, power, made its own power by steam, steam power.  And they would ring the bell, the horn to sound at twelve o'clock and people for lunch, and it sounded on people quit work at the end of the day.  I remember things like that.  I remember we used power from the sawmill.  So at six o'clock, when the mill close, the power was down.  And if you didn't have a modern radio, you couldn't listen to anything else.  You didn't have no power to run the normal radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all had electricity when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, when we were at Canton, not any other places, at Canton.
Speaker 1: And you say it only ran when the sawmill was operation and then it would be shut off?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they had some type of reserve.  I'm not sure whether they rented that reserve from the county or something else.  But if you had an old radio, you couldn't, the transformer or something wouldn't get enough power to run the radio.
Story_ID: 22425
Speaker 1: Did you listen to--was the radio a big feature of growing up, listening to the radio?
Speaker 2: I would say, yes. I guess we listened to the usual things, popular music, stuff like that on the radio.
Speaker 1: Now, did your family--was it a big event when Joe Louis would fight?
Speaker 2: I don't remember listening to it.  I'd read about it.  I don't remember listening to it on the radio, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite show?
Speaker 2: All I can remember is Jack Benny, something like that.  I don't remember much else that I, no, I don't recall anything else because as the power started going out, we couldn't get anything say after six or seven o'clock.
Speaker 1: Now, was music a part of growing up at all?  I mean did you have musicians in the community or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a strange story.  Not really.  We had a lady who played by ear, and she was good at playing by ear.  And her name was a Mrs. Washington.  After she learned that I knew a little bit about music, she would never play in front of me again.  It was interesting because she was, she was playing all over the, played all over the county.  And she found out that I knew music.  She would not--now, when I'd leave town, and I'd come back, they'd say Mrs. Washington's been playing.  When I got back, she stopped playing again.  She was, she really was not comfortable, not knowing more music than she did.  But she was good at what she did.  She was good at it.
Speaker 1: So did you play an instrument yourself then?
Speaker 2: Well, I played at piano.  I, I didn't have the money to really take music seriously.  I just didn't have the money to do it.
Speaker 1: But you could read music?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I can read, yes, and sing it and play some of it.
Story_ID: 22426
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big--now, you mentioned your parents didn't go to church really, but did--
Speaker 2: That is, that's, I hated that I, to say that about my family.  That (unclear).  But I never saw my parents [Ann Pugh and Jimmie Calbert] in church, never.  But I did.  I attended church every Sunday.  I was baptized.  I think I was twelve or thirteen when I was baptized.  But I never saw my parents at church.  I never saw my parents at school, you know, where they come to the school functions.  Somehow, religion and education were not very important to them.  I don't know why.  Was it because their parents felt that way or what?  That's the only disagreement my parents and I always had.  And, again, I knew I didn't want my children coming up not knowing about education and not knowing about religion.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what church, what denomination did you, oh, well, Baptist, right?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.  So what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall the name of that church.  I remember the pastor, a Rev. Ruffin, R-U-F-F-I-N, as I recall his name.  I don't remember the name of the church.
Story_ID: 22427
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us about where you first started school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: I never thought about that seriously.  I don't, I don't recall the name of the first school I attended outside of Canton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, in Canton, I do remember being in third or fourth grade or something, and I remember Ms. Washington--remember I (unclear) one of the teachers.  When I got sixth and seventh grade, I mean fifth and sixth grade, actually, fifth grade, I should say, there was a Mrs. Summers, S-U-M-M-E-R-S, Mrs. Summers that taught.  She was an excellent teacher, for not having the kind of training that you wished a teacher had, but she did her best to make us learn the names of the states and the capital cities for each state, that kind of thing.  So she did make you use your mind.  I can say that, but I attended there until I was fifth grade.  I just--
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: In Canton?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure it had a name.  This, now, remember when I said to you that the [saw] mill town had its own school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, when I went to, into town for it, I was into Cameron Street [school in Mississippi], C-A-M-E-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at the sawmill quarters school.
Speaker 2: Until fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Until fifth grade, and then you went to Cameron--
Speaker 2: Cameron Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was sixth grade.  That's where I met my wife, and I met.  We were sixth grade.
Speaker 1: All right, so it's Cameron Street School in the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Now, that was in town proper.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I take it you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, one of my wife's sisters, who came back from college to teach at Cameron Street High School with one of my mentors and a mentor to many students.  But I'll let, I won't get ahead of myself.  You may want to ask a certain way.
Speaker 1: Well, did you have any science in the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Any?
Speaker 1: Science.
Speaker 2: Yes.  If you wanna call it that, yes.  If The person was not a highly experienced (unclear)--the person could make you get interested and could motivate you to want to study.  But he, himself, was not a trained scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he did the best that he could, and it was not a bad job.
Speaker 1: So you had no lab equipment or any of that sort of thing in school?
Speaker 2: No, not anything, if you had anything, it was very, very mild.  In fact, a lot of the things that we had were sent over from the white school to the minority school.  They sent us their old books, all kind of stuff, unbelievable.  You wouldn't believe it.  If I told you all the stories, you'd say, oh, that's not true.
Speaker 1: Well, tell some of the stories.  That's what we're--
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean--
Speaker 1: --this is what this interview is for (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I mean about sending old things, about sending their old books.  Everything they always sent, that they didn't want over there, they sent it to us, never sent anything new.  Always something that had been used, and they sent it to us.  I remember my sister-in-law, my wife's sister became a principal, and later on, she became the librarian.  And she's a very brilliant person in terms of getting things that were needed.  She went to a meeting, and someone asked about how many books did they have at the black school.  Now, she not only could tell them what books were at the black school, but she also could tell them how they were purchased and they were purchased because they had to sell candy and cookies to raise money to buy books, while the county bought books for the white schools.  They never bought books for library in the black school.  So she went before this, this council or whatever, and she had a list of every single book.  And she told how each book was bought.  It turned out they all were purchased by selling candy and cookies.  And believe it or not, the next day, they had some money out there to buy books at the school where she was a librarian.  But it was that kind of thing that she was able to manipulate.  So whenever Ms. Nichols asked for anything from the county, from the school system, she got it because they knew that she'd come back to the meeting next time and embarrass them again.  And she'd fix it some way that they would be embarrassed.
Story_ID: 22428
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were in high school, I guess, throughout World War II [1939-1945], right, the whole World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So was that a special time to be in high school in terms of, I mean I don't, I know you've been at any other time (laughter), but, so--
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I was so busy.  I say, why, because during that time, when I was in the tenth grade, I had to start taking care of myself.  I had to start working a full-time job.  I'd go to school full time in the daytime and work full time at night on a job.  So I didn't have any time to think about anything except trying to get up in the morning, get to school for a full day, leave school a half hour early so I could get to work and work eight hours on a job for seven days a week, I mean the working part, seven days a week.  I went to school five days.
Speaker 1: Well, what were your hours then?  When did school start and when did work start?
Speaker 2: Well, school started at 8:30.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something like, eight, I think it was 8:30.
Speaker 1: And it went to how long?
Speaker 2: Well, they usually get out around 3:00 o'clock or a little after 3:00.  I had to leave at 2:30 because I had to be at work at 3:00.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they let me out early so I could go to work.
Speaker 1: So did you work 3:00 to 11:00?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was supposed to be until 10:30, but by the time you cleaned up the kitchen and everything, it was 11:00.  I started there as a, as a dishwasher.  And the man came back and said, ghee, you're doing pretty good on the dishes.  Why don't you go over and become a short-order cook.  After doing that for six months, he said, ghee, you're very good at that.  So let me move you to head cook.  So I became a head cook there for my last two years.  I was making $20.00 a week, and that helped take care of my family and for the first time, I could buy myself clothes that I never had before.
Speaker 1: Twenty dollars a week.  Now, this is in--
Speaker 2: That was spectacular.
Speaker 1: --1945.
Speaker 2: That's 1948.
Speaker 1: Forty eight [1948]?
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Now, this is after high school or--
Speaker 2: I finished high school in 1950.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, 'cause somehow we had on this outline that you--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --you graduated when you were fifteen, and that's wrong then, right?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, I graduated, I was, was eighteen when I graduated--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1950.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to college where I graduated in 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's why you looked kind of funny when I said that you were in school during World War II.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You really weren't in high school.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So don't be afraid to tell me.  I don't (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know (laughter).  We're only the ones with the outline.
Speaker 2: No problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay, so you graduated in 1915 [sic, 1950] at age eighteen from--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, say that again.
Speaker 1: You graduated when you were eighteen from--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sorry, yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1950 from Cameron Street High School.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, so, and that's in Canton, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so--
Speaker 2: And that was Cameron Street, called Cameron Street High School.  Once you get to the high school part, it's called Cameron Street High School.
Speaker 1: Now, did you graduate with any honors or anything?
Speaker 2: Any?
Speaker 1: Honors?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the top student.  I was Valedictorian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Even though you were working full time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did you have a favorite teacher in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I shouldn't say this.  My wife is sitting here.  My sister-in-law, her name was Lucille Nichols was my favorite teacher because she attempted to bring us up to speed in terms of using correct language, reading [William] Shakespeare.  I started reading Shakespeare at that time.
Story_ID: 22429
Speaker 1: Now, it's well known in Chicago [Illinois] that you can tell a lot of people from Mississippi because they still talk like they're from Mississippi--they're in Mississippi.  And so, but your teaching you all how to speak--
Speaker 2: Yes, we spent our time, the library was our home room.  So she made us use that time wisely.  She would give us words to learn to use them and to get the meaning, words we never would have had otherwise.  And I still appreciate that and being able, when I got to college, I was ready.  Well, I won't say fully ready, but I was much more ready than I would have been had she not been there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, so she was important in terms of getting you ready for, prepared for college.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you manage to attend Jackson State [College in Jackson, Mississippi]?  Was a given that that's where you were gonna go or could you have gone Alcorn [State University in Lorman, Mississippi] or--
Speaker 2: Let's go back to my sister-in-law.  This is the same one I'm talking about.  I got in an old school bus.  It was the best school bus they had, I guess.  She, one Saturday, she took a group of us, I don't know, twenty-five or whatever, thirty students to Jackson State College at that time, to take a test, to strive to get a scholarship.  And I think my wife and I both won scholarships.  My scholarship was the grand total of $50.00.  But that was my tuition for that year, my freshman year.
Speaker 1: It was $50.00?
Speaker 2: Fifty dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's about all I had (laughter) until I, and then I got another job when I was able to get a job when I was at Jackson State my first year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that sounds, as we sit here, that sound unbelievable that you could go to school for $50.00--
Speaker 2: In tuition.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean that's the tuition part, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen, um-hum, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you got the scholarship to Jackson State.  Now, did you decide on a major as soon as you got there?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was going to go into science and math.  I was pretty good in that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you join that fraternity at Jackson State?
Speaker 2: Yes, I joined the first called Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Phi Beta Sigma.  That was my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was Jackson State like?  Was it a, I mean I know you hadn't attended any other school, but what was it like in terms of the atmosphere--
Speaker 2: I, I guess it was like most young people during that time, for some it may have been a home away from home.  I guess we were sheltered in a lot of ways while we were, we were segregated, most of our teachers were very dedicated.  And they gave us the best they could to make--and they took interest in our learning for it was, I found myself making all 'A's, and I never thought that I shouldn't make all 'A's at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any particular teachers who were mentors to you at Jackson State that--
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember.  I think all were about equally dedicated.  I don't remember anyone that particularly stood out.  Maybe if I think about it later on, maybe I could pick somebody out.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna pause here.
Story_ID: 22430
Speaker 1: So Jackson State, now, did you have a favorite subject at Jackson State [College]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was science.  Now, I still think sometimes how is it that I became a physics' major in college, I mean in graduate school, not having a physics major in undergrad.  I had a good science background, but highlighting physics as a single major, I did not have an undergrad.  So I had to make up a lot of, a lot of ground, and I did that by going to summer school.
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you out of there, let's, now, did anything else happen at Jackson State when you were there?  Now, you're there from '50' [1950] to '54' [1954], I guess?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '50' [1950] to '54' [1954].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes.
Speaker 1: So, I'm just wondering like, what college life was like and did you participate in clubs and did you have to work (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for a, remember I did tell you I did have, in fact, I was getting ready, my freshman year, freshman, I was getting ready at about the end of the first quarter to pack up and go home.  I didn't have anyone to help me to continue in school.  I just didn't have it.  My father [Jimmie Calbert] was not interested, and even if he had been interested, he could not have helped me or he didn't have the kind of job that he could help.  And I remember a Dean Edmund, dean of students.  His name was Edmund, called me by, and he said, you can't leave school.  You're bright.  Someone had told him that they thought I was very bright and that they just couldn't afford to lose me.  So I was able to get a job again in the City of Jackson [Mississippi].  And it was my fortune that the owner of the company was named Mr. Rafferty, who was from Connecticut.  He was not a Southerner by any stretch of the imagination.  But Mr. Rafferty was a lifesaver in terms of giving me a job.  The job enabled me to buy, pay for my room and board.  And that was the only support I had because remember, I told you I had a tuition scholarship, $50.00, and I made enough money to pay my room and board.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you made it all over the summer?
Speaker 2: Well, in the summer, I played the games that they did for a long time.  They try to end school as soon as you could and you go and catch that train, catch the train headed for Chicago [Illinois], and I'd always get a job, luckily in Chicago.  And I was working in Chicago and saved my money to go back to school in September.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did--
Speaker 2: And I did that for three years actually because my fourth year, I finished, of course.
Speaker 1: Where did you--you had relatives in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes, my family by that time, had migrated from Canton, Mississippi to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, your mother [Ann Pugh] and father and your sisters and brothers--
Speaker 2: Yes, and all the other children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I never lived in Chicago with them.  But I was already in college and so that was not my home in Chicago, was not my home.  My parents lived there.  My sisters and brothers lived there, but I did not.
Speaker 1: But you would stay with them during the summer, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Actually, I had an aunt on my, aunt on my mother's side.  I stayed with her during the summer.  And I'm not sure that I had had enough of my father fooling around.  I, I never thought he did enough for the family.
Speaker 1: You said he gambled a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so (unclear), but going back to home and getting in the arguments and that kind of thing.  Well, after he got to Chicago, I don't think he did much gambling as he did in Mississippi.  I don't think he had the opportunity to do so as he did in Mississippi.  So I would go stay with my aunt.  Luckily, I was able to get a job, sometimes extremely difficult jobs 'cause you had to do what was left when you go to apply for a job.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of jobs did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I did, initially, the first years, I would load boxcars, load and unload mail, things like that.  I had an uncle who also worked at the same place where we unloaded boxcars, mail cars and so forth.  We also had a sideline of moving people, and I would work with him.  I don't know how I did that.  I don't, I'm not sure why I'm not dead now.  I would work full time on a job.  We, we moved pianos from the fourth floors, can you imagine, upright piano, you know.  I recall going down the steps, somebody in an apartment was standing by the door, said, what's going on out there?  And my uncle would always respond, "It's a lot going on."  So we'd take these pianos down four flights of stairs and somehow I survived.  I'd get my money and get back to school.  I'd get enough money to buy a few clothes, go back and get on Illinois Central, back to Jackson, back to the other job that I had because the other job in the afternoon, I'd leave school at Jackson State around 3:00 o'clock.  And I remember that because my calculus class was gonna be offered at 3:00, and I couldn't take calculus because I had to work.  It was either take calculus and starve or the reverse.  I opted, of course, to stay in school, school, which I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, did you--anything else about Jackson State?  Now, did you have any time for any extracurricular activities within the--
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, my classmate or my colleagues respected me very highly.  I was, I was heading up almost every club you could think of, you know, the Sunday School Club, everything.  You name the club, and I was head of it.  And I was making all A's in my class work.  My daughter is sitting up there now.  I had a photostatic memory.  I'm careful in saying that because she may think she has one too (laughter), but I'm not gonna get into that.
Story_ID: 22431
Speaker 1: So you had really a photographic memory in terms of--
Speaker 2: I had a photostatic memory, and I could just remember things.  I could just, the teacher would sit and look at me 'cause I could--he asked me a question once when I was a freshman.  It was in the biology class.  And the biology teacher asked me a question.  Nobody knew the answer, and he finally called on me.  And I still don't know why.  I find myself reading out of the book in my mind.  I was going from word to word out of the book.  I didn't have the book.  I had, you know, I had read it earlier.  And he stood there with his mouth open (laughter), said, you know, what is going on?  And I didn't know what a photostatic memory was.  I found out later, of course, that's what was going on.  So that happened.  Now, I don't wanna jump ahead of you, but I just wanna tie the story together.  When I went to graduate school, the same thing happened in taking physics.  I'd take an exam and I could hear, get a question so clearly that he was, the teacher would sit and look at me and ask me how did I do that.  Of course, he knew how I did it, but I mean he, it was a rhetorical question.  And so that, my mind got me through, having that photostatic memory.  When I got ready to get a, choose someone to be my advisor for my dissertation, I went to the department head.  And I had a course under him, in a course in physics.  And he'd give an open-book exam.  He said, okay, everybody come in, and he would question you and we open book.  I didn't use the open book.  I could state back to him every formula that I had, and he stood there with his mouth open because he did not believe I was doing what I was doing.  I didn't know what I was doing.  I, all I know, I would study very hard.  And the next thing I know, he said, yeah, you, (unclear), you know, I'll be your mentor.  And that's how I got my PhD is, you know, by his, he was head of the department of physics.  He realized the ability I had to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, that's something.  That's quite an ability.
Speaker 2: Well, let me give you one other story.  And I hope I relate it because I don't wanna forget it.  When I took my comprehensive, my written comprehensive, I went into the class.  And you have these ten people sitting around you, a board.  One guy told me, whom I liked very well, and he liked me, he asked me a question about potential and kinetic energy.  And he said how do you know you can convert, you had a conservation of energy, think of a formula where you have potential and tell me how you convert it to kinetic energy.  And for the life of me, I had never done that problem before, but something told me what to do, and I need to do this.  And, there I was, you'd have to see this.  This board, going from side, the board, from side to side of the board.  And all of my professors sitting around had their mouths open.  They don't believe that I'm doing what I'm doing.  And working the problems, when I got to the end, I started out with MGH [MGH = mass, gravity acceleration, and height], all at once the kinetic energy fell out at the end about three blackboards, the answer fell out.  Well, at that time, I knew then I was gonna be able to go ahead and continue.  So it was those kind of events--I was discussing with my wife now, at the time, I didn't realize what was going on fully.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: I don't mean to cut you off, but--
Speaker 1: No, no, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: --I wanted to tie that in a little later on if I forget to mention it to you.
Speaker 1: So, now, did they--you graduated '54' [1954], right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from Jackson State [College].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was the year of Supreme Court decision, "Brown vs. Board [of Education]".
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 22432
Speaker 1: Now, so did you keep up with those events when you were, Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Yes, I kept up with the events, but even more so, I kept up with the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968], period.  I never shall forget, I was sitting in a physics class at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] when they announced that those four Civil Rights workers had been found in Philadelphia [Mississippi].  I never shall forget.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that was 1963, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four, [1964], Spring of '64' [1964].  Yeah, that's about ten years later.
Speaker 2: But I'm just saying, yeah.  So those things will come back to you, although I was--it was a strange case in Mississippi, and I know that's not on your list, how do you pay somebody to go to a school that's better in Mississippi.  The schools you attend were better than any school in Mississippi.  I went to school at the University of Kansas, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], there are no schools in Mississippi to compare, but they would pay you to go there as opposed to integrating the school.  It seemed like a dumb thing to do.
Speaker 1: Now, we've heard this before in other interviews.  But just explain how that worked so if you wanna, when you graduated from Jackson State [College], and you certainly were qualified to attend graduate school somewhere else--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But you were qualified to attend--
Speaker 2: As they do now, by the way.
Speaker 1: --the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you wanted to, the great University of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But rather than have you integrate the University of Mississippi, they would pay you to go to some other school?
Speaker 2: That's right, somewhere, that's right.
Speaker 1: Any place that would accept you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So they pay you to go to a better school (laughter).  I mean I thought that was a pretty dumb thing which was good for us, to do that.  I didn't mind it, fine, because it changed the environment.  I met some wonderful people in those institutions.  I never shall forget.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that some of the best educated teachers in the country were teaching school in Mississippi 'cause they had studied all over.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: Had Masters and PhDs from other--
Speaker 2: That's true.  And many of my students now that I taught when I was coloreds; they have their PhDs now 'cause I think I motivated them to do that.  I have three young men who went to an all-boys (unclear) when they were in high school.  Three of them got their PhDs are now top ministers.  I won't tell their background, but they really went off to school and did very well.  So I think being able to motivate them is very important for a teacher.  If you're not gonna, if you're not a dedicated teacher, you really shouldn't do it.  You shouldn't do that as a job, as a vocation.
Story_ID: 22433
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduated though, you taught high school first, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You taught high school, oh, now, were you valedictorian of your class in, at Jackson State [University] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, now, I didn't ask you this.  But did the school bring speakers to campus to speak to the students, to motivate them and that sort of thing?  Did you have a series--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we, they would bring some of the top poets.  I don't remember all their names at this point, but I remember that--
Speaker 1: Was it Langston Hughes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Langston Hughes, and there were two or three others they would bring.  I just don't remember off the top of my head.  And some of the top singers.  For example, Leontyne Price played for my eighth grade graduation.  (Unclear) that was eighth grade.  She was a senior.  I met her again when I finished college and I'd been teaching, my first year teaching.  I came back and my wife and I met up at a concert of hers.  Now, Leontyne, the one thing I wanted to do was to hear her on the stage in an opera, and I never had that opportunity to do that. And I really hate that.
Speaker 1: Leontyne Price, Langston Hughes, other people did come to campus.  As the top student, did you have any role when the--
Speaker 2: Oh, (unclear) now, I wish my wife would find that picture, at that time, Marion Anderson came to our campus.  And my wife, they appointed several of the top women students to work with Ms. Anderson, you know, to help her, you know, press her dress.  She wouldn't let them press it, but they had to do so.  But you see that picture, my wife had a pose, you would think that she was Ms. Anderson (laughter), and (laughter) (unclear), but that's another story.  But we had a chance to meet people like that on the black campuses.  And that's something that was different, that if you had gone to a predominantly white school.  I may have met some people.  I'm not saying I wouldn't meet anyone, but the opportunity to meet people like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I thought I'd ask because of that.  Now, you mentioned you met your wife at Cameron Street School.
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And I know you all didn't get married then so--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when was it that you all finally got married?
Speaker 2: Well, we finished Jackson State in 1954.  We were married in 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we've been married since then.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you in love with her all through grade school and all the way up through--
Speaker 2: Were we what?
Speaker 1: Were you in love with her all through grade school and all the way up through--
Speaker 2: I, we were good friends, but, no, we thought we were in love when we were about, I think about juniors in college or something.  We (laughter), my other girlfriend I had during the rest of the time was her roommate.  But that's another story (laughter).  You don't wanna put that in your (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no, you have to, when this interview's over, we don't have to--I don't wanna get you in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, we were, we became serious when we, I guess we were actually juniors in college when we became serious.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right 1955, you're teaching at Jim Hill High School.  Now, where is that?  Where is Jim Hill?
Speaker 2: That's Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Jackson, okay. And you teach--
Speaker 2: I taught in Clarksdale in 1954, '55' [1955], Clarksdale, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  That's the first one, Clarksdale, Mississippi, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I went to, I came to, went to Jim Hill in 1955, and I stayed there, I think about four years, something like that.
Story_ID: 22434
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, let's see now when did you go to, you received your Masters degree in 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's when the University of Mississippi, I mean the State of Mississippi paid your way to go to--
Speaker 2: No, actually, by that time I went on four year scholarship from the National Science Foundation.  I had a year's and a summer scholarship, fellowship.
Speaker 1: What was your Master's degree in?
Speaker 2: In science, for teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a MA degree.
Speaker 1: Science for teaching?
Speaker 2: Right. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  He has a MA for Math for teaching from Michigan.
Speaker 1: No, it actually was teaching of science.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You could call it science teaching or something like that.  Usually, you combine science and math, you do that.
Speaker 2: Now, from what we have on this outline, it says that the National Science Foundation was formed by Harry Truman, I think in 1950.  By 1957 when the Russians launched Sputnik [the first artificial Earth satellite], there was sort of a panic in the country.  We need to get more scientists, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, well, I was in on those fellowships.  I was in school every summer and then I decided to just take off and go for a year.  But I had been, for another summer I had been places like Tuskegee [University], Texas A & M [College Station, Texas], places like that.  So I've been at a lot of schools.
Speaker 2: Were there any special teachers at University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] when you were there?  Any people stand out?
Speaker 1: No, I, the only thing I--I had met, my, my, one of my teachers that taught me at Jackson State [College] was also in school at [the University of] Michigan at the same time I was in school, working on my Masters.  He was working on his doctorate.  His name was Rogers Newman.  He went on, and he received his PhD from Michigan in Mathematics.  And I left Michigan and went to Kansas and received my PhD at [the University of] Kansas in 1971.
Speaker 2: All right, but we're skipping over, like you taught math and physics at Alcorn State [University], right?
Speaker 1: Alcorn, right.
Speaker 2: In 1960.
Speaker 1: Now, that's another thing we--what's easy about Alcorn, we call it All corn if you're from (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, why do you all call it All corn?
Speaker 1: Well, we just, that's what we called it if you worked there or a student who attended school.  But I know people who do not attend will tend to call it Alcorn.  That's just the way things are.  We don't pay it any attention.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's Allcorn really, that's really how you say it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But who knows?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Okay, so Alcorn.  Okay, so that's up in Northern Mississippi, right, up in the--
Speaker 1: No, it's kind like the central part.
Speaker 2: Central?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, if you'd been in the Northern part of Mississippi, you're up in the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi].  You have Mississippi Valley State, schools like that, up in the Northern part.  But the other schools like Jackson State [University] are in the central part of the state.
Speaker 2: All right.  So you, so '63' [1963], you were teaching, you were assistant professor of math and science at Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yes, I left there and went to Alabama State.
Speaker 2: Now, that's in Birmingham [Alabama], right?
Speaker 1: No, Montgomery [Alabama].
Story_ID: 22435
Speaker 1: Montgomery [Alabama], right.  That's right, Montgomery.  Yeah, so, now, the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968] is really cooking by this time.  Everything is, they had the Birmingham, I mean the Montgomery bus boycott in '56' [1956], '57' [1957] and '63' [1963], the Birmingham [Alabama] thing was going down.  But you weren't in Birmingham, but you said you were in Kansas working on your--
Speaker 2: That's when these four [sic, three] Civil Rights workers [On June 21-22, 1964, three workers, James Earl Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael "Mickey" Schwerner, were murdered by white Mississippians during the American Civil Rights Movement. The event is known as the Mississippi civil rights workers' murders.]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Remember, Shu--I've forgotten some of 'em.
Speaker 1: Goodman, Schwerner, Cheney.
Speaker 2: Cheney, um-hum.
Speaker 1: They were killed in your hometown, Philadelphia, Mississippi (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's where I was born, yes.  And that's only about, maybe an hour and a half drive from Canton [Mississippi] to Philadelphia, right.
Speaker 1: So that was the beginning of what they call Freedom Summer when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] went down to all those towns and were agitating for voters rights and voter registration.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were in Kansas at that time.  Did you hear any word from your relatives back in Mississippi about what was going on?
Speaker 2: No, remember now, my mother [Ann Pugh] and dad had already migrated to Chicago.  Now, I had other relatives in Mississippi.  My wife and I remained in Mississippi because her people were still in Mississippi.  In fact, while I was at--well, my wife came with me to Kansas.  But when I was in Michigan, she stayed at home with our first child, and I went off to school during that time.  But when I went to Kansas, we both went off together, just left Mississippi--at that time, we left Alabama actually and went to Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did that, how was that set up?  How did you end up going to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] to work on a PhD in plasma physics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a chance to go to Kansas one summer on, again, NSF [National Science Foundation] fellowship.  And I had a class under a physics professor.  And he, in the final exam, I made 100 on the final exam.  And he said, oh, yeah, you gotta come back here to--'cause they were looking for minority people to come be in the department.  So I was at the right place at the right time.  By doing that well, and I did well, but I wasn't, I was not taking the test to attend school there.  It turns out, it worked out that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you get there in what '64' [1964], is that when you get there?  And then--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, remember now, in '63' [1963], I left Alcorn [State University] and went to Alabama State [University].  And I was at Alabama State until 1968.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And that's when I left and went to the University of Kansas from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went there in '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: In '63' [1963], actually, in '64' [1964], I think I went to  Texas A & M [College Station, Texas].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], somewhere back in there.
Speaker 1: So between Alabama State and the University of Kansas, you were at Texas A and M?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  We didn't even have that on here.
Speaker 2: You don't have Texas A & M on there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, sixty--that's between '68' and [1968]--
Speaker 2: Sixty--
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I probably went to, I went to Texas A & M two years.  And maybe the (unclear) '64' [1964] or'66' [1966], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) something or maybe the two years.  I have to think about that because going to school every year, I, never in my life.  I went to school every summer that I could, and I went every year that I could.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 22436
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about Dexter Avenue Baptist Church.  So when you were living in Montgomery, you attended Dexter Avenue [Baptist Church]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in Montgomery [Alabama]from '63' [1963] to '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Now, was Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] still the pastor of Dexter Avenue?
Speaker 2: No, it was another pastor.  He had gone at that time.  But I saw him the last time he visited.  At the front of the church, there are double doors, and he spoke at our homecoming at the church (unclear).  He refused to stand on the inside of the church.  He didn't wanna stand at the front door where the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] can see him.  And we had to stand there with him.  But he was that kind of person, and as he stood there, and we were talking and people leaving church, the Klan marched down Dexter Avenue because we were not too far from the state capital.
Speaker 1: Yes, I--
Speaker 2: They marched on down to the state capital, but he was not afraid.  He would let those keep him on the inner part of the church.  He wanted to be where everyone could see him.  He could, he could have been assassinated there or something, but he chose not to.
Speaker 1: I know I thought it was remarkable when I went to Montgomery that the layout of it, you could put it on a stage.  You can see straight down the street.  There's the capital, Dexter Avenue over here, and then the Department of Justice right here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right across the street from the church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You could put that corner on a stage, and you could have the whole thing acting up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, it's that type.
Speaker 2: That's where they ended up, remember, when they marched from Selma [Alabama].
Speaker 1: They went up to, right up to the steps of the capital.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that, so when they knew he was in town, they would come and, the Klan would demonstrate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were marching.  And there were kids out in front, and then the kids, as the Klan marched by, the kids laughed.  But we knew the seriousness of it, and it wasn't a laughing matter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that very next year the Klan killed, I guess--well, I don't know if it was the Klan, but those three Civil Rights workers were killed in Philadelphia [Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Right, I was telling you when I was at, I was at [the University of] Kansas when that happened, yes.
Story_ID: 22437
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now plasma physics.  Now, what attracted you to plasma physics?
Speaker 2: Actually, and as (unclear) strange, so, it has to do--and that still is a wide open field.  And I, I'm sorry I had to be on hiatus from my own major.  But what happened when I left school, I was going back to where I was working at Alabama State [University] 'cause I had started a physics program there.  But I had a job offer here to come here to [Washington] D.C. because I had met a fellow who worked at ISE.  It was called the Institute for Services to Education.  They offered me a job here.  So I left Alabama State [University] and came up to Washington, D.C. to see what the job was all about.  And in two or three days, I called my wife, I said, don't unpack 'cause we were unpacking from leaving Kansas.  I said don't unpack (unclear), put everything back in the boxes.  We're coming to D.C.  So we left Montgomery [Alabama] and came to D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now--
Speaker 2: Well, after [Washington] D.C., actually, ended up in Reston [Virginia], but it was D.C. area.
Speaker 1: We're galloping a little bit too far ahead 'cause I didn't--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --ask you about your dissertation and all that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's an important part of this.  This is your dissertation in plasma physics.  You were University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  Now, who were some of the professors there or the, who was your advisor there?
Speaker 2: My advisor was Dr. Beard.  Gloria, can you find that, my dissertation.  It's in a black-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It's up there somewhere.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't want you to read it or anything, but I just--
Speaker 1: No, I just wanna show it to you.  I didn't want you to read it.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the dissertation--
Speaker 1: It has all the people who were on my committee.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's what I wanted to show you. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: It should be on the table.  Where is mom?  Look in the dining room in kind of a thick book, the writing kind of the front. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're not gonna show it on camera anyway.  I'm just asking.
Speaker 2: No, I'm just trying to get you, the people you asked me about, some of the people on the list, and I can't remember all of 'em.
Speaker 1: Your dissertation was on the Mathematical Analysis and Interpretation of the Solar Corona, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, using F and K components.
Speaker 1: "F" and "K" components, okay.  And first of all, all right, what is plasma anyway?
Speaker 2: Usually if one thinks about plasma--let me see something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Glory, this is not my dissertation. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's pause then, I guess.  [pause]
Speaker 2: Ask the question again, please.
Speaker 1: You don't have to, yeah, your dissertation was on the Mathematical Analysis Interpretation of the Solar Corona--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: "F" and "K" Components, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, can you explain sort of in layman's terms what that means?
Speaker 2: Well, that means you have positive and negative components, and those things--and that's a big topic now.  You see now, they're talking about solar flares, and this thing happened (unclear).  And so they had a lot of electrons and protons flowing, and then that can be a few.  When there's a flare, there's a lot of them.  So those things can cause interruptions in electrical impulses, things like that.  So I had to find out, can we develop a model for how those things flow from the sun to the earth, when do they flow greatest, what happens when there's a solar flare, things like that.  And that's still a hot area.  I wished I'd stayed into it, but I was gonna tell you what happened.  I was gonna stay and go back, but after Kansas, they tried to get me to stay there, going to work at Kansas.  But I had a chance to work with the black colleges at a much higher salary than I would have gotten if I had stayed at Alabama.  So that's how I got into the field of education, getting more minorities and women, persons with disabilities into science and engineering and mathematics.  But that's still a wide open field.  I just couldn't do both.  I couldn't stick with that.  I had to travel all over the country to the different schools, and I just couldn't continue with my work.  I did a couple of other things, but I didn't do, say work full time as a physics, as a person in that field.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I loved it because, had you seen me during that time, that's all I'd talk about.  You'd probably tell, you'd probably get tired of my talking because you're talking about the same thing.  And that's about the "F" and, components from the sun, "F" components and electronic components.  But that's the flow of matter.  They're back to that now because they're trying to say is the universe expanding or is it contracting?  They think Einstein was right on most of the things that he predicted.  But as to some things, they were not sure that he's correct.  They're still not sure if the universe is contracting or is it still expanding.  They think right now that it may be contracting but they're not definitely sure.  So they're still working on that problem and what happens to the flow of that.  They're looking at what's in space.  You talk about space, you may think that a space, that space is void of everything.  That's not true.  Space is not void.  There's something always there in space.  And so they're looking at that problem still.  So there are a lot of problems that they haven't solved yet.
Story_ID: 22438
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in '71' [1971], so you were offered a job by the National Science Foundation to teach a science education in the black colleges?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, no, at that time, I was hired by the Institute for Services to Education--I'm not sure that's in there or not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ISE.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ISE.
Speaker 1: It's the Institute for what now?
Speaker 2: Services to Education.
Speaker 1: Services to Education.
Speaker 2: Right, I worked there for four years, from 1971 until 1975.  And my job was number one, try to increase the number of minorities, particularly, selecting careers in science and engineering.  Not only that, get them to select majors in those fields.  And at the same time, develop curriculum for those persons in those fields.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were a division director for--
Speaker 2: Yes, ISE.
Speaker 1: ISE.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, I was the--I was over something we called at that time, Cooperative Academic Planning.  I don't know what you see in there.  I'm not sure which, something you have.
Speaker 1: Now, we have a note here that in '73' [1973], the Nixon [President Richard Nixon] administration abolishes the White House Office of Science and Technology.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I remember it, but it did not affect us as such 'cause there's something also called OSTP, the Office of Science and Technology Policy, what you're speaking of.  Yes, they did.  But they had other things to take its place.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '74' [1974], you wrote, you published a piece called "Curriculum Change in Black Colleges 7: A Report on Cooperative Academic Planning Curriculum Development and Workshop--oh, I'm sorry, A Report on, yeah, a Cooperative Academic Planning Curriculum Development Workshop in Atlanta, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did eight of those publications, eight of them.  And that's one--
Speaker 1: So this is just Number seven, so, well, this is--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did eight of them?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So those were getting people to upgrade the curriculum at the different schools, the curriculum would be strengthened.  Now, we would set up workshops for both students and for teachers to get them to have strong programs in those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is the Cooperative Academic Planning Program?
Speaker 2: That was my unit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where we did, my unit and this particular company now, Institute for Services to Education, was a unit that, as I said before, to strengthen the academic programs, to strengthen what they do in the programs.  In other words, we go in and take a program, an academic program, with a lot of courses, and try to strengthen those courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did this, these activities lead up to your appointment by the National Science Foundation in '75' [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why I needed somebody to come in and do that same thing nationwide.  See, you, the other one, you're restricted to historically black colleges and universities.  This time, not necessarily restricted.  We now dealt with the Hispanics and all the other so-called minorities.  We also had a program to deal with women, to increase participation on women in science and engineering and also for persons with disabilities.  We had a program to deal with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you do a lot of publishing, I guess, in this job, right?  Publish curriculum--
Speaker 2: Well, during that time, we did, but it's publishing of a different kind.  If you were working, say, on a job, and you had students doing dissertations and things like that, we did not deal with individual students at that.  We dealt with it course-wide, the curriculum that teaches everybody.  We dealt with that.
Story_ID: 22439
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the state of science education in the black colleges in '75' [1975]?
Speaker 2: It has improved.  I wish you could see some of the books we have.  It has improved.  We've gotten, one thing we needed was the equipment.  If you don't have state-of-the-art equipment, you cannot tackle some of these problems.  So we had programs that dealt specifically with getting more sophisticated equipment into these institutions.  That was part of my job, to get money to get this equipment and get people trained to use that equipment.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know I heard a story once from a medical student who went to MeHarry.  He said that it was a good school, but he had to share a microscope with four of his brothers.
Speaker 2: Well, we dealt with issues like that too.  When I, in fact, we had several programs at Meharry [Medical College], but they had passed that stage.  They were dealing with things like counting cells in a particular body to see what's going on.  They do a lot of kinds of things they no longer do.  You may have heard of the Genome Project, what we did with things like that.  They're dealing now in a much more sophisticated level where they actually count cell and see what cell goes where.  And if there's a disease or something, you have to find out what causes that disease, where is that cell located in the gene that's gonna cause that particular disease, how do you treat a disease if you find out where that gene is located.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, the human Genome Project is relatively new.  I mean that's, but in the '70's [1970s], you were just working on trying to improve the equipment and the--
Speaker 2: Yes, getting equipment to these places.  I was not teaching courses at that time.  My emphasis was on getting the people in the courses and giving them sophisticated equipment to work with once they get into those courses.
Story_ID: 22440
Speaker 1: Now, did the NFS [National Science Foundation] provide fellowships for teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were you in charge of the disbursement of those kind of fellowships?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have any specific stories that you can tell us about, you know, a particular school or a person?
Speaker 2: No.  I think you'd be, Meharry [Medical College] has done some wonderful work in terms of the structure of cells and so forth.  They've done quite a bit of good work.  We have a school, worked with the school particularly, out in Texas, the University of Texas at El Paso has a very strong program in physics.  So I worked with all the areas.  Some of those areas were in physics and some may have been in chemistry.  I worked across all those areas.
Speaker 1: Now, it says here in 1983, the NSF [National Science Foundation] sees an increase in funding due to the technology boom.  I mean things were boosted a little bit.  I suppose your funding rises and falls with the political climate of the country?
Speaker 2: Well, we were fortunate.  This was not true for science.  That may have been true, particularly severe for non-science areas, but we always point out to them, remember what happened when we had Sputnik [the first Earth satellite].  And you remember Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] talked, you know, he's gonna shoot things out of the air and that kind of thing.  So we would always scare the Congressman (laughter).  You'd better let us do this because, otherwise, they're gonna come in, and, you know, Russia is gonna move in and do a lot of (unclear) things.  So we never really, we really never--they talked about cutting this, that and the other, but they never really did for science and math and engineering.  They didn't do it.
Speaker 1: Well, I know you were referring to Reagan's "Star Wars" program--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where the satellites would in the sky, ready to shoot down missiles, but it was, do you have a, I mean was it difficult to fund non-military research, you know, in the National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: I would say that the, the size of the awards may have been smaller.  But they still were there.  But those in the critical areas, like something related, not "Star Wars" 'cause that's pie in the sky, but something like Star Wars, would get full funding or another program where you're dealing with something in cell structure, might not get as much money as a project dealing with that.  And see, now, they're back now, all the way back to [Albert] Einstein's theory of relativity.  They're going back there now and to reassess that.  So I don't think we're going in a circle, but it's a good time now to be in plasma physics, to see how to increase the speed of particles and when these particles collide at a very high speed, what kind of particles do they emit, which, and find out what those particles are.  If we think we can find out what particles are emitted, we'd be on our road to finding out what's going on in this whole issue, are things increasing or decreasing our universe.  Is space increasing or decreasing?  So that field is still wide open.  You know, they thought they were gonna get rid of some of the things, dealing with the space program, but you notice now, the space program and back on, and it's not going anywhere because that's where we're gonna be going, towards that issue.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular president that's been better for science funding than another?
Speaker 2: I don't really recall because we always had scientists or scientists who headed up the National Science Foundation or heading up NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and so forth.  So those, we didn't, they never were in trouble, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, some of the other, now, somewhere, at NIH [National Institutes of Health], NIH may not be a popular as say, some of the other kinds of things, as space, as space physics.  See space physics now is the hottest thing, it's a hot topic now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a role to play in the founding of the Directorate for Science and Engineering Education with NSF [National Science Foundation] in '85' [1985], 1985?
Speaker 2: Directorate?
Speaker 1: The Directorate for Science and Engineering Education?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to see what specifically that, you're talking about.  The head of science and engineering education, I was a part, I helped to set up those programs, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Okay, now, in '86' [1986] you received a presidential citation award from Jackson State University as an outstanding alumnus and received the National Science Foundation Directors Equal Opportunity Achievement Award.
Speaker 2: Did you see those things on the wall by the way?
Speaker 1: I didn't, we have 'em written down here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you look at 'em?
Speaker 1: I did not see 'em on the wall.  I will see 'em at some point.
Speaker 2: Yes, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I received awards for all those goodies.  Yeah, they kept coming.
Speaker 1: So you're getting recognition for all this work?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: In '86' [1986], that's a long time ago--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so you're still, yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: I probably would have stayed there longer.  My wife thought that it was time to go.  I think she was right because I had a, I had a friend of mine, he and I were the same age.  But he died when he was 69 years old.  And I was sixty-nine, so I felt maybe I shouldn't put it off.  So she convinced me not to--I was gonna try and stay until I was seventy years old.  But I came out two years earlier than that.
Story_ID: 22441
Speaker 1: Okay, well, looking at it from your vantage point with the National Science Foundation, what, which one of the HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] has the best science programs in certain categories, say who has the best physics program?
Speaker 2: [Coughing].
Speaker 1: I know it may not be empirically easy to say, but--
Speaker 2: It's very difficult to say any HBCU.  Howard [University], well, actually, I should say perhaps Hampton [University] at this point in time, probably had the best because they're near, there's a high-speed cyclotron near Hampton, at Hampton-Roads.  So Hampton is right in the back door for where some good, solid work is going on, that's being supported by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  So that cyclotron gets funding from NASA.  And Hampton gets it from National Science Foundation.
Speaker 1: Yes, they have, what, the Jefferson Accelerator?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, Howard has access to the Beltsville--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Howard had its problem with staffing.  I should not talk about our--should not talk about any of the schools.  Howard has not always had the best staffing, scientific and engineering staffing that other schools have had.  They lost a lot of their people who go to other schools.  It's not in something they've done.  But the people pick 'em off as they begin to do some good things.  They go to other places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I know that Xavier [University] is known for creating the pharmacists--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Howard, Howard should be, succeed in that one.  Of course, MeHarry, you know, (unclear) just a medical school, but Meharry is getting a lot of money dealing with things other than hospital things.  They now do what we call basic science.  If you recall, basic science is where you do things that may not have any relevance tomorrow.  It may be fifteen years before what they're doing would be useful.  Now, applied research, that research, and you do things that are useful now, tomorrow.  But some companies are not interested, some agencies, federal agencies, are more interested in those things that are twenty-five years down the road, not something two down or five years down the road.  So it depends upon where you are.  Howard has a good location, but it just has not (unclear), in my opinion, to its potential, full potential.
Speaker 1: Now, in 1991, Dr. Walter Massey from Hattiesburg, Mississippi becomes the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I know him very well.
Speaker 1: --ninth director of the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, know him very well.  He was there when I (unclear), yeah, he was still there.  Yes.
Speaker 1: I think it's interesting that a lot of people don't necessarily think of Mississippi as producing scientists, but here you are--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Two black men from National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: And they never thought (unclear) from Mississippi, never thought you could do anything except, I guess, go pick cotton, I guess.  I don't know, but we showed that we, we have shown that we can do more than pick cotton.  So that's (laughter) good.  We've gotten a lot of awards because of that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 22442
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Okay, in '92' [1992], a year after Dr. Massey became the director of the National Science Foundation, you became a member of the Senior Executive Service.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that and what did you do?
Speaker 2: The Senior Executive Service is an executive management position.  That's about the highest you can go in that system.  And it's called SES, and you look on this wall, you'll see my plaque for SES.  But that's the top management.  That is where you begin to get your six-figure salaries and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, also in '92' [1992], you edited National Science Foundation publication called "Gateway to Diversity in the Scientific and Technological Workforce".
Speaker 2: Now, I probably can give you those books to take back and put in my profile.  That's where, we had at NSF [National Science Foundation] a lot of programs, some, in science.  That publication is where you have institutions that do research and institutions that do a better job of teaching.  Some of those do both.  They give students scholarships to come into the institution and work with top scientists and engineers.  So that's why, that's--I started a lot of programs to bring students in to work with these, so I received an award for being able to do that and to make it successful.
Speaker 1: Now, '94' [1994], you received the Senior Executive Service performance award.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that from National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: Yes, from--
Speaker 1: And '96' [1996], you published another booklet, "NSF Science, Mathematics and Engineering and Technical Programs for Enhanced Minority Participation and Some Successes".  So this was to, you know, for distribution to the high schools or colleges or what?
Speaker 2: Probably, yes, uh-huh.  They probably, it gets around to all, I remember in '96' [1996], I mean there was a lot of publications.  We really, and when I was there, we also started evaluating programs.  In other words, if they said, well, you spent a lot of money in these programs.  What have they done?  What can you show for the money?  And what you began to see in 1996 were people looking at how many students went in, what have these students done?  Have you increased the number of PhDs, just what have you done for the money that the federal government has given you?  And that's what, that, all that is about, my last few years that I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in, okay '99' [1999] when you were sixty-eight, the National Science Foundation announced that fourteen historically black colleges and universities will receive more than $42 million over five years to promote diversity and increased participation of underrepresented groups in science, mathematics, engineering and technology.  So, so I suppose you had a role, a big role in this?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  That's exactly right.  We were getting more and more money into the, used the institutions to do that.  We found out that we're getting more of those students to go off and get PhDs, not just work in science and engineering, but we want them to get PhDs.  And that's what you see there, is putting more money for a lot of these students to get doctoral degrees.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2000, you helped pass the Resolution HR-3007.  It had to do with creating a commission on women in science, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that, I probably, it's something I started.  One of the projects in the women's components probably did that, but I was, I left the beginning of 2000.  So somebody else finished that.  I may have started it, but somebody else finished it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, yeah, the commission, this commission was mandated to identify the problems associated with recruitment, retention and advancement of women, minorities and person with disabilities in science and engineering.
Speaker 2: When I, when I left in NSF, I was in charge of that special program for women.  After I left, they convinced, they took that program and put it somewhere else and they basically killed the program, actually.  They really--I saw the lady who they had chosen, who was over it, and she had, her hair had turned completely white.  It was unbelievable.  She had a rough time, so--
Speaker 1: So this is during the early days of the Bush Administration or this is--
Speaker 2: Well, during the time of the Bush [President George W. Bush], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you retired in, was it 2000 or '99' [1999]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand, actually, I stopped working, but I had a couple more weeks of sick leave or something, and so they had, they let me go over into another year, until the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember I couldn't get my social security check because they said, the social security was saying, you're still earning money from NSF.  They were erroneous.  I really was not.  So we cleared that up eventually.  But they have it now, you can make as much money as you can make (laughter) or you can get money, you know, get your money that you have from retiring and still work a full-time job.  And that's okay now.
Story_ID: 22443
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, you were enrolled in the National Black College Hall of Fame, and you received some other honors.  But what have you been doing since retirement?
Speaker 2: Well, no, since I retired, I've done just that.  I have retired.  I have served, you know, with special, on special committees and things like that.  Or I work for some of my fellow students.  I have one candidate that I worked with at Howard [University].  He's a mathematician, doing quite well.  I advise him.  I don't work any longer.  I'm retired.  I worked day and night when I worked at NSF [National Science Foundation] because I traveled everywhere.  Ooh, wee, I was tired.  And I came home to rest.  So I haven't done as much.  They tried to get me to come back, but I just, I just couldn't.  I told them I was tired.  My wife has dared me to do so, said we're gonna retire.  We're gonna do some more traveling.  So we've done some of the traveling.  We haven't done enough of it.  We went to, went to Alaska, spent seven days on the water and five days on land in Alaska.  That's the best cruise I've ever had.  I'm glad I retired.  But I'm not, I, I'm not saying never will I do, but I gave 125 percent of my time when I worked at NSF [National Science Foundation].  I had, sometimes I traveled, every week I was somewhere working with students and working with professors trying to get something done.  I was tired when I left.  I'm not saying I'll never go back, but I (laughter), I was tired.  And I got a lot of awards, but I paid the price.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Now, you, from what we've heard from your early career as a student, I mean you were going to high school during the day and working all night.  So--
Speaker 2: I was, and I've been doing it.  All my life I've had to work day and night to get ahead.  But that's life, I mean you do what has to be done.  I have a daughter now who won't talk about it, but, you know, she had a fellowship, and now she's retired from her fellowship, and now she has a full job in the hospital.  So it's better now.  I wish, I wish (laughter) had that, so, you know, people are doing better now.  They do find out that you can do both.  But I, I may, I may go back and do some things.  I do talk to students who need help.  I used to work with students at night.  I may go back to that.  But I've been enjoying, and my wife has been ill for a couple of years now.  So that kept me from doing a lot of things, a lot of traveling.  I've had several schools to write and ask me to come work with them, helping them to write for scholar--write dissert (unclear), grants, things like that.  But that, it just will get you in the grave earlier in my opinion.  And I just don't wanna get on these airplanes that much now.  I used to, I was on an airplane, every single week, I was traveling somewhere.  And I just, I don't wanna do that anymore.  I'm not so much afraid of flying, maybe as far as that should be, but if something comes by that I really can be of help, I think I would be, I wouldn't mind going back and helping to do it.
Story_ID: 22444
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you--what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I think my more hope, I'm concerned more, not with the, the African Americans who are at the higher end of educational spectrum.  They seem to--and I have to be careful when I say this, they seem to be doing all right.  I'll get in trouble if I say that (laughter).  But it's the other end that's in trouble.  They're in trouble.  And I tell my daughter and her husband, they'd better save every penny you can.  I don't know what's going to happen to the people who--they say middle class.  I'm not sure what they mean by middle class, not anymore.  I'm concerned about the lower end, and I don't mean lower in terms, I mean those who are making less money.  I think it's gonna be pretty rough time.  I hate to even think about it.  I hope I'm wrong.  I could be wrong, but it looks right now, it does, looks pretty good, and, you know, and it depends on who becomes the next president because a lot of people are still harping about too much money, cut back on the money you're putting here, there and the other.  So, those who are well trained and that's the point I'd like to get out and do, the young people.  Get more training, get yourself into a field, trained to do something.  And if you do, you'll be okay.  We don't talk about it now.  I, when I worked, I told you in high school, I was a cook.  So I can still be a chef, if I have to and I've been a chef.  I've welded in my life.  I had to go over there, and I made more money welding, in my initial year, than anywhere.  So I've been a welder.  So I know how to work, and I know how to continue school.  No one had to ever tell me not to stay in school.  I was right there.  And I've been able to keep a lot of students in school.  And I'm pretty proud of that, you know.  A lot of my former students are doing quite well now.
Speaker 1: Do you think that students today, when they see where you are today, have trouble believing that you were once like someone that had to work, you know, very, very hard and had to, you know, have a job in school and had to weld and do all those other things too to make a living?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I'm (unclear) I never, I never even considered that I wouldn't be in school somewhere.  That's, that's what bothers me when somebody deliberately stops school.  That never crossed my mind, that somehow you ought a stop.  So I went to school forever.  I have my PhD today, but I was willing to pay that price to get it.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Now, we always ask this question.  Today, when you look back on everything you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My, I think my legacy has been with the number of students that I have taught particularly, to do better in school, stay in school, do well and do the best that you can.  Get that doctoral degree.  If you can get it, get it.  I think that I've done some curriculum development work.  Now, my work that I had done in physics itself, my paper is still being highly used because of what I found out (unclear) the time that I did it, when I was in the field.  I think I have served my country better by being where I am now or where I was and working with getting more students to see the light, by not being somewhere in one lab, filling my pocket, but not getting money into anybody else's pocket.  So my legacy is, I think, let them see me, that you can do it, and my wife still doesn't believe that I still have (unclear) reverence of people--I've been away from the NSF now for ten years, but you'd think I still work there because people have that kind of reverence because I worked hard, and I saw that they worked hard when I was there.  So that part I'm proud that I've been able to get many students, particularly minorities, to see the light and to see that they're going to have to do better than they are now if they plan to exist in this country.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, again, is there anything major that you would change or do over again if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't, off the top of my head, I probably would say, no, although if you think long enough, I'm sure I'd come up with something.  Off the top of my head, I don't.  I just wish I could still help, help more students than I did help.  I helped as many as I could, but I wish I could help more by getting in the position to help more.  You see, when I was at NSF, I controlled a budget of $7 million, and when you control the money, you control what happens to that money.  And that's good.
Story_ID: 22445
Speaker 1: That's true.  Now, well, tell us something about your family.  I know you talked about your wife.  She's an educator as well.  And you have daughters and a son, right?
Speaker 2: No, just, I have all daughters.
Speaker 1: All daughters, okay. I thought you mentioned a son, okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about them.  I think they've, you've kind of encouraged them to get involved in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, my wife, you see, my wife really was a mathematician.  And she decided to be a counselor.  She's good with students, so she decided to go into counseling, although she still does some mathematics.  And by the way, they tried to get me to go in counseling when I was in high school, and I said, no way.  I don't think I want to do that.  But she's, she did it, and she's been good at it, which is good.  But I think for me, I think that, and for my students, I think that I just saw something very different, different than some of the others.  Now, in terms of, all my students, for example, I did encourage them to do as much as they can, to do as well as they can.  All of my four daughters, each of them, each has a professional degree.  One of my daughters, the one that's here, is a doctor, a medical doctor.  I have another one who is a lawyer, and I have two who are teaching school, one teaching in Manhattan in New York and one teaching in Cincinnati [Ohio].  So I'm very proud of what we've done for those four.  I'm proud that they, themselves, decided that that's what they wanted to do.  My wife, I think she's happy.  She was able to do counseling, and she did some mathematics, but most of it was in counseling, and that's her forte.  She likes people and people like her, so I did she did well by making that selection to go full time into counseling.  That just was not for me to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, is there anything we haven't talked about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I think we've, we covered it pretty fairly.  I think we've covered most of the things that we should talk about, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I should ask this on some level, do you think we're on the right road now in terms of science education in the black colleges?
Speaker 2: Well, I try not--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, what needs to be improved or boosted at this point?
Speaker 2: You know, I say that and I say, yes, we are and then someone points out to me that at Florida A & M [University], you have somebody out there who's hazing somebody, and you wonder what have we really done when you see that because, well, I'd better be very careful what I say.  Well, I'd better not say (laughter) 'cause one of the professors, one of the professors at Florida A & M, not now, left and (unclear), left much to be desired and so I'll let it go at that because you'll write it up and I'll be in court (laughter).
Speaker 1: But do you think we're on the right track in terms of--
Speaker 2: The only thing that bothers me when you ask that question, I started thinking about it very seriously.  Maybe I'm wrong; young people it seems to me, to be after the dollar.  They want the money.  I'm not sure--and I'm sure this is not true of everywhere, but to me there're too many young people wanna get the dollar.  They wanna know, go and get iPads and so forth.  They're not, you know--and I'm not sure that's good.  I'm not sure how many still wanna do good for the world, not just line my pockets.
Speaker 1: Okay, you think that education is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I say that with tongue in cheek.  I think there's still those out there who wanna do well, who wanna help the country, help people, and they will do that.  But there are too many, in my opinion, that's after the dollar.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, that raises another question, and I know some people in terms of STEM [Science, Technology, Engineering and Math] education, a lot of people are talking about our students need more STEM education and not as much education in the liberal arts, but do you think that, I mean the exclusive of liberal arts creates a kind of attitude where you're just look at the end result of, you know, the money aspects?
Speaker 2: Well, it seems like to me you have to make a decision.  Do you want them to go out and deliver lots or do you want them to go into an iPad situation?  And so I think I would, I may choose liberal arts as opposed to that.  I think we're gonna have to turn this thing around and make, I don't say people become young [Albert] Einstein's, but I think they're gonna have to let them know that this country will be in trouble 'cause everybody's competing now across the country, and not just the U.S. economy.  It's a world economy that we're dealing with, and if they don't understand that, they're headed for trouble, and not just the U.S. economy.  They are competing with everybody else that's out there.  And so many people don't understand it.  Many people, and I can't understand why someone feels that they have the audacity to quit school for whatever reason.  I just can't see it because I never saw, when I was coming up, that I had the option on leaving school.  I didn't see me having that option.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as trying to get students to improve their lives, to take account for themselves, take responsibility for themselves.  Don't try to find a scapegoat or somebody to say, this is why I'm not doing well.  You must take the responsibility for oneself and to do whatever, you know, do what it takes to do that.  You've got to learn how to study hard.  You've just got to get in there and do it, and you've got to be able to compete with those students.  You've just got to be able to do it.  You cannot choose an easy way and expect to survive in this environment.  You won't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.  This has been interesting.
Story_ID: 22446
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, I'll have you tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: Now, what do you call the people, they have a name for them.  I have a name, but I mean-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  If you know his title or anything, that's fine too.
Speaker 1: He's in that book, what book.
Speaker 2: Oh, you just gave his name a little while ago.
Speaker 1: No, no, nah. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  That's the retirement picture.
Speaker 2: Oh, those are retirement pictures.  That's Carlos Robless, Carlos Handy, I'm sorry.  That's Carlos Handy.  That's Handy's grandson.
Speaker 1: He's on your right, and this is you on the--
Speaker 2: And this is, I think this had to do with my retirement party.
Speaker 1: Okay, if there's a picture you don't want us to show or want us to skip, just let me know when we put it up.
Speaker 2: All right, now, who is that?
Speaker 1: This looks like Horace.  Yes, my brother, Horace.  He cut all his hair off now.  That's my brother, Horace Calbert.
Speaker 2: Horace Calbert, and that's in the '70's [1970s], it looks like.
Speaker 1: Oh, Jimmie Sue.  That's my sister, Jimmie Sue.
Speaker 2: Jimmie Sue Calbert.
Speaker 1: Jimmie Sue Calbert, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can just give the whole name.
Speaker 1: What was Jimmie Sue's--do you remember her married name, Jimmie Sue-- (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  On the thing it just says Jimmie Sue Calbert.
Speaker 2: Her husband is dead now.
Speaker 1: This is my wife and I, let me see that, oh, excuse me, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you can just let us know who they are from left to right, you know, starting with the first row and second row, like you're reading from left to right.
Speaker 1: The first small child is Quayim, Q-U-A-Y-I-M, I think, Quayim.  That's his father here. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is there any way you can do it so we can see?
Speaker 2: Okay, who's that, that's his father.
Speaker 1: That's his father Quayim. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  His father is Rahm, formerly Rahm.  That's my daughter, Debra Brown [cough], Andre Brown, (unclear) Roosevelt Calbert. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  Okay, right here, that's my mom--
Speaker 2: Mom is different, Thelma Calbert.  Okay, and that's, that's Jackie Calbert and there's Lorrie Calbert.
Speaker 1: I just can't half see that one.  That's my wife and I, Thelma Calbert and Roosevelt Calbert.  I'm not sure why we're smacking, but-- (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Let me see, who is this? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  Who's the couple behind you. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE 2):  Buchanan, your frat brother and his wife, Buchanan.
Speaker 1: What's her name? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE 2):  Lavern Buchanan.
Speaker 2: And his name? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2):  I forget.
Speaker 1: We can just say the Buchanan's.
Speaker 2: Buchanan's, that'll be fine.  Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, this is my wife, and there I am.  This is Artie Hicks, one of my former students.  He runs one of the programs now at NSF.  And this is Lillian Bellamy. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, now, you're being recorded.  And the audience who's looking at this is not here.  So they don't, you can't just say that's--because you know who this is.
Speaker 2: From left to right, Lillian Bellamy, Thelma Calbert, Roosevelt Calbert, Art Hicks. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 1: These are some relatives, from left to right, Horace Calbert, Jimmie Calbert, my father, who is that there.  Stanton, Stanton Calbert, I don't, that's an uncle that lives in Hattiesburg, [MS], but I don't, I haven't been around him so I don't know much about him.
Speaker 2: And this is Shirley Calbert.
Speaker 1: That's my sister, Shirley.  This is Shirley Calbert here.  Where is my mother's picture?  Do you have it there? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  Yes, right there. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And who is Shirley Calbert?
Speaker 2: Yes, Shirley, my sister. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Ann, you can call her Annie, Pugh Calbert, Annie Pugh Calbert. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: We'll just say the Calbert family for this one.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  This is a family reunion in Washington, D.C., 2007.
Speaker 2: That's my second oldest sister, Gertrude Calbert.  Alma is, she's living.
Speaker 1: I don't know these names.  These are some NSF workers, other than myself in the middle.  They were working with me on a project downtown at the hotel--what hotel is that, that big hotel down there (unclear).
Speaker 2: That was at a workshop in Florida.  I don't know the person's name, but that's me on the left, and she was in the workshop and we were in Daytona Beach at a--remember you asked me about CAP, Cooperative Academic Planning, we take these workshop like this and we do a lot of things with.
Speaker 1: That's my office, Roosevelt Calbert.  That's our new office in a new building.
Speaker 2: Let's see now.  Left to right, you'll need names. Ruby Hamilton, Roosevelt Calbert, Thelma Calbert, who's that in the middle? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE 2):  That's Alex, your granddaughter.
Speaker 1: Allie, and then I see, but (unclear) her husband, what's his name? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  Madga, M-A-D-G-A-J or something.
Speaker 2: Madga and the other one. Hasebee, he died a couple of years ago, seemed like in perfect health. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Thelma Calbert, Roosevelt Calbert, at our 25th anniversary. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: I'm trying to say you, Laura, who are the others? (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  This is mom, Rasum (ph.), Lorrie, Debbie and you, Roosevelt Calbert.
Speaker 1: This is in Hawaii.  This was (unclear) (laughter), I don't remember their names.  In Hawaii, we're out at a retreat. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Thelma, is this on our cruise or not. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: I'm looking at those curtains behind.  It looks like curtains on the ship.  We went to-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you wanna do another one in the meantime? (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: That's a family reunion, and that's, must have been 2005-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's right on there, 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: July 5th through the 8th.  And this is a wedding anniversary, but we don't know which one. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: This is (unclear) cousins.  They're called Links Chapter, Reston.
Speaker 2: Links Incorporated.
Speaker 1: I thought they had a name. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE 2):  Reston Chapter.
Speaker 2: This is somewhere after, maybe 1964 or 1965 in Montgomery, Alabama. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know what the occasion was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was at a, must have been a Sigma dance, S-I-G-M-A, Sigma dance.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think that's all I have here, unless there's something else.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.  A lot of them are dead now.  They're dead, he's dead. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So just the bottom one.  Yeah, that's the only one.
Speaker 2: That's his high school--
Speaker 1: That's my high school.  I don't know anybody at the top. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So where are you on the bottom one?  Far left.
Speaker 2: And that's in high school, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The Cameron Street--
Speaker 1: --Street High School.  That's 19--probably 1949, 1950. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE 2):  We finished in '50' [1950].
Speaker 2: We finished in '50' [1950], it may be '49' [1949] or '50' [1950], 1949, 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
