Story_ID: 5445
Speaker 1: James W. Compton. I was born in Aurora, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can you spell Compton for us and--.
Speaker 1: C-O-M-P-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the W stands for what?
Speaker 1: Walter.
Speaker 2: And your birth date?
Speaker 1: April 7, 1938
Speaker 2: And in Aurora, Illinois. And the other question.  Just state for the record that we're at the office of The HistoryMakers at 1900 S. Michigan, and your profession.
Speaker 1: We're at the offices of The HistoryMakers at 1900 S. Michigan Avenue, Chicago  Illinois.
Speaker 2: And your profession.
Speaker 1: President and Chief Executive Officer of Chicago Urban League.
Story_ID: 5446
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have a favorite food necessarily.  I like virtually all vegetables.  I like some pastas, chicken in almost any manner in which it might be prepared, and fish.  But I'm not really a finicky eater as such, or that choosey.  I eat pretty much what might be put before me.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue, it seems to be a color I wear most often, although I lean somewhat towards grays, as well.  But I would say blue.
Speaker 1: Blue is a good color. (Unclear).  And favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.  I like long days.  I like to be able to rise--.
Speaker 1: And favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I actually don't have one. I don't vacation as such.  There again, I like to go  when the opportunity avails itself, somewhere warm, which means that I probably would get out in the winter time, if at all possible, to engage in water sports activities, and fishing, relaxation.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Just trying to do God's will."
Story_ID: 5447
Speaker 1: I want to start by asking, as I typically do, about your growing up.  And I would first like to ask about your mother, Ruby Compton, and if you could tell me, you know, about her and what you know about her growing up and her family, that side of the family.  Her name wasn't Compton then.
Speaker 2: Buckner.  Well, my mother was born in Kentucky and one of five daughters, actually six but one died quite early in life.  And they basically grew up, went to school and grew up in Aurora [Illinois].  My father's also from Kentucky.  And my father died when I was quite young, which left my mother with three children.  But she found a way to raise us and to support us and to get us into adulthood and out of high school and, in two cases, college.  And she died relatively, well, I would say young--relatively young--just as I was entering into the work of the Urban League, in fact.
Speaker 1: Did she share with you--?  How long was she in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: She left Kentucky in her childhood, went to elementary and high school in Aurora.
Speaker 1: So, how old were you when your father passed away, 'cause he passed away pretty early?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was about eight or nine years old at that time.
Speaker 1: Now could you--?  What do you know about him and his fa-?  Do you know anything?  Or anything that was handed down or told to you?
Speaker 2: Well, he too, grew up basically in Aurora.  He went to elementary and high school there in Aurora.  Then later went to Lane College in [Jackson ] Tennessee.  I don't think he graduated, but I know he went for a while.  But most of his upbringing too, was in Aurora.
Speaker 1: You know, that's interesting because both of them were from Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Both of them were from Kentucky.
Speaker 1: So they didn't know each other.  Did the families know each other?
Speaker 2: Now that I really do not know.  I would tend to believe they may have, but in actuality, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about the name Compton?  Where it came from or its origin?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Now, so your father, you think he came around the same time as your mother, sort of around that time?  They were really Aurora--
Speaker 2: He may have come a little later actually.  I think my mother's family, that side of the family, I think probably arrived there earlier than my father's family.
Speaker 1: Did they--did you ever hear about the Aurora [Illinois] that they came to?  You know, I mean before you came on this earth.  Did they ever talk about that,  being in that environment there?
Speaker 2: No, I thought the Aurora that I came into was not too dissimilar from the Aurora that they came into.  Aurora was an interesting place at the time.  It was a place that offered a lot of employment opportunities for unskilled, semiskilled workers who were coming from elsewhere, very little unemployment there during  the period that I was there.  And a lot of people migrated particularly from the South--African-Americans--for employment opportunities.
Story_ID: 5448
Speaker 1: But some of your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Well, Aurora [Illinois] was segregated in the sense, mo--racially segregated in a sense,  but probably more segregation based upon class.  I grew up on the East Side of  Aurora, where most of the working class people, white and black lived, where the  West Side was mostly made up of the business type, the entrepreneurial class,  the people who owned businesses there in Aurora and throughout the Fox [River] Valley.  Blacks did live on the West Side, but they did not constitute the  entrepreneurial or professional class--they, too, were working class people.  And we had a sprinkling of, of, or a handful, of whites who may have been  professional or entrepreneurs on the East Side. But basically it was  segregated based upon class as opposed to race.  There were very few Hispanics in Aurora at that time, as opposed to currently, which is the fastest growing  population, and may be the most populous population in Aurora, in Aurora today.  Actually,  there was a Mexican family that moved across the street from where I lived,  where we grew up on King Street, there in Aurora.  But it was, I would say, a  typical midwestern type of locale.  No professional blacks to speak of.  I  never had a black schoolteacher, for example, through elementary or high school.  It was only after I went to college that I had a--who were then professors, of  course, who were black.  All of my teachers, during my childhood growing up in  elementary and high school, were white.
Speaker 1: What was the racial mix of the area?  (unclear) (laughs) Let me just explain  something.  You know, I can't--you're the only (unclear).  You know  I did--The worst interview I did was with Gus Savage.  I just wanted to say  that (laughs).  And it's just reflections really.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I really believe that in this there are some underlying things, you know,  about really what people (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's all.  But I was wondering what the racial make-up was.  Was it primarily  a white community?  You know--.
Speaker 2: Oh, overwhelmingly a white community.  Although my family, both  sides of my family,  were huge families, at least at the time I was growing up.  It's not true today.  But both my father's side, the Compton-Hazelwood side, and  then my mother's side which was the Carter [and Buckner] side of the family, they were huge  families and actually dominated certain neighborhoods on the east side of Aurora  in terms of numbers.  So it was a large family on both sides.
Story_ID: 5449
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to your earliest memories.  What are just some of the things  that you sort of remember?  I mean, I can lead you in that way  But I'm just  wondering what--the other question I asked you--is what--what smells or sounds do you  associate with growing up?
Speaker 2: No particular sounds or smells, except maybe the kitchen.  I mean people did  cook, I would say, every day.  I mean that was, that's what people did then as  opposed to today.  You know, most of our meals--if not either at home or in the  homes of other relatives, you know, my grandparents or at home.  Every once in a  while somewhere else.  So the smells would be associated with cooking and food,  in the main,  and the flower garden on the side of the house.  But that's what I  kind of remember.
Speaker 1: And your siblings?  You have two other siblings.  Where are they in the order  and what are their names?
Speaker 2: My sister, who is still living, currently lives in North Aurora.  Actually,  she's lived there for thirty years or so.  My brother who is the youngest, Jack, is  deceased.
Speaker 1: (unclear) So what is the order?  I need the oldest--.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest.
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest followed by my sister, who's the middle child,  Janice is the middle child, and then my brother Jack was the baby.
Speaker 1: Now were you, you said you had an extended family.  Were you like any  special--as being the first boy in the family?  Or, you know, in that-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: I was the first--yes, I was the first boy and actually the  first grandchild for both.
Speaker 1: So that's a big deal.
Speaker 2: Well it tended to be, especially with my paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: (laughing) No, that's a big deal.  So you were showered a lot.  There was a lot  of celebration around your birth then.
Speaker 2: Well I, obviously, I wouldn't know what my birth was, but certainly throughout my early childhood, I would say that. We all were well taken care of, given the  times and circumstances, but certainly I can remember, you know, my paternal  grandmother, my father's mother, particularly after his death, took a very  strong interest in us as kids and saw to it that as much could be done in our behalf as possible.  Of course, she did that even before my father's death.
Speaker 1: Like what things did she do and make sure about or talk to you about?
Speaker 2: Well, we always visited with her every Sunday.  As we got older we had the option, of course, of going any time we wanted to, especially if we were looking  for something, knowing that we probably would get it .  And she didn't  live that far from us.  But, you know, the grandparents on both sides were that way, but I certainly remember my paternal grandmother--in that vein--more.  And how she insisted that (unclear), that I be called James and not Jim or Jimmy.  And I was named after both of my grandfathers.  So I take my name, James, which  was the middle name of my paternal grandfather and Walter, my middle name, is the middle name of my maternal grandfather.
Story_ID: 5450
Speaker 1: What were you like as a child? How would you describe yourself?  Were you  well-mannered?  Were you rambunctious; were you mischievous, were you--?
Speaker 2: Probably a combination of all of that.  I, I know that I was  pretty highly independent and always sought to make things work in my behalf, in  an independent kind of way.  I worked at a very tender age in various jobs.  And, you know, that continued throughout my childhood, my adolescence, right  through my adulthood.  So I began working at a very tender age and never have  been without something to do.
Speaker 1: And you say you were independent.  What does that mean?
Speaker 2: In the sense that, you know, I sought out information, went to the library  studied, worked, never wishing, or wanting, or desirous of people having to do  for me what I felt I could and should do on behalf of myself and on my own.
Story_ID: 5451
Speaker 1: What was family life like?  How would you describe it?  You have this extended  family thing happening but what was it like?  I just would like to have two or  three sort of memories of different times and events, you know, in the early  part of your life.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a typical life in a world for African Americans at that time, not a  great deal of creature comforts, necessarily.  I mean I would say we were--probably could be described as economically disadvantaged, but just  didn't know it, or certainly wasn't something that overwhelmed us.  I would say  that, by that I meant, I mean that by statistical or governmental standards I  never felt poor in the sense that we couldn't figure it out as to how to meet,  you know, meet our needs and get through life.
Speaker 1: But family was there.  Was it a religious family?  Did you spend time in church?  Were there--?  Did everyone come together at mealtime?
Speaker 2: Well, everyone pretty much came together at mealtime.  Most of  the members of the family, not all, were church-going.  My father wasn't  church-going as I recall. As I recall, I ceased to be church-going probably in  early adolescence.  My sister and her friends, they tended to be church-going  throughout.  But I think that certainly early in adolescence and through most of  my high school years I was not a regular church-attender.  I would go on  occasions and as a younger child-a younger boy, yes, I went virtually every  Sunday.  My grandfather, my maternal grandfather, was quite active in the church  and he was a deacon and the superintendent of the Sunday school.  So I pretty  much had to go to Sunday school.  Maybe I got worn out, I don't know.  But  (laughs) you know in the earlier years--.
Story_ID: 5452
Speaker 1: Your father's death must have had some impact, I mean you were eight or nine,  I mean you're still young.  But you would have some sense of the loss of him at  that point.  I'm wondering if that was sort of a changing point in your family's  lifestyle or structure, or how it even impacted you?
Speaker 2: Well yes, obviously, you know, there was the loss of income certainly, and a  loss of presence.  That probably reinforced a sense of independence in me in  that I began to go out and do things and make, make things happen on my own, that I  might not have necessarily pursued, although given my make-up and nature, it  might of also.  But certainly after his death I made sure that I always had a  job--income.  And knew that I was gonna make a life of my own.
Speaker 1: Was there a sense that you had to sort of be the man of the house at that point?  You know, (unclear) did you feel that at all?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't really feel that until a little later when helping my mother with  my brother, who was a difficult child--a difficult boy.  But early on I didn't  feel that type.  But later throughout high school, and as he began to develop  and grow up in the sense of getting bigger and older--not necessarily (laughs) smarter or wiser--you know, I would take on, I guess, some of those  responsibilities that would normally accrue to a father in dealing with him.
Story_ID: 5453
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?  You went--.
Speaker 2: I went to two elementary schools: one from kindergarten through  fourth grade, [W.S.] Beaupre [Elementary] School [Aurora, Illinois].  And then from fifth  grade through seventh grade I went to Oak Park [Elementary] School, [Aurora, Illinois], which was even more white than was Beaupre (laughing), with a handful of kids on--.  Most of the handful of black kids in Aurora who lived on the East Side at  that time went to Beaupre.  After we completed the fourth grade, because Beaupre only went through the fourth grade, everybody had to scatter somewhere.  Many of  the white kids went to a school called [C.M.] Bardwell [Elementary School, Aurora, Illinois] or some went to Center [School, Aurora, Illinois].  The black kids basically went to either Center or [L.D.] Brady [Elementary School, Aurora, Illinois].  For some reason or another, they sent me to Oak  Park Elementary, which was a good school,  I mean for the period and time in  terms of basic education and reading and, learning to, you know, read and write  and all, had a fairly good sports program, music.  So, you know, for the times,  it was a sound basic education, I would say.
Speaker 1: So when you--.
Speaker 2: Then we all came together again at  [East Aurora] Junior High, which was just  one grade, but in one school. We all--everybody came back together from the  various elementary schools into the junior high school and then from there on to  East Aurora High School [Aurora, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And was there subjects or things that you gravitated to?  Were you,  I mean I'm  just wondering whether English or math or sports or--.
Speaker 2: Well, sports certainly, history, literature, less grammar, more  tuned and more engaging literature.  I did quite a bit of reading, I would say,  as a high school student.  Well, even as an upper elementary school student, but  certainly in high school, I did extensive reading, utilized the school library  as well as the public library within the community and read from a broad range  of topics and subjects.  Very often would do more reading on my own than I would  the textbooks and school books.
Speaker 1: And what types of things were you reading then?
Speaker 2: Virtually anything and everything, whatever struck me:  novels, history,  mysteries, whatever I might see or scan and take a liking to.  If I read the  first several pages or a chapter and liked it, I'd continue with it.  Read quite  a bit on World Wars One and Two, biographies of individuals.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone that you particularly admired and sort of looked up or you  considered a role model at that time?
Speaker 2: No, not, not particularly.  I came to appreciate my grandfather later in life  actually.  But no, not--I can't say that I did.
Story_ID: 5454
Speaker 1: Had you any thoughts about what you wanted to be or what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, beyond wanting to play baseball, no, I never thought extensively.  You  know, a lot of things came across my mind throughout my youth--you know, be a  fireman. And why I'd be a fireman, I don't know--there weren't any black  firemen.  Engineering, at one point in time. Just any number of things.  It  would change.  But I guess at one point in time I probably wanted to be a  baseball player more than anything else.
Speaker 1: Who did you admire as baseball players at that time?  Who were your favorites?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Jackie Robinson, who came up in 1947, was the first black ballplayer I really became knowledgeable about.  I certainly had heard about  Satchel Page.  And then, you know, some of the great ballplayers who were not  black--Ted Williams, when I was a kid, because of his great hitting capacity.  But I remember once Jackie Robinson came up my grandfather always planned his  vacation time around the time the Brooklyn Dodgers would be in Chicago.  So I would see the Dodgers for two or three straight days (laughing).  I mean that's  the way he had planned, so he would be available to go 'cause that's who he, who he cheered for, you know, was Jackie and the Dodgers.
Story_ID: 5455
Speaker 1: How'd this great love of bask--baseball--?  Do you think  it came honestly or was it your grandfather who sort of influenced it?  Or, did  you like playing the game?
Speaker 2: No, I liked playing the game.  I loved to play baseball.  And  when we were young we played it, you know, in the summer time; we'd play all  day.  You know, two or three games a day virtually every day.  And then, you  know, I followed the teams in the major leagues--far fewer teams at that time.  There were only sixteen teams, eight in the National League and eight in the American League.  So it wasn't difficult to know what each and every team was  doing and who, what players were on what team.  Because they don't, they didn't  change teams every other year like they do now.  I mean a person who came up  with a ball club, especially if they were better than average ballplayer, you  know, that's where they spent a lifetime.  So it was, it was different.  And having  then, having an opportunity to attend games with my grandfather, I would assume,  had some impact.  But I just naturally liked to play baseball.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first game you attended?  That must have been pretty  exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember the first one there at Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois].  And it  was a tough period and somebody in the stand made some epithetical remark that  he didn't particularly care for and he let the person know about it (laughs).  But that didn't curtail his or my enthusiasm about going, you know.  We were  definitely gonna go see Jackie [Robinson] and the [Brooklyn] Dodgers.
Speaker 1: How old were you then when you went to see him?
Speaker 2: I was about eight years old.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay. And that--even the trip in must have been a big trip.  I mean, this  is, you know--you're out in Aurora [Illinois].  It was sort of like a small town,  right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a small town.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I think of it as, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and certainly, you know, it was all farmland between, virtually all  farmland between Aurora and Chicago at that time.  And my grandfather did not  drive and he never owned a car.  So we always came in on the Chicago--. What was  the name of--Chicago Aurora and Elgin, I believe it was.  Called it the Third Rail.  It was an electric train.  That's how we would come in.  And every once  in a while my-- I had an uncle who did drive-- every once in a while he was able  to work his time out, you know. The three of us would come.  But I can certainly remember most often we'd come in on the Third Rail--every once in a  while we'd drive.
Story_ID: 5456
Speaker 1: And were there other people influencing you when you were young?  Anyone else?  You know, it seems like you--.
Speaker 2: Now when you say young, what are you talk-?
Speaker 1: I'm talking about, you know, eight years on.
Speaker 2: No, not really.  No.
Speaker 1: It was very heavily focused on family, the people you interacted with and  everything.  But what about when you went to school?  You know, you're in  school--.
Speaker 2: Well, also I would say my buddies, my friends.  You know, I  mean there was a closeness there, a tight-knit group of us that lasted for  years.  And I guess there are about four or five of us remaining out of that  group.  Several have died.  There are about four or five of us remaining who--we  see each other on occasion.  We're all spread around:  one is in Florida, one is  in New Jersey, one is out in Lisle [Illinois] and one in Atlanta [Georgia].  We don't see each other  that often, but every once in a while there's something that brings us together.
Speaker 1: That's nice to have friends that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those were, were close--I mean we were very close.
Speaker 1: Would you, what?  Get together and plot things?  You were mischievous,  like young boys, or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, and you know, we would engage in sports.  And we had a  baseball team.  We had a basketball team and we would--when we were in high  school we had a pretty good baseball club, in fact.  And we traveled around the Fox Valley area, even to Chicago.  The same with the basketball team we had.  And we played various teams; we played all-white teams and mixed teams.
Speaker 1: So this was separate, the basketball club, the baseball club was separate apart from anything in the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You formed your own club--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We did that and we would play the school varsity  team and beat 'em.  And yeah, this was separate and apart from the school team  and the school activity.
Speaker 1: And how did that work then?  I mean how did you--? You weren't part of any  leagues were you?
Speaker 2: No organized league, but certainly there were enough teams in  existence that we could play.  And, you know, we would find out about 'em.  They'd find out about us and, you know, we'd play against some of the established school teams.
Story_ID: 5457
Speaker 1: Now, what--you went to junior high school, where did you say?
Speaker 2: In Aurora [Illinois].
Speaker 1: In Aurora--but that--.  What was the name of the junior high?
Speaker 2: It--.
Speaker 1: You said everyone came back together.
Speaker 2: Well every, all the elementary schools--. When we were all in elementary school  we went to various schools.  We would come back together in junior high, which  was one grade, eighth grade, and in one building.  And then from there we'd go  off to high school.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: In Aurora.  East Aurora High [School].
Speaker 1: East Aurora High, okay.
Speaker 2: There were two public high schools in Aurora at that time,  East Aurora High and  West Aurora High and then there was Marmion Military Academy for boys and Madonna [High School], a Catholic girls high school.  I think there were only four schools, I believe at that time.
Speaker 1: And the population of Aurora was about how many at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would imagine it ranged between thirty thousand to forty-five [thousand] during my lifetime out there.
Speaker 1: And the black population was what percentage of that do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh very, very, very small.  It couldn't have been as much as ten per cent. That would have  been large, probably three to five, five to seven maybe.
Speaker 1: And so when you went to high school, that sounds like (unclear).  So when you were in high school, you went to East Aurora .  How did that happen,  not going to West Aurora?
Speaker 2: We lived on the East Side.
Speaker 1: Oh you moved.  Wait a minute--.
Speaker 2: No.  We lived--.
Speaker 1: You lived on the East Side.  That's--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But was that more black?  There were more blacks there?
Speaker 2: On the East Side?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were blacks who did live on the West Side, but there  were more on the East Side. The East Side was predominantly a working class  community, where the West Side was made up of the entrepreneurial class,  professionals and business owners.  But there were blacks who lived on the west  side of Chica--I mean on the west side of Aurora.
Story_ID: 5458
Speaker 1: When you were in [East Aurora High school, Aurora, Illinois] high school, in terms of what you wanted to do afterward, were there people that influenced you?  Were there teachers--?  'Cause you said for the most part your teachers were white, you know, and so did you have--?  I mean what were people sort of encouraging you to do?  Or what were, here you're saying, "I'm an independent person."  You've sort of said, "I've always been independent."  And I'm just wondering what was sort of going on?  Were people impacting you?  I found when growing up at my time, guidance counselors could never be trusted 'cause they sort of put you in the other direction.  You know, slower than what your capabilities were.  So I'm just wondering what was happening with you?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have guidance counselors.  We had a boy's dean and I guess a girl's dean as such who handled everything from, you know, guidance issues to disciplinary issues and whatever came forward.  No one actually indicated or tried to influence me in any particular direction.  I mean I had some teachers who were more caring than others.  And then some, you know, you felt didn't care at all.  They had these reputations.  And we didn't always identify it with race as much as that's just the way they tended to be.  Now, I did have a teacher in high school named Oscar Madizar, who was Jewish, who I would say identified with me and sought to give me guidance and encouragement.  And, you know, indicated that I had the talent and the necessary intelligence to go beyond what most of the kids-- and certainly what most of the black kids--were doing in Aurora.  I credit him with that and he encouraged me to read certain books and literature and all.  So that would come, Oscar Madizar, I think would come the closest in that regard.
Story_ID: 5459
Speaker 1: What were you thinking then, as you approached graduation, what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I wanted to--.  Actually I graduated, I completed high school, in three and a half years and came back.  I had a job at the time of my graduation.  I was working.  I left school in January.  And that's, as I tell people today, less because I was smart as opposed to I just wanted out.  I just didn't care to go to school any longer.  And so I took all the necessary and  required courses and more that allowed me to get out in three and a half years.  And between the January and the graduation, however, I did decide, based upon the work experience and other factors, that I would go to college.  And then I began to become serious about the application process.  But I had not started that in, while I was attending school.  That occurred between the time I left and the time I graduated.
Speaker 1: So what was the  (unclear)?
Speaker 2: One reason was because I had the opportunity to go hear Dr. Benjamin Mays speak at North Central (College) in Naperville [Illinois] some time during that period, early spring.  And that probably more than anything else was the most compelling reason that I changed my mind, I think, you know, having seen and heard him, which was a brand new experience.  And so I changed my mind about buying a brand new Chevrolet and decided that I better go on to school and get an education.
Speaker 1: Now what was Dr. Mays like?  You're not the first person who's talked about him and what influenced--.  But what was that experience like?  Or, what did he say that,---?  What impressed you about him?
Speaker 2: Well, what impressed me was, you know, the fact that he was a college president--very articulate, very impressive both in terms of speech, mannerism, performance, but also in appearance.  And I concluded that there was something beyond what I had mostly seen and observed up through that time and until that time.  And that influenced me to wanna go to school.
Speaker 1: Had you been thinking of it at all?  Or this, you really hadn't.  You were like--.
Speaker 2: Not in a serious kind of way because most of the classmates, white and black who any intent of going to college, most of them thought in terms of becoming teachers.  Most were guided  toward that and to go to the teachers' colleges state supported schools in Illinois.  I mean this was for white and black kids who they thought ought to go to college or could go to college.  As I said, there was so much plentiful work around (Laughs) it was assumed that most of us, white or black, would go into the factories and the workplaces and the foundries because that had been the tradition.  That's what folk did.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking when you decided you wanted to go on to college?  What did you want to do with that?
Speaker 2: I was thinking that I wanted to pursue probably government, politics, nothing too definitive.  It was a matter of going to school and better preparing myself and becoming educated to pursue whatever it was that I would ultimately pursue.
Speaker 1: And there was no sort of (unclear) on the family saying, "You know, boy, you should just go on and get a good job."  There was not--?
Speaker 2: No no, no, no.
Speaker 1: --message?
Speaker 2: No  no.  I was pretty much left alone in that regard.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I mean there was some encouragement, but not a lot.  I mean it wasn't overwhelming. It wasn't overwhelming one way or another.
Speaker 1: So where do you decide to apply to?  And where do you get in?
Speaker 2: Well I--. If I recollect, I applied to the University of Illinois because my, one of my cousins had gone to the university and  had actually been a football star, played on the 1947 Rose Bowl team with Buddy Young.  And Buddy used to come out to Aurora quite a bit when I was a kid.  And Paul Patterson, who was my cousin, and Buddy were close friends up until the death of both of them.  And so the University of Illinois.  And I probably applied to one or two other state schools, as well as Morehouse (College), which is where I went.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  He [Dr. Benjamin Mays] was at  Morehouse, right?
Speaker 2: He was the president of Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that had a great--so now, you went back to graduation.  By the time you graduate was there a span of time between that time and you got--? Did you graduate in June?
Speaker 2: June.
Speaker 1: And then go to school in September?
Speaker 2: September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay.  So now this is a whole new--.
Speaker 2: So, I had some money  'cause I had worked from January up until September, time to go to school.  And I had virtually saved all that 'cause I was living at home.  And, you know, very little to--once I had made up my mind, 'cause actually I was saving to buy a brand new Chevrolet.  And since that's what the guys were doing and, you know, so I was gonna do likewise.  And--.
Speaker 1: And your buddies?  Did any of them go along?  Any of this group that you're still friends today,  were they--?  Did any of them go off to college too?
Speaker 2: All of them.  Two of them went to college, two brothers went to Howard [University], the Jenkins brothers; they went to Howard.  My cousin Wayne went to Drake [University]. George Fuller went to Aurora College.  Then, of course, the others didn't go.  The bulk of them didn't go.
Speaker 1: And what year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: '56, '57 (1956, 1957).
Story_ID: 5460
Speaker 1: How was Atlanta?  In this whole--'cause this is opening up a whole different world that you had not been involved before.
Speaker 2: Well, it opened up a whole different world in the sense of, you know, the physical experience and actually being in it.  Now, it wasn't new in the sense of intellectually having some understanding of the differences.  I was very studious and followed that whole Emmett Till murder.  So, you know, I had some sense of what the South was about and the ex-, you know, what one might expect.  Now, I had not experienced it in that same manner because having grown up and lived in Aurora, you pretty much went where you wanted to, even though you knew some times that you weren't wanted.  But certainly legally you could go and most often no one made a big deal about you being there.  I mean you could  sense where, you know, you weren't desi--when it wasn't desirable.  Or, you didn't wanna go because of the fact that there was an environment that you just didn't care to be in, it wasn't hospitable or welcoming, but certainly you could if you decided to.
Speaker 1: But I'm also talking about the difference between a small working class white town and a black university  in the South, white mainly.  Exposure to whites versus exposure , even though your environment was black through your extended family, (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very, very different.  This is the first time, as I said earlier, that I had encountered black professionals in any significant kind of way.  You know, black professionals I had seen in Aurora, there was one doctor, Dr. Bolger, a black doctor.  There was an undertaker, Mr. Branch, and then there were the preachers, none of whom I don't think were highly educated.  I mean--. So that was about the, you know, the extent of it.  And, you know, a handful of black teachers who taught  in either Chicago or at the Illinois State Training School for Boys or the Illinois State Training School for Girls, the boys in St. Charles and the girls in Geneva.  But certainly going to Atlanta was a vastly different experience in terms of the environment and what you were to encounter.
Speaker 1: So how did you find your adjustment?  Did it take you some time to adjust?  Did you do--? Were you like a fish who found water?  Or what was the whole experience--?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there was, you know, some period of adjustment.  But I certainly didn't find it to be overwhelming or crushing or uninviting.  I mean it was something, you know, you kind of work yourself into.  And actually while I grew up in Aurora, certainly in my teen years I spent a lot of time, you know, I spent a fair amount of time in Chicago.  So, you know, I was in and around Chicago.  And so I had that type of exposure and experience.  But certainly Atlanta was a different experience, and the college and university the same.  And it was a very positive and a very growth opportunity.
Story_ID: 5461
Speaker 1: How did you grow as a person?  You know, Morehouse College is famous for making Morehouse men.
Speaker 2: Well that's what we do.  That's exactly what it's there for.  That's what it does.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) That's so much--.  (Laughs).
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs) you can help me out a little bit here.
Speaker 2: Well I mean, you know--people have their own interpretations of what that means.  But I mean it is established for the development of African-American men, who may go on to do different types of things:  engineering, lawyers, doctors, educators, scientists, an athlete or two every once in a while; but a broad spectrum.  But the fundamental thing is you are first of all a Morehouse man.
Speaker 1: And how do they cultivate that there?  What do they say even being a Morehouse man, what it stands for?
Speaker 2: Well it stands for integrity, for character, for discipline, for honest pursuit of education and intellectual enhancement and improvement, and service, leadership, commitment.
Speaker 1: And did you experience while you were there any of the class schisms that goes along with those institutions?
Speaker 2: Any of the what?
Speaker 1: Class schisms, class differences, you know, with the black society that Atlanta is known for then?
Speaker 2: Well I, certainly, you know, witnessed that.  It wasn't crushing or overwhelming.  And I think probably I paid more attention to it since graduating and being an adult, as opposed to my student years there at Morehouse because I was too engaged in being a student as well as working.  So that part of what was the greater Atlanta didn't register that much, although I was aware of it.  So that, you know, it wasn't something that just consumed one.  And certainly at Morehouse, you know, it was certainly not something that was perpetuated or encouraged or rewarded.
Story_ID: 5462
Speaker 1: Were there people that served as mentors for you there, during your time there?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, starting with Dr. [Benjamin] Mays.  I worked for Dr. Mays for three years.  So that was an education in and of itself.  And I think most of us who had that kind of exposure saw him, and saw Morehouse, and that--.  Well, let's put it this way, saw him, which was the epitome of Morehouse, and then the classroom.  So that, you know, you kind of were getting two educations.  And I was most fortunate in that three-year intimate association that I had  working there at the President's home and was his driver for three years.
Speaker 1: Oh that's wonderful.  Okay.  So you got to see and experience quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Talk about him a little, you know, as a man.  Dr. Mays is no longer with us but, you know, there are-.
Speaker 2: No, he's not.
Speaker 1: People that were influenced by him.  And I would just like you to talk, because everyone talks about him in such a phenomenal way.
Speaker 2: You lived in an environment of high expectations (unclear) during his tenure or the leadership there at Morehouse.  Dr. Mays was a leader.  And he was a person who, a man who--was not, how might I say it?  He was a man who didn't suffer fools.  He was a man who would not accept one's best whether it be a professor or whether you be a student.  That is, he had very high expectations and expected that, you know, one would put forward their best performance, which meant preparation, it meant discipline, it meant sacrifice, honesty, integrity.
Story_ID: 5463
Speaker 1: Dr. [Benjamin] Mays [Morehouse College president] appeared in the chapel at Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia] most Monday mornings.  Generally, he would be out of the city, out of Atlanta, beginning probably Thursday or Friday, very often on other speaking engagements in various parts of the country.  Some of them, if they were in the South, I drove him to, if they were in Florida or other parts of Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Mississippi, if they were within a day's driving time, whatever, you know,  Tuskegee, Alabama.  But he always tried to make it possible that he would appear in chapel on Monday mornings to speak before the total student body.  That was pretty much a ritual.  We had required chapel when I was at Morehouse , daily chapel five days a week.  And then if you resided on the campus then Sunday, which was a service, a religious service.  But this was where much of the education as it pertained to the development of a Morehouse man actually took place.  If you went to class, you know, you learned chemistry, you learned physics, you learned algebra and geometry, and English and grammar and rhetoric and whatever else that you might.  But it was there in the chapel, and primarily under the direction of Dr. Mays, that you really learned what it was about being a Morehouse man.  And he would change, you know, his themes and subject matter depending upon the needs and the times, whether he thought it needed to be adjusted regarding politics or government or whether it had to do with campus issues, or national or international affairs.  But there was always a tie-in as to what the Morehouse man was to be in relationship to that and how a Morehouse man, you know, should respond and act and behave and think as it pertained to them.  I remember one time, you know, we had this great football rivalry with Clark College, although we never,  Morehouse was never really good.  And one time I think it was on a Friday, game Saturday, there was a pep rally in the chapel and how those who were involved in the pep rally came down the center of the chapel with a replica of a tree and with a human, you know, an image of a human body being hung from this tree.  And on this human body is (laughing) Clark College (laughing).  Well, most of the student body obviously, you know, saw this as a rallying point and this is what's gonna happen to Clark on Saturday.  And, you know, it just took on the norm of a rally, you know, a pep rally.  Dr. Mays--I remember this vividly-- jumped out of his seat, jumped up onto the stage and halted the pep rally.  He told them to take that out of the chapel.  And then he began to speak on the history of lynching.  And I imagine he spoke for forty five minutes to an hour.  And, obviously, everybody left there in shame, based upon, you know, that type of behavior and how he wasn't gonna be identified with it, and we weren't to be identified with it.  And he made it a lesson so that and challenged the faculty, who served in advisory capacity, as to why they had allowed that type of behavior to take place.  So, you know, that's just one instance that, you know, comes very vividly.  But having been with him as much as I was over the years, you know, I had a lot of lessons that I was taught (laughs) in driving and listening to him and some of it was in general and some of it was more about, you know, the whole school population.  Every once in a while it was directed to me personally.  When he was displeased with my performance or behavior, whether it be in the classroom or what he may have heard.  I might not have been studying as much as I should have and spending too much time on Auburn Avenue or whatever.  He'd let me know about it. But the point being that they were very high expectations at Morehouse.
Story_ID: 5464
Speaker 1: You're in this period between, you know, Brown vs. Board of Education and the Voting Rights--.
Speaker 2: '54 (1954).
Speaker 1: '54 was Brown vs. Board.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Brown vs. Board of Education.
Speaker 1: You said you went there starting in '56 (1956)?
Speaker 2: '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: In that period of time,  can you just describe what things , because he's around speaking a lot--?  You know, there's a lot of going on in terms of activistism.  And with that, you know, you typically think,  pro--.unclear) Civil Rights Movement.  People think it was the '60s [1960s].  (unclear) that, you know--.People realize (unclear).  But I'm just wondering what was the environment like there? Because of the relationship you had with him?  You at least saw him out and about doing things and had that exposure.  And I'm just wondering if you could describe the type of environment that existed then.  And what were the issues? What were a lot of the issues of the day?  This (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a very dramatic period because we were beginning to see the beginnings of the Civil Rights period in the '50s, late '50s, '60's [1950s, 1960s].  I would say the 1954 Supreme Court decision probably was the force or at least the rationale and the legal setting that gave impetus and direction, although the '54 [1954] Supreme Court decision obviously was not the first decision based upon race or discrimination.  But what it did do was to erase the 1896 decision of Plessy vs. Ferguson and turned that whole legalized segregation, discrimination completely around.  But it was a difficult period in Atlanta.  You know, we began to have, as throughout the South, but  in Atlanta because I was there,  we had the boycotts and various marches and marched upon some of the big department stores such as Rich's downtown Atlanta and certain of the hotels.  And it was a period in time where Dr. Mays for example who, you know indicated we had to balance being activists and being in the streets of Atlanta and demonstrating and boycotting, we had to balance that with our responsibilities as students, in that getting thrown in jail for periods of time (laughing) was not going to be an excuse for you to fail chemistry or zoology or English.  Yet you were still gonna be held to those same standards.  And that everyone couldn't, you know, as a person, human being; you kind of had to measure what your capacity was in that.  But that your first responsibility was really as a student so that you could make a more long-term contribution in dismantling discrimination and that you couldn't spend all your time in jail.  So, you know, it was always that balancing act that was going on for a period of time among the student body there.  I don't know how we did it but we obviously worked through that.  Of course, the first students-- two students--who integrated the University of Georgia, Charlayne Hunter, who became Charlayne Hunter-Gault, and [Hamilton] Holmes, who was a Morehouse student and  he was selected from out of the student body of Morehouse  (unclear) kind of like a Jackie Robinson.  So he was probably the best, capable in terms of intellect, character, mannerisms, the whole package as the most likely to be able to withstand all of that pressure and to succeed.  And, of course, both of them obviously did.
Speaker 1: In the period, there was a lot of activism going on--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: The campus.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yes.  Oh yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Throughout, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During that time, I was president of the Morehouse chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I was also the president of the citywide student chapter of the NAACP.  So there was a lot of activity, activism and involvement during this time and period.
Speaker 1: And really the NAACP was the (unclear) at that point.  Wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Well, the NAACP was a major player in the civil rights activity in the south.  SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] was new. And of course, SCLC  under Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was the most visible entity in terms of the marches and the activist aspects.  But when it came to the courts and the legal battles it was the NAACP, because this was before-- prior to the creation  of-- the NAACP Legal and Defense Fund.  So interestingly enough, you didn't hear much about the Urban League in Atlanta at this period and time.  It was the NAACP, of course, with the creation of SCLC and then SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], which came into creation during that period of time and je--.
Speaker 1: But SNCC was later though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it came along.
Speaker 1: You had graduated long before--?
Speaker 2: Not long before.
Speaker 1: Not long?  Let's see '60 [1960].  Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not long before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then to some extent CORE [Congress of  Racial Equality] which was an older group.  I think it was formed in (unclear) organization.  I think it was created in 1942, I believe.  But all of the organizations more or less came together and meshed and worked together.
Speaker 1: Now what is your family saying of your experience?  Or are they (unclear) unaware of what's going on?  What's forming you as a person during these years?  Are they aware, you know, they're up here in Aurora.  Are they aware of what being--?  What changes are taking place in James Compton?
Speaker 2: Not in a--I would say no, not in a major kind of way.  They didn't--they just knew I was more or less out there and engaged and involved and going to school and doing the balancing act between all that I was trying to do.  No, because they didn't see me that often during that period of time.  I very seldom came home once I went to Morehouse.
Story_ID: 5465
Speaker 1: James W. Compton, "J-A-M-E-S" "W" middle initial, "C-O-M-P-T-O-N".  Today is Thursday, the 16th of May, 2002 and we are located today at the headquarters of the Chicago Urban League, located at 4510 S. Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, 60653.
Story_ID: 5466
Speaker 1: When we ended you were still at Morehouse [College], getting involved with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I'd like to continue with that.  That's where we were.
Speaker 2: Is that where we were?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well ,I was a member of the Intercollegiate Youth Chapter of the NAACP while in Atlanta, as well as the president of the Morehouse College Student Chapter of the NAACP and was quite active during my several, my four years, at Morehouse in the NAACP.  The Urban League actually did not have a great deal of visibility at that time in Atlanta. And then you had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], which was relatively new, made up of college students from various colleges throughout the south.  So they tended to be the active organizations in the Civil Rights Movement at that time, and of course, SCLC  [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] obviously, under the leadership of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Were you influenced at all in your involvement with NAACP by Dr. [Benjamin] Mays?  Was he involved, not in the student chapter, but--.
Speaker 2: Well, he was a life member of the NAACP and always talked quite highly of the role--and appropriately so--of the role of the NAACP, and the role that it played in the school desegregation case, the 1954 Supreme Court, and the role of Thurgood Marshall, and the role of all of the magnificent attorneys in the team that he had assembled.  So we were, on campus, quite aware of the history of the NAACP and had knowledge of the role of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: Now what were the things that you accomplished that you were so proud of during that time or were involved with?  This is back at the years of 1950?
Speaker 2: This was in the late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: And early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: '60s [1960s], okay. A.  And--.
Speaker 2: So the '50s [1950s] and--.
Speaker 1: And we were involved in voter registration efforts, "Get out to vote."  We were involved in sit-ins, you know, Rich's Department Store I can remember--recall quite vividly--and various other establishments in downtown Atlanta.  Of course, if you go to downtown Atlanta today, you see African Americans in great numbers and occupying many types of positions.  As we know, today Atlanta has its first African-American woman mayor, the first woman mayor for Atlanta and the first African American woman.  And it has had a succession of African American males serving as mayor. So that going back from the time I was there, late '50s until '61 [1950s to 1961] there's been a tremendous, tremendous change in Atlanta and throughout the South.
Story_ID: 5467
Speaker 1: What other things are forming you as a young person there?  I was struck the last time because I didn't know that you had acted as Dr. [Benjamin] Mays'--.
Speaker 2: Driver?
Speaker 1: Driver. And--.
Speaker 2: Which was an education in and of itself, equally as important, I believe.  And probably the older I get, the more credence I attached to it in having had that opportunity.  Now, of course, when I first took that assignment, I'd never had dreamed and never had an idea that it would be as significant a part of my education and development as it has been.
Speaker 1: What do you think of if you describe him?  What was sort of the essence of the man?  I mean most people talk about him and Morehouse [College].  He was Morehouse.
Speaker 2: He was Morehouse.
Speaker 1: And they talk about him in odd terms.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say obviously his intellect and his education but also his background, which is part of his overall education, the humble beginnings and circumstances, and the fact that he worked obviously quite hard to overcome his own early education deficiencies.  He was beyond the normal age when he graduated from high school, beyond the normal age we normally enter college, but he certainly made up for these deficiencies and went on to the University of Chicago.  And he was always quite proud of the fact that in order to get his Ph.D. he had to take proficiency exams in both Greek and Latin.  He let people know how difficult it was to obtain a Ph.D. at the University of Chicago at that time.  I suspect there's been some degree of relaxation in our higher education system from that period in time.  But beyond the intellect was the sincerity and the commitment to the educational advancement of African American people and obviously, the commitment to Morehouse College.
Speaker 1: Now did you think that what Morehouse is as it is today was far more when under his leadership?
Speaker 2: I would say that most historians  would subscribe as that being the case.  Morehouse was a very good school.  It was a good school and evolving into a good school prior to his coming.  But I think he came, if I'm not mistaken, I think he came into Morehouse in 1941 and served as president for some twenty seven years, I believe.  And it was during that period in time that we saw the growth of Morehouse, not only in terms of numbers, but in its stature as a college of higher education dedicated to African American young men.
Story_ID: 5468
Speaker 1: What do you think really formed you? How did you change as a person during that time, those four years? Because that was really your first time in South and--.
Speaker 2: It was certainly the first time that far South, in the deep South.  I had been as far South as Kentucky, but it was certainly the first time that I had been that far South for any prolonged period of time. And so it was quite a transformation, quite a difference from having grown up in a small, little town in Illinois and being in the presence of so many African-Americans in one place and at one time.
Speaker 1: Who also were some of your classmates or people that you met there?  You may or may not have people with names people may know, or that you have long-lasting relationships with?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several.  Julian Bond was one, certainly one whose name is now quite prominent.  And we were classmates and very good friends.  In fact, Julian left Morehouse [College] for a period of time and came back many years later to finish and obtain his degree.  But there were several, and the individual who integrated the University of Georgia [Hamilton Holmes], along with Charlayne Hunter [Gault], came out of Morehouse, was transferred from Morehouse to the University of Georgia as the two who were selected by a team of elder citizens of Atlanta to take on that momentous responsibility.
Speaker 1: So you didn't get so involved with NAACP activities that you were tempted, like Julian, just to say, "Forget about school," and "I'm gonna go out and--"
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.  I never got that engaged where school, academic and scholastic attainment and achievement became unimportant.  Of course, having the kind of relationship with Dr. Mays, I was not really allowed to. And he made it very clear that, while he encouraged involvement in the Civil Rights Movement and all, that your first responsibility and your primary responsibility was to obtain the education that Morehouse was offering you.
Speaker 1: Was there anyone else besides Dr. Mays that was an adult who was forming you also at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say several of the professors at Morehouse College:  Dr. [Robert] Brisbane, who was my political science instructor or professor, Dr. [Melvin] Kennedy, Professor [Claude] Dansby and then Whitney Young over at the Atlanta School of Social Work, who was then Dean at the Atlanta University School of Social Work at that time.  So all of these individuals had impact upon my growth and development and the direction I was headed.
Speaker 1: And there might be one or two whose names I don't readily recall at this moment, but will recall as soon as we finish this interview (laughs).
Story_ID: 5469
Speaker 1: What are you thinking that you wanna do when you graduate?
Speaker 2: My leaning at that time was to go into the foreign service and probably more specifically the information agency, USIS, United States Information Service [sic, USIA--United States Information Agency].  But that was my leaning at that time, even though I had this involvement, engagement in civil rights, I also had great interest in foreign affairs and diplomacy and that type of activity as well.
Speaker 1: And an interest in the Soviet Union, right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Soviet Union.
Speaker 1: Soviet Union.  Tell me why you were interested in that?  You know, here's this guy from Aurora (laughs), all of the sudden, they--.
Speaker 2: First of all, I was studying history and political science. So, you know, both of them give you exposure to a larger world than the one that you just happen to find yourself in.  I mean both of them expose you, at least from an academic--.  And then I had the opportunity to also travel, which opened up a whole new universe and the more exposure I got and the more I saw, the more interested I became in world affairs and world events. And some similar type of activities were taking place in other nations as well, Africa, Europe, Asia.  It might have been different nuances, but it certainly revolved around the have-nots seeking to obtain rights, seeking to obtain a position, seeking to obtain opportunities they did not have, whether you were talking about the Algerians in Algeria or the Vietnamese in Vietnam or other parts of the world--Africa.  So there was a lot of activity and protest going on all over the world at that particular time.
Speaker 1: And what attracted you was that the commonality of that? A  The commonality and--.
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: And the fact that the disfranchised, let's call it, was seeking opportunity and their rightful place in the world.  It was not all in the South of the United States. It was a worldwide kind of activity and protest and demands that were taking place and much of it involved students all over the world, too.
Speaker 2: Now who were you interacting with that shared your sort of view? Or who did you admire who was actively involved in those issues?
Speaker 1: Who did I--?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause of the people you mentioned, Whitney Young, wasn't involved in those issues at the time, was he?  Or am I missing--?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Whitney Young was very active in the civil rights activity of Atlanta.
Speaker 2: I'm talking about in international issues.
Speaker 1: Oh, in international, no.  No, I think you're right.  I mean obviously there had been Ralph Bunche prior to that, probably the most noted African American diplomat, most noted African-American dealing in foreign policy and that.  But most of the leadership at the time--African American leadership at that time--was mostly committed to what was going on in this country.
Speaker 2: That's why I was asking who was active in international affairs that you were following or monitoring or wanting to emulate?  Or was it not any particular--?
Speaker 1: No, no. It was more cause-related, more cause-initiated than any particular individual per se.  I mean the identification would be with those individuals in those locales who were giving leadership as opposed to, say, someone--.
Speaker 2: But who were some of those people?
Speaker 1: Well, I certainly remember (unclear) and some of the Algerian leadership, and the role of France in that whole scenario.  And--.
Speaker 2: Now you said, "I thought of having a career in the foreign service."  What happened?
Speaker 1: Well what happened, I became so immersed in what was happening here that I, over time, you know, what was going on in this country and where I was at that point in time, took over. And it began to--foreign service--began to diminish as something that I might do from a career perspective.
Speaker 2: Now this is what? You graduate in 1960?
Speaker 1: '61 [1961].
Story_ID: 5470
Speaker 1: We're six years from the passage of Brown vs. Board of Education [of 1954], there's a lot of activity occurring in the South with the marches and things like that.  You didn't think about staying in Atlanta?  Did that ever cross your mind?
Speaker 2: It crossed my mind. And I think it probably crossed the minds of many of us at that time in staying there because it was kind of the crucible and kind of the focal point, and certainly Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] being from there, and being in Atlanta as often and much as he was.  So yes, there was consideration of that, no question about it.
Speaker 1: But what made you come back here?
Speaker 2: Well, I came back here not thinking of any permanent kind of residency or taking up a career here.  I returned here as I think most graduates do; after graduation they go home at least for a period of time.  And so that's what happened there.
Speaker 1: But the person that came back was much different than the Jim Compton who came back to--.  You went back to Aurora?
Speaker 2: I went back to Aurora [Illinois] momentarily.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was a much different person than who had left.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had a lot of experiences.  That happens a lot of times, you know, where someone goes off to school, they experience the world and they don't quite fit at that point.  And so I'm just wondering, what happened at that point?  Who were you?  What was your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job--.  Actually, I was with the Chicago Board of Education.  I taught for two or three years and then moved over to the Chicago Urban League.
Speaker 1: How did the move to the Chicago Urban League happen? Were you recruited? What were you hired to do?
Speaker 2: I was hired to be what was then called an 'OJT Representative', an On-The-Job Training Representative, and ostensibly to go out and recruit enterprises and businesses to accept clients for on-the-job training whereby the United States Department of Labor would subsidize the employer a certain amount of dollars, as well as provide a percentage of the wages for the trainee for a period of time, after which it was expected that they would then go on to the normal payroll of that enterprise or business and become a full-time employee.  So that was my first position or my first job, let's say, but I did many various tasks, actually, with the Chicago Urban League before I left to go to New York.
Speaker 1: And what were some of those?  You sort of moved up from doing one thing to the other, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I headed up the Housing Division for a period of time.  I created, actually, our West Side office and operation, which was located at 2400 W. Madison Street, because it was my feeling that the Chicago Urban League was too regarded and too known as a South Side agency/organization. And [the Chicago Urban League] received some degree of criticism for its non-relationship, supposedly, with the West Side. Now, we certainly did not have, at that time, a West Side office or a West Side location, although there were several of us younger staff who found ourselves working on the West Side or moving around within the West Side community relating to people on the West Side.  So I was able to help the Chicago Urban League get funded to establish a West Side operation.
Story_ID: 5471
Speaker 1: I would like to take you back, really, to that time period because you're viewed as synonymous right now with the Chicago Urban League.  But this was a time--and I'd like to sort of have you paint a picture--this is a Jim Compton with a lot of (unclear).  You're young, brash, got a lot of firepower.  You've got your ideas about what's right, what should be done.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that--.
Speaker 1: You've been on the front line down in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: (Laughs) In the mix, right?
Speaker 1: In the mix.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughs).  I'm just wondering, you know, what was happening inside and what was this Chicago [Illinois] that you came to?  This is Chicago in the early '60's [1960s]. How did you find it and who were the important players and where did the Urban League fit within that?
Speaker 1: Well certainly, obviously, one important player was Bill Berry, the Executive Director of the Chicago Urban League, who was, obviously, a major player and the head of the Chicago Urban League and was involved in much of what was going on in terms of trying to bring about changes and trying to bring about advancement of African-Americans at that time.  And then, you know, there were certainly others, but certainly Bill was a major, major player.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us something also about his background and how he had come to head up the organization?
Speaker 1: Well, Bill was a career Urban Leaguer.  He came to Chicago [Illinois], I believe, in 1955 from Portland, Oregon.  Prior to that, he had been in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  So most, if not all, of Bill's career was within the Urban League.  And Bill became not only a big figure and personality in Chicago, but within the Urban League movement, was highly regarded as one of the major forces within the whole national Urban League structure.  So he would be one of maybe four or five at that time whose opinion and who's thought and all would be sought out within the whole national Urban League framework.
Speaker 2: And can you also give just some background for his (unclear), but about the Urban League itself, how it got started and where it fit within this whole time period?  It's an organization that got started in the mid-1900's, I think.
Speaker 1: The Urban League was established in 1910.  The National Urban League was established in 1910 in New York City.  The Chicago Urban League was founded in 1916.  So the Chicago Urban League, which is now in its 86th year, is one of the older affiliates of the National Urban League, which totals about 112, I believe, now.  Now most of the early, the original Urban Leagues, were formed in the north to provide service and to serve as an intermediary for African-Americans who were migrating from the rural and agrarian south to the north, ostensibly for a better opportunity, particularly employment opportunities and in jobs.  But there were a whole myriad  number of support mechanisms that they needed, you know, in getting housing, obtaining housing, getting kids into school and obviously getting employment.  So the Urban League, in its formative years, in its earliest years, was primarily regarded as a social work organization and most of the personnel within the Urban League in its formative period were social workers, many of them having come out of the Atlanta School of Social Work.  Most of the leadership of the National Urban League, certainly through Whitney Young, were social workers.  And, as I said earlier, Whitney had been the Dean of the School of Social Work at Atlanta University.  And so Bill Berry was a Social Worker.  So most of the leadership of the Urban League and most of the personnel, professional personnel of the Urban League, at that time, came out of the social work arena.  Now that has changed somewhat, I mean still a lot of social workers within the Urban League. Some of the veteran and older people within the Urban League think that everybody should be a social worker.  But as time has gone on, we've drawn from other disciplines. And I think to the enhancement of the Urban League, we've drawn from other disciplines, other training, other backgrounds in addition to social work.  The Urban League still is in the business of providing services. But we're more than that and I have insisted in Chicago [Illinois] that we would be more than a social service provider.
Story_ID: 5472
Speaker 1: When you came here, it [the Chicago Urban League] was still very much a social service.  This locally was a social service organization.
Speaker 2: It was, yeah, if you consider--.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Not totally, but it was.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Leon Sullivan, had he formed OIC, the Opportunities International [Opportunities Industrialization Center]? Was that formed at that point?
Speaker 2: It came into existence--are we taping?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh we are.  Oh, it came into existence, I believe, sometime in the mid to late 1960s.  I don't know the precise time. But it was, as you well know, based in Philadelphia and it had a specific and particular mission, being more jobs-oriented and getting people employment.  The Urban League did a lot of that and when I say social service, I'm including the job placement activity, the interviewing and placing people in jobs, so I'm putting that under that umbrella.  But certainly, historically, that has been one of the primary and main activities and responsibilities of the Urban League, that is to move people into gainful employment.  And we still do a lot of that, both the non-skilled, semi-skilled, skilled workers, professional placement.  So that is still a major part of what we do and one of the things, of course, it does is to allow us the opportunity to relate to the employer community and as well as the placement activity.
Speaker 1: Now what had been [Edwin] Bill Berry's hallmark? What was the Urban League that you were coming into?
Speaker 2: Well I think Bill Berry's hallmark, among other things, was the relationship Bill established, particularly in the business community, and the interracial cooperation that he was able to promote and able to give leadership to.  I think he probably was best known for that as within the Urban League.  You have to keep in mind, Bill Berry had a career after the Urban League as well. And so after the Urban League, Bill expanded his engagement and probably served more years more years in a non-Urban League capacity as opposed to the number of years he served the Chicago Urban League.  Now that wouldn't hold true for his total Urban League experience when you go all the way back to Pittsburgh but certainly his career after leaving the Urban League was a long, if not longer, than his career with the Chicago Urban League.
Speaker 1: What things did you learn under his tutelage? Was he sort of a hands-on person?  Was he a mentor in the way that Dr. Mays became to you?
Speaker 2: Bill was diff--I'm at a different stage in age obviously, and now I'm in the gainful employment arena, so it's as opposed to being a young student interested in everything, now I'm becoming a bit more focused.  So Bill was a great, I think, organizer, both within the Urban League and outside of the Urban League.  And was very precise and very exacting, very demanding, but he was equally as demanding upon himself as he was upon others, both within the Urban League and outside of the Urban League. He had a magnificent mannerism and ability to bring people together and to formulate and develop coalitions and to really bring about interracial cooperation, which was the thing he constantly espoused if not preached, learning about interracial cooperation.
Speaker 1: So that's why I wanna say, in Chicago [Illinois] in the '60s [1960s] you had Richard Daley,
Speaker 2: Richard J.
Speaker 1: Richard J. Daley as Mayor.  You have a business community.  I'm not exactly sure what that business community is like.  You have a lot of black people that have come and are still coming to Chicago [Illinois].  And here's an organization where you're in your first position, which is job training and things are brewing and opening up.  But politically, this is a city that was controlled in many ways.  So I'm trying to understand that.  Whether in the religious community or the business community, who were the major players in Chicago [Illinois] at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly you've named some.  Certainly the main figure at that time would have been Richard J. Daley, mayor of the city of Chicago. And much of what went on in the city of Chicago [Illinois]  revolved around the policies and the execution of those policies from Richard Daley and the Daley administration.  Certainly you had Congressman [William] Dawson, who was highly responsible for the successful elections of Mayor Daley in those years, from the mid-1950s until Dawson died, and [for] the delivery of the African American vote to Daley and to the Democratic Party in general.  The big preacher at that time was J. H. [Joseph Harrison] Jackson, who pastored Olivet Baptist Church as well as the National Baptist Convention.  And then we had the development and the evolving of the Civil Rights Movement, which was very much Southern oriented, but gravitated to the South.  And then we had Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] coming to Chicago there in the mid-1960s; and the Freedom  Movement and Al Raby; and Bishop [Arthur] Brazier; several others.  But during that period there was not full unity within the African American community because you had the African American, the black aldermen at that time, who were very much aligned with Mayor Daley, and many of the African American preachers as well.  So that we had those who were kind of status quo oriented and those who were trying to move a progressive agenda.
Speaker 1: The Chicago Urban League was part of that progressive agenda?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.  Bill Berry played a very pivotal role and was involved in an organization called the Triple C-O, Coordinating Council of Community Organizations, which was responsible for getting Dr. King here in the mid-1960s, and with the leadership of Al Raby and that whole activity.  Emphasis at that time was upon trying to open up the housing opportunities, and as a result of all of that we had the creation of the Metropolitan Housing Council, which is still in existence.  But that was definitely an outgrowth of all of that.
Speaker 1: During that time, what is the Urban League setting as its key areas?  Housing is one,  jobs another, right?
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: No, no.  I'm talking then.
Speaker 2: Jobs, open housing, those were two of the primary concerns at that time.  I'd say jobs and then everything else (chuckles).
Story_ID: 5473
Speaker 1: Can you give me a recount, three to five instances, of things that sort of stick in your mind from the 1960s period?
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Well, in the general malaise and unrest, there was beginning to develop in the black community divergent points of view, the more established black leadership as opposed to the younger and newer black leadership that was emerging; you know, the beginning of the emergence of people like [Richard] Dick Newhouse, who ran for mayor;  Harold Washington, a different political type of mentality and a different agenda, if you may, than Chicago had been accustomed to  and certainly when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came here and the energy that that brought, and his young cadre of lieutenants, which included Jesse Jackson, who headed up Operation Bread Basket and later organized and founded Operation PUSH.  So there was a new and different element that Dr. King brought with him to Chicago that neither the African American community or the white community had [been] exposed to.  I mean here were some young, energetic, very intelligent, dynamic individuals.  That was new and different.  And so that began to change the atmosphere in Chicago. And, of course, there was also the beginning of the, the beginning of the--.  How might I say it?  The beginning of the loosening of power within the Daley organization.  He was beginning to lose the tremendous amount of power and was getting fewer African American votes each election that was taking place, particularly, I would say, in the 1970s until the time of his death [1976].  So there was a diminution of the power, not an extension [chuckle] or not an elimination--but certainly a perceptive, demonstrable diminution that was occurring.
Speaker 1: Do you remember how long Dr. King was here when he came?
Speaker 2: Dr. King was here short of two years.  It was not a two-year campaign, I don't believe.
Speaker 1: So he was in and out, but he--?
Speaker 2: He was in and out. And if you recall, well, you probably would not recall, he had an apartment there on the West side.  I don't know how much they were being occupied, but it was there and certainly had some symbolic purpose.  But he was in and out. Because one: he was a national leader, certainly, and had activity and campaigns going on all over.  And then Dr. King had to move about quite a bit to raise money to support the campaigns and to support the organization and was in great demand as a public figure and speaker.  So he did not himself stay in Chicago each and every day.  I mean he would come and he would return when his presence and all was demanded, but he traveled quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Now what are you thinking? Because you spent time in Atlanta and you had been involved in the Civil Rights Movement down south.  You understand King and you also have started to understand Chicago. And I'm just wondering where you were?  Were you involved in his activities when he came?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  I was involved in it as a staff member of the Chicago Urban League. Interestingly enough, I did some driving for him in moving about from various locales and then did some research in terms of gathering facts and information about where we would be on a different day; not esoteric research or academic research, but more fact finding as to what were the demographics of a given community, how much public housing was in this given community, what  the unemployment rate in a given community, and all that kind of thing.  So it was a very interesting time, a very exciting time.  I say today that probably those young people who enter into the Urban League today or a similar type of situation don't necessarily have the same; their bond is different, so some of the excitement that we entered into is not here today.  It requires a different mindset for a young person coming in, some different skills probably. But certainly the environment is vastly, vastly different. And the activity!  I mean we used to go fifteen plus hours a day in organizing and putting on rallies, and organizing for marches, and at the same time trying to carry out the regular programmatic activity in the organization. So, I perceive there was a difference.  And I mean what was going on at that period in time all over the country, certainly in the south, many young people, kind of gravitated to.  But this was a worldwide kind of phenomenon.
Speaker 1: Where did you first meet Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson?
Speaker 2: Here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago.  Do you remember the year?
Speaker 2: I can't recall the year, but obviously it's sometime in the 1960s (laughs).
Speaker 1: Do you remember the occasion?
Speaker 2: I suspect it was at one of the rallies or in a church, which could have been a rally as well.  I used to see him all the time during the time that Dr. King was here because while Dr. King would be the featured speaker, three, four, five of his aides would speak prior to Dr. King.  Dr. King obviously would be the featured speaker and sometimes he didn't come on until 8:30-9:00 at night and we'd been there since 6:00 (laughs).
Speaker 1: Who were some of these people? Was Andrew Young part of that?
Speaker 2: Oh sure. [Andrew] Andy Young, Walter Fauntroy, C.T. Vivian, James Bevel, and Reverend Abernathy, who most often traveled with King.  He, more or less, would go when King left and return when Dr. King returned.  Let me see, who else was in there?  There were a number of them and most of them were very, very, very articulate speakers.  Most of them had come out of the ministry and had been educated and trained as ministers.  I'm trying to think of them, John Lewis.  Dr. King had an impressive cadre of young people at that time, who were part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Council] and part of his inner circle.
Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have for you--did you find? 'Cause you know, you, you started out with the student chapter of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Were there differences between the organizations of then that were sort of marked or not?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there were differences.  I would say, taking the Urban League, the Urban League didn't take on a real civil rights posture or civil rights mantle until Whitney Young became the head of the National Urban League. Again, it was more of a social work organization.  It was when Whitney Young came in as the head of National Urban League, Roy Wilkins was the head of the NAACP and, of course, Dr. King, and they all came together;  James Farmer, too.  And then you had the creation of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], which was kind of on the outside trying to get in the inside and so it was a very interesting time.  There was kind of a division of labor. We certainly know the role, the posture of the role, and function of SCLC under Dr. King's leadership.  They're the ones who kept the public focused on what was going on within the Civil Rights Movement.  Others had different kinds of roles.  The NAACP had been pretty much legalistic in its orientation:  fought in the courts, as well as lobbied within legislatures and the Congress.  The Urban League had a research role and a role in bringing about an interracial kind of mix within what was going on at the time.
Story_ID: 5474
Speaker 1: Just back to [Edwin] Bill Berry a little bit.  He was a pretty controlled person.  His manner was pretty sort of even-tempered, right?
Speaker 2: More or less, yes.  He had a temper, but--.
Speaker 1: Do you remember sometimes when he lost his temper or--?
Speaker 2: Oh many times.  Yeah. Yeah.  He lost it with me and some of us, who had different ideas about what things should be and how they ought to go.  But yes, in general, Bill had control of his demeanor, control of his disposition and that was one of his strengths.  Those of us who knew Bill and worked closely with Bill over time, whether it was during the Urban League years or later--.  As I said, Bill's career later probably was longer than his career with the Chicago Urban League.  But yes, he was a disciplined man, exacting, organized.
Speaker 1: So when did you go to the national office?
Speaker 2: I never went to the national.
Speaker 1: You went to New York.
Speaker 2: When I went to New York, I went to run an affiliate.
Speaker 1: An affiliate of the Urban League?
Speaker 2: Of the Urban League and in Binghampton, New York.  It was called the Bloom County Urban League.  We were a county Urban League as opposed to city so I had three towns/cities that we operated in:  Johnson City, Endicott and Binghampton.  Our headquarters were in Binghampton, but we had operations in Johnson City and Endicott as well.
Speaker 1: How did you get that assignment?
Speaker 2: Well, I had ambition to be head of an Urban League and didn't see that as being forthcoming here in Chicago [Illinois] so I was going somewhere where it was a possibility.  And that's what I did.  It probably was one of the wiser things that I had done in terms of career and growth.  Interesting enough, I left Chicago in 1969 and Bill Berry announced his retirement later that year in 1969.
Speaker 1: So (unclear)?
Speaker 2: But I would not have become the head of the Chicago Urban League either, not at that point in time.
Speaker 1: What were your ideas about what you wanted to see the Urban League do and what you saw as its role?
Speaker 2: One of the things I wanted to see [was] it aligned with and an integral part of the civil rights move[ment].  I saw the Urban League as being more than a social service organization or a service delivery organization.  I saw it being an organization that ought to have research capacity, engage in public policy advocacy, challenge the status quo, be part of the leadership mix of a community; whenever there was a confab, or a forum, or a coming together on big, important decisions, the Urban League should be part of that. It shouldn't be outside of that kind of framework.  So, you know, ostensibly, I saw the Urban League and still see the Urban League as having to be part of a leadership gathering or a leadership environment. Having a lot of people or a handful of people [unclear] or meeting on something of a significant nature, whether it be O'Hare or the public schools or any major significant decision, that the Urban League isn't a party to--
Speaker 1: And that wasn't the case then?
Speaker 2: It was with [Edwin] Bill Berry.  Yes, no question in my mind on that.  But it wasn't part of what was--.
Speaker 1: Going on.
Speaker 2: what was going on.
Speaker 1: So it was in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it was with Bill Berry.
Speaker 1: You said in 1969 you went to Binghampton.  That's upstate New York, right?
Speaker 2: That's in upstate New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or south central New York.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That community is much different though than here, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it's a very different community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Richard Nixon was President at the time.  So it was a--.  You know, leaving Chicago [Illinois], the Robert Taylor Homes, the South Side and the West Side and going to an area where you had to look to find black folk was vastly different.  Now there were poor people--they weren't black--because the truth of the matter is most of the black population were IBM employees.  Most of them were not indigenous to the area-- they came from elsewhere.  These were engineers and technicians, and people trained and educated in technology.  So these were not poor blacks and they didn't remain there long.  I mean they were there and then they were gone.  So as soon as you got one on your board, six months later they're gone and you'd get somebody else.  The poor people were primarily indigenous whites so most of my clientele were semi-skilled, non-skilled whites.  It was a changing environment going from a rural, agrarian environment to more of an industrial one with IBM being of a great significance in the arena.  So it was interesting.  I remember being able to get Julian Bond in there to speak with the purpose that he was gonna speak mostly on civil rights.  Julian got to speaking about Vietnam--it was during that same period--which was fine with me. But certainly it was being anticipated that Julian was gonna speak on the issue of civil rights.
Story_ID: 5475
Speaker 1: You said you had Julian Bond come and he was supposed to talk about the Civil Rights Movement. He talked about Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Yeah and the anti-war crusade. Which was fine with me. Because certainly I was one who supported Dr. [Martin Luther] King in his own activity and leadership on the--against the Vietnam War.  Now, you know, this caused some consternation within the civil rights community among the--some of the civil rights leadership who thought that he was confusing the issue. And that too much attention was being garnered by him for his anti-war position and crusade as opposed to the Civil Rights Movement.  I thought he--I thought there was a consistency and a--within what he was doing. And, you know, I took the position that as a ordained minister, he had a responsibility to do such.
Speaker 1: And so let me ask what this--the Binghamton [New York].  So you're saying your--a lot of the people that you were servicing were lower class Whites?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Were--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That you were doing poverished--
Speaker 2: The impoverished, yeah.  yeah.
Speaker 1: Impoverished--
Speaker 2: The impoverished Whites, non-skilled, poorly educated.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you said--See and I'm--But  why was there a decision to open up an Urban League?  And, you know, you said it was a color--a county Urban League?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Why was that decision made?
Speaker 2: Because the population and the people of that community asked for it. And the National Urban League, which has the responsibil--had and does have the responsibility of opening and closing affiliates, decided that the community--there was enough community support, that the United Way had signed on, that the leadership, which was ostensibly white, and the community was desirous of it. And that's the way it went.
Speaker 1: Now you were there from 1969 to when?
Speaker 2: 1972.
Speaker 1: Three years.  Okay.  And at what tim--what point did Whitney Young, you know, moved to head of the Urban League?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Whitney became head of the National Urban League in 19--either 1960 or 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what--You said you also learned a great deal in that whole period. And I'm wondering what are the things that you learned and why did that move do you well?
Speaker 2: Well you learn that--You learn that there're differences in viewpoint.  You learn really operating in a primarily conservative Republican environment as opposed to a Democratic controlled environment.  You're operating in a population mix that is vastly different from where you were.  And so you learn to adjust and refine your approaches to be able to operate or try to operate successfully within that type of framework and that--within that context.
Speaker 1: So you didn't think at the time you'd been sent to Siberia? Or you had taken an assignment in Siberia?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I've always approached life and situations that there's something positive to be garnered and gained out of any--most any situation.  So I was not close-minded.  I mean the fact that I was not on the west side of Chicago or on the south side of Chicago did not deter me from what I felt I needed to do.  Now certainly it was--it was a different experience.  But on the other hand, I looked at it in the context of opportunity.  I knew that I was not going to be there a lifetime.  I doubted that I would be there over five years.  I saw it as up to five-year exposure and then move elsewhere.
Story_ID: 5476
Speaker 1: 'Cause 1972 you came back.  You came--right.  You were--So was there a ope--There was an opening.  What happened?  Because you became more than--You became Executive Director. Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well the--What happened unfor--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Bill Berry left in 1969.
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Retir--
Speaker 2: He submitted his retirement notice in '69.  The new Executive came in in 19--the spring, I believe of 1970 from Rochester, New York.  And unfortunately for the organization, that didn't work out.  And then I became the head of the Urban League in 19--in mid-1972.  Actually, I served six months on an interim ba--was it six?  Maybe three months. And then they named me--I served three months, I think, as Acting and then was appointed in mid-1972.
Speaker 1: That seems sort of--I mean that was a sort of meteoric rise, though.  I mean to--I'm just saying, you--That was a big deal. Right?
Speaker 2: A very big deal [chuckles].
Speaker 1: It was a big deal.
Speaker 2: A very big deal.
Speaker 1: Did it have anything to do with your relationship with Whitney Young at the time?
Speaker 2: Whitney had died--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Whitney had died.
Speaker 2: prior to that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh my God!
Speaker 2: Yeah, Whitney was not living.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It had more to do with the fact that people knew me from having been here, including folk who were going to make that decision. So that I wasn't a total stranger.  I mean I was not like the person who had replaced Bill Berry, coming, you know, in cold from the outside.  I had performed here, people knew me.  I had long-term relationships, came to Chicago from time-to-time. So that, you know, I was not like somebody coming in from elsewhere, unknown.
Speaker 1: So who was on the Board at the time?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Some of the people.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of who was on the Board who's still on the Board.  George Johnson was on the Board, still is on the Board.  Frank Bixby was on the Board, still on the Board.  Jim O'Connor was on the Board, still on the Board.  So I think that probably--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I think that probably is it as far as who was on the Board and who still is on the Board.  I would say the key person on the Board at that time was the President of the Board, Carey B. Preston, who was the Executive Director of the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority and was very instrumental in my hire.  Given the position she held and had been quite disappointed in what had transpired, and was anxious and eager that it get turned around.
Speaker 1: Now you come back and you have lots of ideas? Right?  And you had said--I--You know, you had said, "My--I was interested in the Urban League being able to be engaged in research and public policy and advocacy, and really be in the leadership--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Leadership.
Speaker 1: mix."  And so are these things that you talked about?  I mean obviously they interviewed you. Are these some things that you talked about happening at that time? You know, doing?
Speaker 2: I would sa--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But there had been a leadership gap.
Speaker 2: I would say yes to some degree.  I don't recall there being a--any extensive interview.  As I said, I had been here, was known, had put some things in--had put the west side office in place. So that there was not extensive interview and that kind of thing.  I just kind of articulated some things that I thought we--needed to be done and, you know.
Speaker 1: Let me ask the question from another way.  You had--How large was the Binghamton office?
Speaker 2: When I worked there, I guess it was a two-person office.  When I left, I would say about a 20-person office.
Speaker 1: And how--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And--
Speaker 1: How large was this office?
Speaker 2: I--In exact numbers, I would say at least 50. At least 50.  But we grew the Bloom County Urban League.  We got a lot of Model Cities money.  Monies came into Bloom County from the federal government for model Cities purposes. So you can see based upon that what kind of community and what the needs were.  I mean they qualified for significant sums. And we got a huge portion of that, because we were physically located in the most economically depressed area.  We had economically disadvantaged constituents and clients,. So that we were able to put together a proposal that satisfied the decision makers. So we were able to gear up. And most of our money actually was model cities money when I left there.  Some IBM money.
Speaker 1: And had you established a good relationship with IBM during that time? And--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.  Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. I was able to do that.  It was one of the first things I set out to do.  And there were, you know, three or four people on the Board from IBM from different installations and different divisions and all within IBM.  And they probably didn't know one another, but IBM was a very powerful force in that area. And, of course, was headquartered in Armonk.  But it was, you know, throughout the whole region.
Speaker 1: And that was a dynamic time for IBM, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh yeah.  IBM was a very--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Setting standards and everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 5477
Speaker 1: You came back. And so what are your--What are the things that you want to accomplish and put in  place? And what did you get about the business of really doing here?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to get a good research operation in place. Which we were able to do and it served us quite well.  I mean it kept us visible in our findings and our public--our public exposure of various deficiencies and the impact of institutions and the impact of racism and discrimination, segregation.  The other thing was to, you know, have us in the--again within the leadership mix of the city and within the African-American community.
Speaker 1: So what were the things that you did? Some of the things like--How did you go about doing effective research?  You know, I remember when I was interviewing Senator Jones.  He talked very strongly about the Urban League's role in support of him and Black legislators.  You know, but that [unclear] they didn't have the same opportunity. So he needed to rely on the Urban League as his research farm.
Speaker 2: Well we were--that is true with Dick Newhouse, Harold Washington.  We have done much of the re--work and research and drawing of maps.  We did a lot of work, put forth a lot of effort on this most recent re-map with the Cook County portion of it. Where we got--where the map turned out to be almost precisely what we presented and testified for and went to the court on.  So it has always been my posture that, you know, through the leadership role we're able to develop power and to be in a position to make things happen as opposed to always being in a position of having to react. That you can create opportunity, that you can influence what is going to occur.  So that's been my posture and continues to be my posture.
Speaker 1: And how did you go about setting up the research arm?  I mean what did you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What we did is that we wrote a proposal, submitted it to the Chicago Community Trust. And actually, it was for the creation of a research--a research and planning operation.  Not solely research, but an operation that it would also be instrumental in giving leadership to the planning process--strategic planning process of the organization over both short- and long-term periods.  But we would use research as the basis by which we put that forth. Whether it be for economic development, whether it be for education, whether it be for employment, whether it be for the social service activity, whether it be for housing. But that we wanted to start with impeccable research and use that as a basis for our programming.
Speaker 1: The work you were doing here, was that mirroring what the National Urban League was doing? Or were you sort of the tail wagging the dog?
Speaker 2: Well I don't wanna say tail wagging the dog. But--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I mean you're [chuckling]--Were you--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We--
Speaker 1: [unclear].
Speaker 2: We put--put far more emphasis and we may be the only affiliate within the whole structure that has a research capacity.
Speaker 1: And this is--I--You know, I don't wanna overlook the importance of that. Because a lot in the Black community has been loud on--well louder on talk and sometimes short--I don't wanna--I'm saying--But anyway, short--loud on rhetoric and short on research.  And so this--The fact that you did this was--is very important. And has--has really stood the organization well. Right?
Speaker 2: It has stood the organization quite well. Especially in periods and times when we were doing it well.  In periods of time where we've had slippage, we could see slippage in the organization's impact. Because we just didn't have all of the necessary information and facts.  Plus based upon that, you can do interpretation, that differs from the interpretation of someone else.  It's beyond having the information. It's what you do with the information and how you formulate your position with that information.  Somebody else with the same information can come out with different conclusions. 'Cause that's what they wanna do.  And we want to use it for--to help us arrive at the position that we wanna take.  But we don't want to go in with a position that we cannot support in a rational manner and fashion.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the studies that came out of here that you are most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well the studies on wealth and income. The three studies we did on Blacks and policy making positions. A lot of the work we've done on voter registration and re-map. And, you know,  that influenced the political process, that influenced legislative behavior. The fact that we put forth research that was convincing enough to prove that under the right performance, particularly out of the African-American community, that the--there was a possibility of election of a Black mayor.  And that was very important. Because most in the Black community didn't perceive that as being doable.  But we put forth a convincing argument based upon research that with the right execution and leadership, this was doable. Which began to change the mindset.  So the research that we've done over the years and then the research prior to me on school segregation and research that we have continued on education has been quite important for the changes that have taken place over time in that arena.
Speaker 1: That time period from the time you did the research on the possibility of there being a Black mayor, to the election of Harold Washington, how long a period was that?
Speaker 2: It was less then ten years.  I would say six, probably. Somewhere in there.  It was not a great span of time.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And what were the critical factors that you'd get?  You don't--Was it Just the numbers that you were basing that research on, that it was possible? Or was it, you know, com--I mean 'cause it's--A lot has to do with also perceptions and [unclear] and meetings.
Speaker 2: Well common perception was one of the main challenges in being able to establish a mindset,  "That this is doable. That regardless of what has transpired over the years and regardless of what our behavior has been, this can be accomplished."  Then, of course, you know, there is the numbers factor and where these numbers exist.  Because that's important as well.  I mean that's why a re-map of the--periodically becomes an important undertaking.  That's why the parties fight about it. And politicians fight over it,  because it's not just the matter--sole matter of the numbers, but how those numbers come together within certain geographical boundaries.  So the politicians, the elected officials pay great attention to that reality.
Story_ID: 5478
Speaker 1: What are the things that you are most proud of? You know, during your tenure here?  What are the things that when you look back--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well--
Speaker 1: And you say, "Had it not been for us, these things would have not happened."
Speaker 2: I think the work that we have done in voter registration, voter education, get out to vote, and the political education has been very important. And, as you said, was acknowledged by Senator Emil Jones.  But it's been acknowledged by others as well.  Harold Washington acknowledged that.  I think being in the leadership forums where significant decisions are being made and being able to put forth a representation that better represents--
Speaker 1: Stop, stop.
Speaker 2: [pause] That's a reality, too.  I would say, you know, that's been very important.  I think the work we did, the pioneering work we did about Blacks in policy making positions in both the private sector and the public sector. At the time we did it, because it--it highlighted the vast discrepancies in both the private and public sector at that time.  Now there's been significant movement within the public sector and far less movement in the private sector. Which leave us still with some significant challenges within the context of Board composition, composition of Boards of Directors in the private sector, within the managerial ranks, particularly at the higher levels. Because it is still a reality, the higher you go in corporate structure, the less color you will see.  And at the very top, it becomes almost an exclusive white male club.  So we've still got great work to do there.  The same would hold true in the professional services arena, in accounting firms, in law firms, in consulting firms, in the professions.  All the kinds of activity that takes place, you will find very few minority, African American partners or managing partners.  And that is something that we've gotta address. Because the fact of the matter is, young people are graduating out of some of the finest schools in the nation and even those that might not be labeled as among the finest, but are still very good schools.  They're coming out as lawyers, they're coming out as accountants, they're coming out with MBAs, all having matriculated to the same schools as their white counterparts. Having had the same professors, having read the same books, having studied in the same libraries.  But yet, once they get into this arena in the private sector, there seems to be--well there not seems to be, there is a ceiling as to how high one can go.  And I think that's gonna be a major challenge that we've got to address going forward.  So we've got to get beyond the mere fact-finding. 'Cause we've done all that. And we know what the--what--Now the challenge is, how do we move this agenda?
Story_ID: 5479
Speaker 1: I wanna understand really when the organization moved from a social service organization to a business oriented organization?
Speaker 2: When you say business oriented--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well I mean I think that you have with your approach. You know, with heavily on the research and--Well that's not--Advocacy and public policy I see more in the lobbying capacity. You know, with--And then but being part of the leadership and really ingraining yourself within the, you know, the business community. Which I think this Urban League, you know, it became sort of a business outsider to a business insider.
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: Was it in the '70s or the '80s?
Speaker 2: I would say, first of all, Bill Berry played some of that role.  I would say in the case of myself, it's been a matter of having selected that as an arena where it was necessary to be if you were going to have the type of impact on policy and decision that affected African Americans and your constituency.  I mean that's--You have to be real. That in this country capitalism, which is primarily exercised through the private sector, it plays a very dominant role in what goes on in this country, even in the political arena.  And, you know, I take the position, for example, we've got, as African Americans, get to the position through the creation of wealth within our communities where we can selected the candidate, that we can fund the candidate and then we can support the candidate. And that it's not a situation where you have to go outside and hope that you can get support.  I remember the Harold Washington mayor--run for mayor in 1983 and how difficult it was for us and the Finance Committee that I served. How difficult it was for us to raise the necessary dollars. And how Bill Berry, who was the Chairman of the Campaign Committee, was very distraught that we could not raise the type of dollars that he envisioned out of the corporate community of Chicago.  They shut us out.  And so, you know, we were borrowing money.  Fortunately we had Independence Bank and Seaway Bank that we could borrow money.  Of course, when you borrow you gotta pay it back.  And that was, you know, the saving grace. So it's been my position we--you know, it's necessary to be where folk are going to make decisions, especially decisions that affect you and those you purport to serve.
Story_ID: 5480
Speaker 1: You're really saying in the last fifteen to twenty years that there was a move aggressively on your part to integrate yourself, to not be in a position where you would be cut off like that, a different approach, right?  That's interesting.  When you look back, do you see any missed opportunities?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are missed opportunities.  I wish that we would have done more earlier in the economic development area and I wish we had been more successful in what we've attempted to do in the economic development arena.  I'm not satisfied that we, the Urban League, or we as a community have really mastered that arena, being our businesses continue to be small.  There are some exceptions; some in the financial services industry, which is relatively new to us, are growing and expanding.  But certainly, when you take in consideration how long African Americans have been in business of one kind or another, the viability and strength that we would hope is not there.  We've had a diminution in the number of financial institutions, banks and other types of financial institutions.  We haven't merged in cities and throughout the country, where we could reduce the number, but increase the strength and capacity.  So I do feel that futuristically, the Urban League and other institutions and individuals have got to do more.  We've seen the disappearance of many of our viable businesses over time for varied reasons, but nonetheless, they've disappeared and I think that creates a significant void in terms of wealth creation, in terms of leadership capacity, in terms of overall strength.
Story_ID: 5481
Speaker 1: What are your visions for the Urban League going forward?  What do you want to see happen?  One thought was why didn't the Urban League come up with the Wall Street project or the LaSalle Street project?  It seems a missed opportunity in many ways.
Speaker 2: If you talk about a Wall Street project, then you'd be talking about the National Urban League.  Why we did not come up with a LaSalle Street project is because no one in the organization thought about it and created it--it's just that simple. It goes back to what I was saying earlier that there'd been missed opportunities.  I would say, certainly in the economic development arena, we haven't done as well as I would have wished or as well as is required and that is something that futuristically, the African American community is gonna have to address.  Otherwise, it will be playing a much lesser role in the body politic of this country than we presently enjoy or presently have.
Speaker 1: And so what are your visions for this organization and hopes about what it can accomplish? 'Cause this is a new day in many ways-- demographics shift, a lot of things changed.  Some people even will say that the black community is not as relevant as it was.  The Hispanic community is relevant [unclear].
Speaker 2: Well, that is what you have to be concerned about and worry about and that's part of what I said in this whole economic development arena.  If the African American community, and when I say community, I mean in the global sense, I mean in the national sense, not just Chicago, but certainly Chicago, not just because of the [unclear].  I mean if we are not going to do more in say, wealth creation and developing our youth, a certain amount of irrelevancy will set in as it pertains to us.  We won't be looked upon as being people that others have to be that concerned about in the total scheme of things.  Now, there will always be, I believe, individual African Americans who will be successful in their particular undertaking and what not.  But as a race, as a people, this position of irrelevancy could become a reality. You take the black athletes who garner a lot of money and yet as a group, we don't see much in terms of what they've been able to do.  I mean some of them have individual businesses of one sort or another and some of them get endorsements for a period of time that they are riding high.  But with all the money that has been made by our athletes and a handful of others, there's been no pooling of money of any consequence to develop anything of a major consequence, whether it be a financial institution, whether it be a shopping mall of magnitude, whether it be a major business.  So I just used them because of the fact that they do make a lot of money and there is money there.  But I just think that the whole economic arena is one that we've got to master far better than we're doing.  I mean true enough, there are gonna be a handful of individual wealthy black people, but as a community and as a viable force, that's a whole different issue.
Speaker 1: And what do you think is gonna be necessary for that to happen?
Speaker 2: That's a very good question.  One is education and there again laying out what the potential is and making it clear that under a certain type of leadership and behavior, this is doable.  I mean who would have envisioned a Wal-Mart created by a man with a thought--an idea--that is now the largest company in America, larger than G.E., way larger than Sears, Roebuck, and here's a company that is less than fifty years old.  So you have to envision and see the possibility and then, you know, work toward that.
Story_ID: 5482
Speaker 1: Do you personally weigh in on reparation?
Speaker 2: Well, we follow the debate,we follow the conversation.  We look at it from time-to-time as to how we think it might be designed to make sense and how we think it might be designed to come into fruition.  But it is one of those issues that, at the moment, has not galvanized the attention and resources within the African American community. And there's probably as many ideas about how to do it and how to go about it is there are people who, in fact, are giving serious thought to it.  We have not spent a lot of time and resources on the issue and I suspect we might not.
Story_ID: 5483
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes are that we can build upon the experiences of the past, build upon the successes of the past, as few and far between as they sometimes are, and that we can bring the young people along through education, through opportunity, through exposure to be productive, viable citizens in their communities, in the country and in this world.  I mean the world is becoming more global and the competition is not necessarily the person next door.  The competition may be in India. The competition may be in Brazil. The competition may be in the Middle East or in Central Europe.  So we've got to have our kids prepared, qualified and of the right mindset to compete.  I mean we've proven that under certain conditions that we can compete through extensive training, opportunity certainly.  But that, going back to your previous question about relevancy, we've got to perform in such a manner that we're not considered irrelevant.
Story_ID: 5484
Speaker 1: You're viewed really synonymously with the Urban League. [Edwin] Bill Berry's name still remains prevalent, but you've been here for a long time and I'm wondering what you're doing to plan for succesorship?
Speaker 2: Well, we are beginning to take a look at that--and when I say we, I mean the leadership,  the Board, as well as myself-- and how we might go about that.  We have had, over the years, talented people here who've decided to go elsewhere, to do something else.  We've got some talented people here right now.  There are talented people who are in the city of Chicago [Illinois] doing other things.  There are talented people outside of the city of Chicago.  We've got to, of course, put a mechanism in place and process by which we're going to bring that into fruition.
Speaker 1: Now you have had the advantage of being able to sort of take an idea and make it happen and really help in the growing of an institution.  I'm wondering what you want to be remembered for.
Speaker 2: Well if I'm going to be remembered at all, and what normally happens is that over time people aren't remembered, except maybe by loved ones and people very close to them, but I would like to think that the Urban League is being viewed as an organization that played a leadership role in a positive kind of way for the advancement of African-American and economically disadvantaged people.  I would like for the Urban League to be thought of as an organization that has fought and continues to fight for the betterment of education of our kids. And that we instill in them the mindset that the world is open to whatever they desire to do if they're willing to pay the price to do it and that there are not the constraints of yesteryear in terms of being restricted to certain occupations or certain roles, but that if you perform, that it's yours to be had.  And that once that is reality, then what do you do in bringing others along and what do you do to build a more viable community.
Speaker 1: And what do you want people to say about James Compton?
Speaker 2: Well, "That he came to work and did his job."
Speaker 1: And--?
Speaker 2: That doesn't sound very esoteric or very profound. But the truth of the matter is that those persons who have made a contribution in whatever arena, it's because they worked at it.  Didn't talk about it, worked at it and did it.  Didn't plan for it, but executed.
Speaker 1: And what do you think Dr. [Benjamin] Mays would have said about your progress with this institution?
Speaker 2: Well knowing Dr. Mays as I knew him and his high expectations out of all the graduates of Morehouse College, I think he would simply have said "He's fulfilling or has fulfilled the expectations of Morehouse College."
Speaker 1: You had a great love for him, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Great love and great admiration.
Speaker 2: No--.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Great respect.
