Story_ID: 390922
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers]. Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, Mary Cornelia, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-A, Cherry, C-H-E-R-R-Y [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 18, 1924, I was born in Manteo, M-A-N-T-E-O, Virginia, it's in Buckingham County [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Now is Cornelia your maiden name?
Speaker 2: No, Shelton is my maiden name.
Speaker 1: All right, I just wanted to make sure I got that.  Okay.  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: What was my occupation?  I was a production manager for forty-one years in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, production manager of--
Speaker 2: Of Frank Novelty Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were manufacturers of leather and plastic goods for the church trade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: October 11, 2006.
Story_ID: 390923
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that The HistoryMakers management compels me to ask everyone (laughter).
Speaker 2: Five?
Speaker 1: Yes, and they only require a short answer.  So this is the first one.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Spaghetti and meatballs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll say New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I love you truly.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you.
Story_ID: 390924
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your parents and your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Samuel Kyle] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.  Annie, A-N-N-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Shelton, S-H-E-L-T-O-N [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle].
Speaker 1: Was that her--Shelton was her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was her name.
Speaker 1: Her married name?
Speaker 2: No her married name is Kyle.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: K-Y-L-E.
Speaker 1: Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 3, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay, February 3, 1900.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Buckingham, Virginia [Buckingham County, Virginia], in Manteo, the same place where I'm born.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to--I think, let's see, my mother and my grandmother, my grandmother's mother.  I can go back four generations but I only know history which I have checked out.  We go back to Washington Lomax, and that was her grandmother's father, Washington Lomax.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes [sic. great-great-grandfather].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories associated with Washington Lomax?
Speaker 2: There's a lot of history that we have especially on his children.  He had a lot of children but I don't know--I have that in a book but I don't know firsthand about them.
Speaker 1: So there weren't any good stories passed down through the family about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of educated sons and daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay so there were a lot of educated people in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Were they college graduates?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Where did they go to school, primarily?
Speaker 2: I don't know where they went to school, no I don't know that part but I do know that they--I have it all in a book.
Speaker 1: Did you--are there any stories passed down about life in Virginia back in the day, way back when?
Speaker 2: With them?
Speaker 1: Yeah did they talk about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They talked about the slavery time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how I think they got over, and they were able to go to school because they were slaves, and the slave master paid for them to go to school.
Speaker 1: Now this is after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: After, yes--
Speaker 1: Were they the children of the slave master?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So Washington Lomax was descended from the slave master.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And his wife's name was Mary Pryor [Mary Pryor Lomax], P-R-Y-O-R, that's all I know about that side.
Speaker 1: So they were educated?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had eleven children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you know anything about your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, the only one I know is my grandfather, not my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: But they all lived in that same part of Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Virginia, in Buckingham County.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandmother ever tell you stories about growing up there?
Speaker 2: No my grandmother--the only story she ever told was like, where they lived was in a wooded area in a rural section, and she would always talk about, you know, going to church and having like the revivals and things like that, but no she never really told me.  The most history I've ever found out in my family was through my mother, my mother.
Speaker 1: What did your mother tell you about that?
Speaker 2: Well she was the one who laid out all the family names, you know, on both sides, my father's side and her side; all of the family, the brothers and sisters and also their children.  She told us all about that.  My daughter Rose [Rose Cherry], she put everything down because our first reunion was held in 1977, and so we started in 1970 getting information about the family and that's what we did.
Story_ID: 390925
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] have any stories about growing up in Buckingham County [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but they were, you know, just simple things, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, those are the good ones. Go ahead and tell us.
Speaker 2: --about, like, how they had to walk to school and were in a little schoolhouse, you know, all the children were like together in a schoolhouse.
Speaker 1: These were all the black children?
Speaker 2: Yes, and about church, you know, how my mom used to tell me how they had to wash clothes on a washing board, and lay them out on the bushes to dry, not like how we had lines and talk about the vegetables that they would raise and different things like that.  But never did my mother say anything about like, how she was able to go and visit other people, you know.  At that time they didn't have a car, they had the horse and buggy and they would go up and down the dirt roads, you know.  But not visiting like the children visit today, they had to stay home.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it dangerous to travel?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't say anything like that, no, it's just that they didn't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she have a chance to--now she went to the one room school, there?
Speaker 2: Yes, she and my father [Samuel Kyle] did too.  My father only went to the third grade; I think my mother went to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they lived their whole lives there, practically, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they lived there until they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She just was a housewife, she never did anything.
Speaker 1: How many children did she have?
Speaker 2: My siblings, there were seven of us, four brothers, three sisters--I mean four brothers and two sisters [Ann Kyle and Barbara Kyle], four boys and three girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your mother like?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was the best mother.  I'm not saying because she was my mom, but she was really.  She did all the cooking, and she was a housewife, and like I said we had moved to New York, and I was only two years old, and my mom was really stern.  Like oatmeal, she would get up early in the morning and cook a big pot of oatmeal, and we had to eat oatmeal.  I don't like it today because I had to eat it then, and you know if oatmeal gets cold it gets lumpy, but you still had to eat it.  And we had to go to school.  We walked to school.  We went to the best schools, I say, in Westchester County [New York], there in Tarrytown [New York] and we would come home from school and do our homework and do little odds and ends, chores around the house.  My mom, she put the C in checkers, she would beat everybody that sat at the table with her.  No one ever beat my mom playing checkers.  She was good, she was loveable.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I've gotten kind of mixed up but she didn't grow up in Virginia--she grew up in Virginia but when you were little they moved the family to Tarrytown.
Speaker 2: I was two years old.
Speaker 1: When they moved to Tarrytown, New York (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So you grew up in Tarrytown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 390926
Speaker 1: Tell me something about your father. Can you give me his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, Gibson, G-I-B-S-O-N, Kyle [Samuel Kyle].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 3.  When was my dad born?  Eighteen ninety-nine [1899].
Speaker 1: And do you know his birthday?
Speaker 2: November 3.
Speaker 1: Okay, November 3, all right.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about them.
Speaker 1: They were all from Virginia too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The same part?
Speaker 2: I don't know because I never met anyone.  Whenever I went to Virginia, if anything happened, it was a death, and that's the only time my dad went back, like when his mom [Mary Kyle] passed.  His father [Julian Kyle] was dead before he moved to New York, and then when I graduated from high school [Washington Irving High School, Tarrytown, New York], I think was my first time going to Virginia, and I met a brother.  Then the following year when I got married, I went to West Virginia and met another brother.  But I mean that just was a short visit.
Speaker 1: An uncle?
Speaker 2: My father's brother, which was an uncle, yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So did your father talk about growing up in Virginia and what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: Yes, he worked hard, and he worked in the mines in West Virginia, he was a miner in West Virginia and that's all he ever said about what he did.
Speaker 1: So he was a miner before he moved to New York?
Speaker 2: Yes just a short time.
Speaker 1: So was the whole family there or did he just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was there with his brother in West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about why he decided to move to Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: To New York?  For a better life.  He said people who had gone on before them, they would write and say, "Come on up, we'll get you a job and you can go to work."  That's why they went to New York.
Speaker 1: So--can you describe your parents' personalities for me?  Well you described your mother's [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] but your father's, and who do you think you take the most after?
Speaker 2: Me?  My mother. And maybe my hair may look like my dad's, but I took after my mother.  My mother and father were a loving couple, they really were and I have never--like kids say, oh ma stop--I have never heard my mom or dad speak bad to one another, never, they were a loving couple.  And they got along swell.  My dad worked hard, my mom when she was about in her late twenties, she became ill with asthma and she had asthma up until she passed, she died in '87 [1987].  They were just a loving couple, and I always thought that's the way all couples were, like my parents.  They agreed on everything, you know, they really did.  If they didn't, we didn't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of personality did your father have?
Speaker 2: Very quiet person, he was very quiet.  When he first got to New York he got a job working for Boyses Sanitation [ph.], and he worked there every day.  I mean five days a week.  He got off early on Wednesdays.  When we would come home from school, he would always be home because he had finished working, and then he became a janitor--a sexton at a church, a white congregation in Tarrytown, they hired him.  That I always said that was the love of my father because that's where he was.  On Sunday mornings, he was there every Sunday morning whether he felt good or not, and he would be ringing the bell.  I don't know if that do that anymore but they used to chime the bells early so people all around could determine that it's time to come to church, and he did that.  He worked there at that church for fifty-eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a long time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you--now you had like six brothers and sisters, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, four brothers.
Speaker 1: Four brothers, and how many sisters?
Speaker 2: And I had two sisters [Ann Kyle and Barbara Kyle].
Speaker 1: Two sisters, yeah.  So there were six more of siblings, that's what I was trying to say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, seven.
Speaker 1: So there's seven of you.
Story_ID: 390927
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Of myself?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the earliest memory, the earliest thing that you can remember.
Speaker 2: The earliest thing I can really remember about--I remember everything but the most touching was when I was fifteen, and I was allowed to go roller skating.  There was a couple in Tarrytown [New York] that opened up a roller skating rink right by the Tarrytown train station, and my mom [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] said I could go, but my brother Shorty, his real name is Charles [Charles Kyle], he was younger, he had to go with me, and that's when I met the love of my life at the roller skating rink.  And when I was skating around I was holding on more than skating, my brother called me over and he said, "Hey sis come over here."  I skated over there, and there was this good looking guy standing there and he said, "I want you to meet someone," and he introduced me to Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.].  Lamon said, "You called her sis?"  And he said, "Yes," and he said, "You didn't tell me that she was your sister," because Lamon had already given him twenty-five cents to meet me.  Lamon saw me skating, and he asked my brother, "Are you from Tarrytown?"  And my brother said, "Yes," and he said, "Do you know that girl over there," and he said, "Yes."  He said, "I'll give you a quarter to introduce us," and that's what Lamon did.  So Lamon lived in Ossining [New York] which was seven miles north.
Speaker 1: Ossining, the infamous home of Sing Sing [Sing Sing Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so it cost Lamon nineteen cents to ride from Tarrytown to Ossining on the train, and Lamon said that he went into the bathroom, and he stayed in the bathroom on the train until he got to Ossining because he didn't have the money.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He had given my brother the twenty-five cents.  But about, I guess it was maybe about ten years later we calculated up that twenty-five cents and we gave it to Lamon for his birthday--we gave it to my brother for--Lamon and I gave it to my brother for his birthday 'cause we always remembered that's how we met.  And I said to my brother when we were walking home, "Don't say anything to mama about this," and he said, "I'm not going to say anything."  A couple of days later I came home from school because we came home at lunchtime, we walked down the hill and my mother said, "Who is Lamon Cherry?"  I look at her and I said, "Lamon Cherry?"  And she said yes.  I said, "I don't know anyone by the name of Lamon Cherry," and she had something in her hand, and she said, "If you don't know him, why did he write you this letter?"  She had opened that letter and she had read that letter, and I lied, and I said, "I don't know what you're talking about, I don't know any Lamon Cherry."  She didn't say anything else to me, went on back to school and when I came home from school she said to me, "Here is the letter, write to him and tell him he can come."  He had written the most beautiful letter asking--telling how he was elated, and I didn't even know what the word elated meant, upon meeting me, and that he wanted to come and meet my parents.  And see when I met him, I gave him my address and my telephone number but he didn't have a telephone so he had given me his address, which I hid.  I knew I was going to be in trouble.  I was fifteen and he was seventeen.  So my mother said, "Here's your letter, you can write and tell him he can come and visit you," and I said okay.  So I really didn't want him to come to visit me because of his complexion, and I not knowing anything about his family or anything, you know, I didn't want him to come but my mother said write, so I did write back.  I told him he could come, and he wrote back and he said, could I meet him at the train and I told him no because we lived directly in front of the train station and he would have no trouble finding the house.  And he told me he was going to come that following--that next Sunday.  And I had gone out because my parents--on Sunday morning, on Sunday afternoon we used to go driving.  My dad [Samuel Kyle] had a car and he'd put all the kids in and we'd go riding, you know, just riding anyplace (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--
Story_ID: 390928
Speaker 1: Those were the days when people would do that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and it seems to be--I don't know if anybody is still doing it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but that's what we did, yes.
Speaker 1: --but it used to be a family activity, you get in the car and go for a ride.
Speaker 2: That's what we did, and so I said to my mom [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle], "I don't think he's going to come today, can I go up to Snookie's [ph.]?"  That was my girlfriend, and my mother said, "Yes, but if he comes I'll call you."  And as soon as I got up to Mechanics Avenue, to my girlfriend's house, her mother came to the door and said, "Your mother called and said for you to come home," and I really thought my parents were getting ready to go out for a ride.  And almost to the corner I met my father [Samuel Kyle] and when we were just about at the house he said, "You know, that boy came in just after you left."  I said, "That's what you came to get me for?"  He said yes.  I was really petrified, you know, because girls at that time, you couldn't just have a boyfriend.  When I got home, walked in, Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] was in the kitchen talking with my mother and he stood up when I walked in the room like to greet me.  Well gee, that took a place in my mom's heart, mine also.  He had told my mother all about himself.  He was eleven years old when his mother and father separated.  They were in Windsor, North Carolina and his mother and he and his sister [Dorothea Cherry Wiggins] had moved to Ossining, New York.  They too--people used to reach back and help one another, families.  If someone had moved on and they were doing pretty well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they had relatives living in Ossining?
Speaker 2: Yes so they went on to--not necessarily relatives, you know, friends did it then too.  I know when we first moved here [Atlanta, Georgia] in '87 [1987] there was a lady--a cousin of mine, she had a son in California that wanted to come here to live, and I told all kinds of stories, I had no place for him, you know, because I didn't want to bother and all I could think about was what people did when my parents were growing up that's how they got ahead.  My parents when they moved from Virginia, they had started having a house built and their full intention was to go to New York, live there a while, make some money which they couldn't make in Virginia, and then come back and live.  My parents never lived in the house.  When we got married we went down and we transacted a sale to a relative that lived in Virginia who bought my parents' house.  They never lived in it; none of us ever lived in it.  My husband and I, we went there and went into the house.  But people were calling up and saying to my mother, people are going into your house and taking doors off--the inner doors, and people are doing this or that, so then my mother decided well, we're not going to go back to Virginia, so we may as well sell it, and that's what we did.  They sold it to a relative.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is how you met your husband, this story, that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes at the roller skating rink, I was fifteen and he was seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, that's your best memory, it seems like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 390929
Speaker 1: What do you remember when you were a little kid?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well we didn't have television, you know, and we didn't even have a radio.  I just remember playing around the house, in our neighborhood, in our backyards, and going to Sunday school, going to church and going to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], we had to do that every Sunday.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Shiloh Baptist Church [Tarrytown, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, Shiloh Baptist Church, and so BTU, that's the Baptist Training Union, right?
Speaker 2: Yes the training session where it was like five o'clock in the afternoon but we had to go like to Sunday school which was like nine o'clock.  We had to go, and then church started like ten o'clock, and we had to stay for that.
Speaker 1: You were in church a long time.
Speaker 2: All the time, all the time, we had to go.  But then it was a lot of fun because we were there with all of our friends.  So we had North Tarrytown [Sleepy Hollow, New York] and Tarrytown and we only had one church, so the North Tarrytowns came over and we had a chance to see them because they didn't go to the same school that we went to.  The only time that we saw our friends was in school.  We were not allowed as young children, like even with my grands here now, you know, we were not allowed to play around in the neighborhood.  We had to play in front of the house, we had to.
Speaker 1: That wasn't true for everybody, was it?
Speaker 2: No.  Well you know, it's just like now, you know, you could tell your children what not to do and they'll slip out and do it, you know.  We tried that too, you know, we got punished--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so we didn't do it.
Story_ID: 390930
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid?  What were you like and where did you fall in the order of the seven children?
Speaker 2: Number three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the third one, the first girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your personality like growing up?
Speaker 2: They told me I was a sweet little thing.  That I got along with everyone, and I know I had to make sure that my room was clean, my brothers--three, two were older and one was younger.  They had a room and my mother [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] would say to me if I was finished with my room, "Go over there and help them clean their room," and I couldn't understand that, you know, three against one (laughter) but I still had to do that.  I did not have to cook, and even today I don't know how to cook a lot of things.  Now I'm not concerned, but I never had to cook anything at home, not for the family because between my dad [Samuel Kyle] and my mom the food was cooked and prepared.  If you didn't eat it--you have probably have heard of they put it in a warming oven or up above the oven and if you didn't eat it all you had to go back and finish that before you got anything else.  I would have to stand, well like a double boiler in the morning cooking that oatmeal.  I had to make sure I had to keep stirring that.  If my mom was making a cake I would have to be--like she put the flour and the butter together, I would have to mix the sugar and everything like that for her, but that's all I had to do as far as cooking.  I did not have to wash; I did not have to iron clothes or nothing like that.  I just had to go to school and do my homework.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you like doing when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: What did I like doing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Dancing, and having fun at parties, when I got to the age that I could participate in something like that.  I liked going to church [Shiloh Baptist Church, Tarrytown, New York], I've always liked that.  I like speaking, like the kid said, being shown.
Speaker 1: Okay so on those days like Easter you'd have a recitation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Well some people remember.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I'm eighty-two years old, I don't have memories that far back.  I just remember that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Did you sing in the choir?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and I loved singing, and where I went to school, we were taught how to read music, you know, and I have a piano.  That piano upstairs is my piano.  Then after we moved here [Atlanta, Georgia], the kids gave me a keyboard, and that was one thing my husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] always wanted me to do.  He always--like we have seniors programs during the year, he'd always say, "Go ahead Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry], play something," and I would never do it.
Speaker 1: So you knew how to play but you never did.
Speaker 2: I can read a little, you know what I mean?  I can read a little bit, enough to--I could play enough for him and I to listen to.  You know, I only play church music, nothing popular.
Story_ID: 390931
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: My school?
Speaker 1: The first school.
Speaker 2: The first one was, oh my goodness, F.R. Pierson Grammar School [Tarrytown, New York], P-I-E-R-S-O-N (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) F.R. Pierson.  Do you know who F.R. Pierson was?
Speaker 2: No.  I did.  That was on Broadway in Tarrytown [New York], and then when I went to Washington Irving High School [Tarrytown, New York] where I graduated.
Speaker 1: Was Washington Irving from around here?
Speaker 2: Yes, Irvington, he was from Irvington [New York] and we went there many times during the school term.
Speaker 1: So was the white population heavily Dutch in that area?
Speaker 2: Yes, all through school there were never any more than six or seven blacks in my class, and we did not even have a black teacher the whole time I went to school.  They have some there now but the whole time I was in the school system there was nothing; not in the grammar school nor in the high school.
Speaker 1: Tarrytown, that's--so is Tarrytown sort of in the mountains?
Speaker 2: No it's like thirty-three miles north of Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay that was very close (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there are some mountains if you're going up through Elmsford [New York] or something but actually not in the mountains.
Speaker 1: Those are the Ramapo [Ramapo Mountains]?  I'm trying to think now, maybe I shouldn't speculate out loud (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you ever hear of White Plains [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Really well we--actually we did our main shopping not for food but for clothing in White Plains, New Rochelle [New York], Yonkers [New York], Port Chester [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So how did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved it and I was a good student (laughter).  I had to--when I was going into high school you always bring your paperwork home and your parents had to help you select what you wanted, what courses you wanted to take, and of course, I took shorthand, typing but I had to take home economics, sewing and cooking.  My mama [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] always would tell me and tell us that if she and my father [Samuel Kyle] had any money, if she'd send anyone to college, it would be boys.  Women, we needed to learn how to cook and to sew and to be good housewives.  But I still--I wanted to take shorthand and typing, and I took French for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a favorite course in school?
Speaker 2: My favorite course was typing (laughter) and shorthand that was my favorite.  I was so thrilled when--if you ask me now to write something in shorthand I can't do it.  But you know, we didn't have computers like today, but I really enjoyed very much the shorthand.  I was good at it too, I really was.
Speaker 1: How was your social life in school?  Were all the students treated basically the same?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and I had very nice friends in my class, the white boys and girls.  There were seven of us in my class--I mean the coloreds, the black children, and we were really close.
Speaker 1: Let's see, were there any special teachers or mentors in school that guided you or spent special time with you?
Speaker 2: No, we were all treated by all of them the same.  There were none that was any--not at all, through school I liked all my teachers.
Speaker 1: But you didn't have a favorite?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 390932
Speaker 1: When you went to high school [Washington Irving High School, Tarrytown, New York], did things basically stay the same in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did they--did you all have a prom in that school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we had a prom.  We had--oh golly I have all that in my book.  We had a prom--that's been so many years but it was really nice.  We had a dance and everything.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any clubs in school?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't because I could not participate in any after school activities, I couldn't.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because my mom [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] just said I had to come home from school and then when I was, I guess in my sophomore year, a lady in the church where my father [Samuel Kyle] was the janitor, she wanted someone to come to her house and help her.  She had three children and she needed someone after school to help her prepare dinner.  Light things, set up the table, and see that the little boy had his bath after dinner, and I took that job.  I was getting fifteen dollars for the month, not the week, fifteen dollars for the month.  And I had to just walk from the high school up the hill to their house and just go in and mingle with the children.  I did not have to help them with homework.  I would help her, like she would maybe peel potatoes or mash potatoes, you know, something light, set the table and it was my job to serve the family.
Speaker 1: So is this about 1939 or '40 [1940]?
Speaker 2: Yes, and then after Charlie [ph.] was a little boy, whenever he was in the bathtub he always wanted me to read a story to him.  You would never guess the name of the story he always wanted me to read to him, 'Little Black Sambo' ['The Story of Little Black Sambo,' Helen Bannerman].  When I would get to the word black sometimes I would read fast over it, you know, I didn't want to say it, and he would say, "You didn't say that."  And I stayed there with them until the year when I graduated, but then shortly after I was working for her another lady spoke to my father, her name was Mrs. Vetter [ph.], and she had a hat shop on Main Street there in Tarrytown [New York], and she wanted to know if I could come over and work just on Saturdays in her shop.  And my main job was to put trimming on the beautiful hats for the girls.  I think we had Marymount College in Tarrytown.  It was predominantly white, and the girls like at Eastertime or special holidays, they would have beautiful suits made and bring pieces of material over and we would make hats to go with their suits and it was my job to put the lining in and she taught me a lot.  She taught me a lot.  And I got two dollars a week working on Saturday for her.
Story_ID: 390933
Speaker 1: You met your husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] when you were fifteen, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He wasn't your husband then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did he continue to come and visit you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, every now and then he would come.  You know, I couldn't have company like kids can today, you know.  No, he would come like maybe every other Sunday, and he knew what time he had to go.  We were just allowed to sit in the living room, and by that time we got a radio, and we'd listen to the radio.  Then I had a chance to go and meet his mother which I was scared to death to meet her.  I'll never forget it.  She walked around the table where I was sitting and she said, "Oh your hair is beautiful."  I had black hair then and she said, "This is very nice."  But she never said too much about the fact of he and I going together.  But then on Thanksgiving one year she invited me, and we went, we all went together to New Jersey--over to Newark, New Jersey for Thanksgiving dinner.  That's when I was introduced to the family, her brothers, and they acted like they liked me and I had met his sister [Dorothea Cherry Wiggins], Lamon's sister, she lived in Ossining [New York], you know, and she went to nursing school--
Story_ID: 390934
Speaker 1: You met Lamon's [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] family in Ossining [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, his sister [Dorothea Cherry Wiggins] and his mother, yes.
Speaker 1: So everything turned out all right?
Speaker 2: Yes, his sister is very nice, in fact we're still--in fact our birthday's the same but only she is three years older than I am, but we're still friends today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were in high school [Washington Irving High School, Tarrytown, New York] you already had a boyfriend, so you didn't have to worry about that.
Speaker 2: Right, but you know what boyfriends were like then, you know, not like today.
Speaker 1: No, that's right.
Speaker 2: You hardly--three months it took my husband before he kissed me, three whole months, and we were going upstairs, and I had a couple of girlfriends who had come over.  I tried to put him off onto my girlfriends, you know.  Said, "You can have him."  You know, like this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were uncomfortable having a boyfriend actually?
Speaker 2: Yeah because I knew--things are different, you know, and so going upstairs we were the last couple going up, and he grabbed me and he kissed me and he had the nerve to say to me, "I know you've been waiting for this as long as I have."  (Laughter) Maybe I had, but he didn't have to say it like that, you know.  So that was my first kiss, I was fifteen and he was seventeen, three months it took him to kiss me.
Speaker 1: So he was a senior in high school in Ossining?
Speaker 2: He quit school in his senior year to go to work at a store called Daniel Reeves [Daniel Reeves Stores], which was a grocery store in Ossining.  This man offered this job to him and he felt that he could help his mother and his sister because his sister had just started going to nursing school in Manhattan [New York].  The guy's name was Phil Guinan [ph.], and he gave him this job, and Lamon really liked it.  He was waiting on the customers and everything, and he worked there until--well when he got to the end of that year, he, that's when he went to his father's [Lamon Bernard Cherry].  He went to North Carolina, down to North Carolina to his father.  He went with another friend, a guy from Ossining and because they said they were getting ready, I think it was the outbreak of the war, World War II [WWII], and you know how they say if you--well this is what they said then.  If you were in this area and were inducted into service, you would probably be shipped far away.  So he went to Virginia thinking he was going to be shipped up our way, you know, to the camp in our area but he wasn't.  He went to Louisiana and every place.  All these southern states he went to, and then they shipped him overseas, and he went overseas, and that's when he wrote and asked my mother [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle] if he could marry me.
Speaker 1: So he didn't ask you, he asked your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he asked my mother, and my mother said, did I want her to answer the letter, and I said, yes.  She said, "What do you want me to tell him?"  I said, "Tell him yes," and so she said, "If he and you become engaged, you cannot go out with any other boys," and I said okay and that's the way it was.  So then his mother sent me a postcard, something like a month later, she mailed me a postcard and asked me to come to Ossining because she had something for me.  I had no idea what she had and I went up there and she had my ring.  She had purchased the ring for him and she gave it to me, and then my mom put an announcement in the Tarrytown Daily News that he and I were engaged.
Speaker 1: Now this is amazing, the formality of all this is amazing to people these days I think, you know, how this took place (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 390935
Speaker 1: Now this is the Depression [Great Depression] too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is right--did you have a sense that you were living through the Great Depression?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but it wasn't so bad because my father [Samuel Kyle], like I said, he worked on--for the sanitation, and he was always able to get food from the stores when they would pick up the trash or the garbage from them, especially on Wednesdays, that's when my dad was able to get things.  My dad was the only one bringing in money in the house, and the little money that I was making, you know, that was just enough to buy little personal things for me.  Fifteen dollars a month, you know, that was nothing, and when the lady was giving me the two dollars on Saturday, before I'd get home I had spent that, buying something.  But it was a good life, it was a lovable life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you graduated from high school [Washington Irving High School, Tarrytown, New York], you graduated in what?
Speaker 2: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: So your fiance [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] is in the [U.S.] Army, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you graduated?
Speaker 2: I went to work at--when I graduated, that was when the war started, World War II [WWII], and then I went to work at Eastern Aircraft [Eastern Aircraft Division, General Motors Corporation], and that's where I told you I was a buffer, making airplane wings.
Speaker 1: That's Eastern Aircraft?
Speaker 2: Eastern Aircraft, it was in Tarrytown [New York].
Speaker 1: And you served as a buffer, now this is historic 'cause women couldn't get these kinds of jobs before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was there, and on the line too.  We made so many airplane wings on our shift for the day.  You know what a buffer is?
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: That was my job.
Speaker 1: So you had to make sure the wing was polished.
Speaker 2: Yes--no I was a buffer.  You know how we use the machine for putting in--like a screw, it's like a screw.  Somebody is on the top shooting this nail in, and I'm a buffer, I'm holding underneath this thing and when it comes down, it's making it flat on the bottom.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, I never would have guessed that.
Speaker 2: When I was working then, that's what I was called, the buffer because that was my job to hold that block underneath as they were putting in this thing in the airplane wing.  And there were many holes all the way around that we worked on, and I think we did like four wings per shift.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you worked at Eastern during the war, right?
Speaker 2: I worked there two years, and when the war was over immediately our job was terminated, and then I went to Reader's Digest, and I was a graphic typist.  We didn't have computers then either, and I was good at that job.
Speaker 1: So you had a manual typewriter then or electric (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, manual, and I was good at that job because like I said, that's what I always wanted to do is be a typist, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it exciting at Reader's Digest then?
Speaker 2: Yes it was a lot of reading, you know, reading the articles that were submitted.  It was really interesting, and we had a monitor who would walk in between it.  There were words that you could not understand, you just beckoned for them to come over and they would help you out.
Speaker 1: So the work basically came to you longhand or in shorthand?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was longhand.
Speaker 1: So the writers would write the story longhand and send it in and you would type it.  A monitor would determine the words--the unintelligible words (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes, and then someone would--after everything was finished they would take the whole thing and go over it and set it up properly, you know, but that was our job and I worked there for a year--a whole year.
Story_ID: 390936
Speaker 1: And then the war [World War II, WWII] was over, and Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] came home December 18, 1945, and right away, you know, we knew we were going to get married, so we picked a date and then we bought furniture.  My mother-in-law was living in the Bronx [New York], and she said that we could live with her, she and my sister-in-law.  They had moved from Ossining [New York] to the Bronx on 169th Street.  So we could have the small bedroom, she and Dot [Dorothea Cherry Wiggins] had the large bedroom, and that's what we did.  We went and bought bedroom furniture, and then Lamon went to Windsor [North Carolina] to visit his father [Lamon Bernard Cherry], and when he came back, we got married on a Tuesday, January 29.
Speaker 2: Of what year?
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you continue to work after you were married?
Speaker 1: Well no I stopped working just before got married because I knew we were going to move to the Bronx, and there was no way that I could go to Pleasantville [New York] or White Plains [New York] and work for Reader's Digest.  So then after we got married, that's when Lamon went to--I told you he went to refrigeration school, and I went looking for a job.  I told him I wanted to go to work.  Well, my mother-in-law was taking care of little children in the neighborhood, so we said to my mother-in-law, do you think you could stay home--oh no wait a minute, I'm a little ahead of myself.  Before we went--when we got married, January 29th, I got pregnant right away that's what it was, and Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian] was born December 1946, and so then that's when I went to look for a job in 1947.  We said to my mother-in-law, would she stop her job--she had a domestic job in Manhattan [New York].  She went to work by twelve o'clock and didn't get home until after eight o'clock, after serving dinner, she was making fifteen dollars a week and we told her we would give her twenty.  And she stopped.  She had to think about it 'cause she had been working for these people for a long time.  So then she gave up her job, and she started taking care of my daughter, and then other people would bring over their babies and she would take care of them too.
Story_ID: 390937
Speaker 1: And that's when I went to work for Frank Novelty Company.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I worked there forty-one years.
Speaker 2: Forty-one years, okay, and they make leather and plastic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Leather and plastic goods for the church trade.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: My boss had just been in the country about three months.  He came from Germany, and he was living in Brooklyn [New York], and he started the business himself.
Speaker 2: Was he a Jewish immigrant?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was Jewish.  The best person to work for.
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Alfred Franken.
Speaker 2: Okay, Alfred Franken sounds like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) F-R-A-N-K-E-N.
Speaker 2: There's a big comedian now called Al Franken, he's a political commentator.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: You think he might be related?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Al Franken.
Speaker 1: It used to be so interesting to sit with Mr. Franken, and he would talk about the things that went on in Germany with Hitler [Adolf Hitler].  He told me a story once how he came home, and he said, he and his wife came in and the lights were on in the house, and he was petrified, and then she remembered that she had left a light on in the house, she had not turned it off.  They were afraid to go into the house because things were very bad.
Speaker 2: Yes, he came over after the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So he was there during the Holocaust.
Speaker 1: Yes he was there during the Holocaust.  He showed us pictures and everything, and would tell stories all of the time about the many persons that they killed, you know.
Speaker 2: Was he incarcerated in the camps himself?
Speaker 1: No, no and he said he sent his son--he had only one son, Harold [Harold Franken]--and Harold lives here someplace in Dunwoody [Georgia] his son.  But he sent his son to England to go to school and everything.  He didn't want him to have anything to do with living in Germany, and Harold lived there until he got grown, and then he went to New York, and that's who he had when I was there; just he, his wife and Harold, and a couple of other women.  He was just starting his business, and when I went there--I went to the unemployment agency to buy my job, you know I had to pay for it and when I went in the office, he said, "What do you want to do?"  And I said, "What do you want me to do?"  He said, did I want to work on the table, gluing?  We used to glue velvet--the cases we used to make were covered with--the inside with velvet, they were plastic and leather and so I said, "Well I'm looking for a job and I'll do whatever you want me to do."  And then we started getting more orders and producing more, employing more people.  But I was there two weeks, and he made me the production manager, and that started my life.  It taught me a lot.  The main thing it taught me was, treat people like you want to be treated.  Further along in life when the business was really growing, we were really hiring people, and I made a mistake one day, I called the unemployment office and I told them we had a special project and we had to get it out and I needed at least twenty girls.  Most of the people we hired were girls, and I said, "Please don't send me any Puerto Ricans or Spanish people," and that almost got me in trouble.  She told me you cannot discriminate against anybody.  I said, "I'm not discriminating but they don't understand," and it's very difficult because we were working on heat-sealing machines and if you know anything about heat-sealing you have to be aware because if that machine comes down on your hand, you know, you're going to lose your hand.
Story_ID: 390938
Speaker 1: You got married in 1946, you got--started a new job [at the Frank Novelty Company], and so what were the--were there any challenges in this job--any big challenges?  Did you ever have a day where things seemed to fall apart?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, you know, mixing the different personalities was the thing that was hard.  Especially, I found out women, they are more trouble than men.  You can tell a man what you want him to do, I felt you could tell and explain to a man, but a woman it just took more.  And especially like we had six heat sealing machines, now everything is laminated but then we were sealing, so of course you had to be very careful.  We had people who had to insert the cards, the girls would make the shells first with the heat sealing machine and we had eight cards on a sheet, four and four.  Then we would give them--like even my son [Lamon Cherry, Jr.]--all the children in the church would come to work with me during the summer.  They would insert thousands of cards and then we would take them into the girls and the girl sitting on the machine would just pick up one, put it there, step on the thing, the machine would come down, flip it over and do the other side.  So this is really work you have to constantly do, not stop, look around and talk.  The machine has to keep sealing.  It's not going by itself but you have to keep your foot right on it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You have to keep the production rolling along.
Speaker 2: Yes and that was the hard part for me to get them to understand that.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things did the company make?
Speaker 2: We made prayer cards--it was mainly prayer cards that we made, and then we made book covers.  Like we made leather covers for the Bibles, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But the leather covers were mostly the expensive ones, were hand sewn, I mean, sewn on the sewing machine, you know.  But we did a lot of sealing.
Story_ID: 390939
Speaker 1: The women would sit on the sewing machine and sew them.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And we'd make thousands and thousands and thousands, and then we made the little chapel caps.  Especially Catholic people years ago they did not go into the church--the cathedral without something on their head, and so we made them in all colors.  I experienced that once when we went to Canada, and we wanted to go into the cathedral up there in Montreal, and the taxi driver--the tour guide said, "Miss, do you have something to put on your head?"  And I said, "No, I need a cover on my head?"  And he said, "Oh yes, you wouldn't go in there like that.  Your husband have a hanky or something?"  So Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] had a hanky and he said, "Put that on your hair and go in like that," and I said okay.  So that taught me a lesson whenever I was going someplace, I always made sure I had something in my pocketbook 'cause I didn't want to, you know, do the wrong thing.
Speaker 2: Are there any good stories from the job that you can tell?
Speaker 1: Well we used to celebrate birthdays, everybody's birthday that we knew we celebrated that right in the plant there, and Christmas was always a big affair.  Everybody went out for dinner, the boss took care of it.  My boss, he loved my husband.  He told Lamon--when Lamon didn't get a job in refrigeration he went to school again for auto body and fender, and that's when my boss said, "I don't care how many degrees he has, I want him to come and work for me."  So I said, "What is he going to do?"  And he said, "He's going to be a printer and I'm going to send him to school," which he sent Lamon to school to be a printer on the Multilith machine.  My husband for thirty-seven years, he was a printer for the company [Frank Novelty Company].  My boss said to me one day, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry], I want you to give Lamon a couple of extra dollars in his salary," and I said, "What happened now?"  He said, "Because I want him to come to work dressed, so when I want to go out to have something to eat, I want him to take me."  I said, "Mr. Franken [Alfred Franken], Lamon has plenty of clothes," you know, he says, "Well I want him to have extra money and I want him to understand when I want to go out for lunch, I don't want him to go out with his pants, with ink on it and everything."  So I told Lamon, so we brought clothes to the job and hung them up so whenever the boss wanted to go out, all Lamon would have to do is wash up and change his clothes.  He liked my husband, he bought the car--the station wagon--and we had the company car, that was our car for all those years, we did not have to worry about a car, insurance nothing, gas or nothing because he furnished the car.  And at summertime, people were--when school was closed members of my community at church were calling me to say, can you please hire my daughter, could you hire my son and of course you know the station wagon with Lamon and I in it, we only had space for about four children, and we would bring them.  Many people would say, "I don't care if you don't have room, we'll see that the children get there," and they worked for us plus my grands, I have four grandsons, all four of them worked every summer that they could, plus my children Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian], Rose [Rose Cherry] and Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Jr.], they worked, they worked with me.
Story_ID: 390940
Speaker 1: Now tell the story, now you--when I came in you were telling me the story of how your husband, Lamon, Sr. [Lamon Cherry, Sr.], was training to become an expert in refrigeration, and was offered a job across the street from where you lived in the Bronx [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: And what happened, tell me what happened?
Speaker 2: Well see, what had happened was while he was in school he would go over because the shop was right in front of our house and he would go over there and talk to the men who were in charge of this and they knew where he was going to school and everything.  They took him with them on Saturdays, on the job training they called it, and he loved it.  And then one day he went over there and they said, "Lamon, we have to talk to you, we can't take you with us anymore."  He asked them, "What are you talking about?"  He said, "What are you?"  And Lamon said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Well we saw you with a colored woman," now here we're living in front of them and he knew we lived there, he knew Lamon lived there, what did he think I was the maid or something.  And he said, "I saw you," and Lamon said, "That's my wife."  "Your wife, what are you doing with a colored woman?"  And he said, "I'm colored," and they said, "You are?"  And he said yes.  They said, "Oh Lamon, we can't take you with us anymore," and he said, "Why not?"  And they said, "The people wouldn't allow this, they would not allow us to bring a colored man into the house," and just like that they let him go.  He was not being paid; he was just getting the experience fixing the refrigerators.  Yes, and they let him go.
Speaker 1: What nationality were the men there who worked across the street?
Speaker 2: I don't know I just know they were white, and I was shocked, I really was shocked.  You know, because it wasn't like he had only done it once, and so Lamon said, "Oh that's okay."
Speaker 1: Now did you share the opinion that your husband looked like he was white?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, even more so when he was younger he really did, he really did look white.
Story_ID: 390941
Speaker 1: What's the family story there?  Now he's from North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is the family story?
Speaker 2: His grandmother, her picture is on that wall over there too, Mary Cherry was her name, Mary Elizabeth Cherry, and she went with this judge, Martin [ph.], he was the judge of Windsor, North Carolina, and I know the first time Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] took me down there to visit his father I was so impressed because they had such a beautiful home and acres of property, and I said to Lamon, "Wow your dad is all right."  But see I didn't know anything about history then.  I think there were eight children in the family and we knew--well we visited with at least two of the sisters.  I don't remember too much about my father-in-law's brothers, but we knew there was something there because the first time dad, I called him, whenever I would go there he'd just loved me so.  He showed that he loved me, and he said, "What do you like to eat?"  And I said, "I love liver," and he said, "Really?"  And he was a cook and he was left-handed.  He said, "Okay let's go to the store," and we would go to the store, like if I go to the store I'd buy a pound of liver, now him he bought a lot of liver because I said I liked liver and he knew we were going to be there a while.  Anything, and like those little peppermint balls--candy balls he would buy the whole big jar.  He just showered me with everything and I felt in my heart, he really likes me.  And he treated me with great respect and I did the same with him.  Whenever he would cook he would say, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry], whatever you want I'm fixing it for you," and I would say, "Okay dad, okay."  That's the way our life with him was, and one day someone knocked on the door, and they were two or three colored men, and they said, "Can I speak to Mr. Cherry," and I said sure.  I went and got him and they said, "We're ready," and he said, "Okay, when do you want to go?"  And they said, "Can we go tomorrow?"  And so what they were talking about, dad took their crops which they raised, and he took it to Raleigh, North Carolina because a white man got more for his tobacco and his other crops than the black man.  And they would take whatever they made and they would share with him, and he did that all the time.  He had three farms himself, and he had three tenant farmers there living on his property.  Like it was during the month of November, I believe, when they all gathered their crops together and the main thing was tobacco that they were selling, and that's how he made--
Speaker 1: And what was his name--he was a judge?
Speaker 2: This is my father-in-law.
Speaker 1: Your father-in-law.
Speaker 2: But the judge, his name was Martin, Judge Martin, and he was definitely white.
Speaker 1: Okay and your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had all these children by my husband's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, so he would be the grandfather--
Speaker 2: He wasn't married to them.
Speaker 1: His father is who you're talking about now.  What was his father's name?
Speaker 2: His father's name was Lamon Bernard Cherry, B-E-R-N-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  This is interesting now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One year we went to visit Lamon's dad and he was having--on the main road going into Williamston, North Carolina, he was having a gas station--his own business, operating a gas station and he was a building an apartment above the gas station, and he told Lamon, he said, "This would be a good project for you.  You and Mary can come down here and live and operate--you know, be in charge of this business for me."  Lamon told him he'd have to ask me and he told Lamon, "You're the man, you make the decision and the wife will follow."  Lamon told him, "No dad, we don't do it like that."  He knew I wasn't going to do it and he said, "No dad we don't do things like that."  My father-in-law had his own beer garden.  I have a picture, a nice picture of him as the operator of this business, and Lamon worked with him for a while in the beer garden.  That was in Williamston, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So that's an interesting story.  So he was able to use his complexion to get a better deal, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes and he did it for other people, you know, and they gave him a portion of what he got, you know?
Story_ID: 390942
Speaker 1: Was your husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] ever tempted to pass for white?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he never wanted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He never--if he passed it was a time like he didn't know that he was because that happened to us in Richmond, Virginia.  Our car had broken down on us and we were going back there to get our car back to Windsor [North Carolina] and we took the bus from New York, and when the bus stopped in the bus terminal there in Richmond, Lamon--Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian], she was the baby, she got off and Lamon, he saw the sign above the steps going up that said restaurant, and he said, "I'll be up there," and I said okay.  So we went on into the bathroom, when I came out of the bathroom I looked and I didn't see any colored people going upstairs.  So this man was sweeping the floor there and I went over to him and I said, "Excuse me sir can you tell me where I can get something to eat?"  And he said, "Yes you go out this door down on the corner, there's a little stand there and you can get something."  And I said, "But I saw my husband go upstairs," and he says, "Oh no they don't serve us upstairs, so he's not up there."  So I went outside and looked in and I went down to the corner to the stand and got something for Cheryl and I'm so furious and I said, "Where in the world is he?"  When I came back we just took a seat, I sat there with my eyes looking at those steps and finally I saw Lamon come down and he said the look on my face told him something was wrong.  And I said, "The man told me they wouldn't serve you upstairs."  And he said, "What happened?" and I told him.  He said, "I was wondering, I didn't see anybody up there," and he said, "What happened?"  And I said, "He told me to go around to the corner and get Cheryl something on the corner."  Lamon said, "Let's go out there," so we went out there and he stood up there and got some coffee or something because he said if anyone would have seen him they could have said, hey, he was trying to impersonate a white person, you know.  He stood there and then we said oh this is something, we've got to hurry up and get out of here.  We waited for the bus because the bus was taking us further up where his father [Lamon Bernard Cherry] was going to meet us in Richmond.
Speaker 1: So whether you were down south or up north it's still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same thing.  Happened to us in New Jersey crossing the George Washington Bridge, we were heading south and Lamon saw a diner just on the right side of the road and he said, "Let's go in here and get something to eat."  As we walked in he started talking 'cause he was a person who would always talk, good morning, good morning how are you, and the man said, "I'm fine," so Lamon said, "What do you have to eat?"  And he said, "We have everything but you can't eat in here," and Lamon said, "I can't eat in here," and he says, "No, no, no."  So we turned around to walk away and he said, "Well wait a minute if you want to go around in the back I can pass it out to you," and we said, we're not that hungry.  Because had heard about that in the South that people were told, "Go around the back and get your food."  So he said, "But wait a minute I'll tell you something, if you continue on up the road you'll come to a nice place that will cater to you people and it's called Hilltop [ph.]," and so we got in the car and we went on.  He said, it's on the left side, and as we approached this place, beautiful brick building that said Hilltop, and it said, catering to sepias, and I didn't know what sepia meant, I did not know.  I had never heard that word.
Speaker 1: S-E-P-I-A, sepia?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I said, "I'm not going in there because I don't know what a sepia is," but the man had told us they cater to people of your color so it had to be us.  So later on that evening when I was talking with my daughter Rose [Rose Cherry], she said, "Ma, that means people of color."  How did I know, I had never heard that word, you know, and so we ate there.  But there were many places we had gone and we were told that they did not serve colored people.  Everything said, go around the back and we'll pass it out.
Story_ID: 390943
Speaker 1: When did things start to change then?
Speaker 2: Oh golly.
Speaker 1: Or do you think some of those places are still the same?
Speaker 2: Well you know when my daughter Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian] moved here [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1979, so it had to have been around '79 [1979] or 1980 when she was traveling to Birmingham [Alabama] or someplace, and she said she wanted to use the bathroom, and they told her that colored people couldn't use the bathroom.  And--
Speaker 1: Say, yes we can, just watch us.
Speaker 2: And so she said she was scared when they told her that, she was really frightened, and they told her they were sorry she couldn't use it.  And she was in there getting something to eat but she couldn't use the bathroom and they told her to go to a gas station--to a filling station and that they would have bathrooms there and she could use that.  And she was scared, she said she didn't want to--she was driving herself and she said she would never do that again.  And I don't think she's ever tried that since.
Speaker 1: So did they start really changing in the late '60s [1960s] as the Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and that was a good thing.  Even up in New York you know like the men said they used to go into the bar and just have a glass of beer or something, and they had to stand on certain parts of the room or sit in certain sections of the room.  They couldn't just do what they wanted to do, you know.  But things got better, but the only thing that I always say is that we always thought and people always thought everything was bad in the South because that's the way it was portrayed on the television.  The first television we got was when we got married, you know, 1946, but then after everything started happening with the civil rights and everything and you would watch it, and it was just unbelievable how they were mistreating people here.  It was more open than I think up in the North.  In the North it was more shady like, you know.  You sit there and the waitress would go around and wait on all tables and then finally they'd come over to you.
Story_ID: 390944
Speaker 1: Tell me like what sort of volunteer activities were you involved in when you were in Tarrytown [New York]?
Speaker 2: Nothing, I didn't volunteer for nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Did you deal with the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] at all or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh you mean like the PTA?
Speaker 1: Yeah all kinds of neighborhood stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right when Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian] was in grammar school, we went to all the PTA meetings and we found out that we were the ones in the kitchen preparing the meals, and everybody--you know like they used to have dances, and you could go out on the floor and dance.  Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] and I were dancing one evening on the floor and they came out and told us they needed us in the kitchen, and so we went in the kitchen but we didn't do it anymore because the next day I called the lady who was the president of the PTA who was always calling us to come, and I told her and she said oh she was sorry she had not seen that.  I told her, "Well it happened," and she said, "Well I promise you it will never happen again," which it did not happen.  And then one day Cheryl brought home her report card and she had an 85 [percent] on it but it was in red and it was circled.  So I said, "That's strange, 85 is a good mark, why is it like this," and see she lied.  And she said she didn't know.  So the teacher wanted us to come to the school to find out--she wanted to talk to us.  So I went to the school and she told, "Cheryl didn't have an 85, she had a 55 [percent] and she changed that and she circled it and she made it red."  Cheryl changed the five to an eight just to get by with us.  So then she said, "Well I'm glad you're here because I want to talk to you."  She said, "Cheryl comes to school all the time with such nice clothes and she's dressed so nice but I think you should know that some of the children that she pals around with I don't think you would want them to be with her.  And want her to be with them."  And I said, "Why not?"  And she said, "Well you know they live in the projects," and I said, "What is the projects," and she said, "People who are the lower class."  I said, "So are we, we're just blessed that we're able to live in a house."  Then another time she, the same teacher, something happened because she said Cheryl always has candy or lollipops or gum, you know, most children don't have freedom like this, and she said to Cheryl, you know, I want to see your father, I just want to know who your father is because Cheryl had said I'm going to tell my father, you're always picking on me.  She said, "I want to see him; I just want to know who your father is."  That day Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] got up, he told me, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry] you can drive on to work, I'm going to school."  He got up, put on his Sunday go to meeting clothes, went up there to the school and he said that when he walked in the teacher said, "Can I help you sir?"  And he said, "Yes, I'm Cheryl Cherry's father, I just stopped by to say hello to you."  He said she dropped her pencil and said, "Oh Mr. Cherry I'm so happy to meet you, I am so happy."  See, she was shocked; she didn't know who he was either, you know.
Speaker 1: Well just his looks or is that you're saying he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he was younger he looked like a white man.  He really did when he was younger.
Story_ID: 390945
Speaker 1: You lived in Tarrytown [New York] for many years, until '87 [1987] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived there until forty--oh I lived in Tarrytown until I got married.  And I got married in '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Oh, you lived in New York--
Speaker 2: Then I lived six years in the Bronx [New York] and then in 1952 we moved to Ossining [New York] and that's where we lived until 1987, and then we moved here.
Speaker 1: Okay so Tarrytown to the Bronx to Ossining.  Okay, all right.  How did you wind up living in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: My daughter Rose [Rose Cherry], she had gone to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and called me one week and said she wanted to--she said, "What would you think if I told you I wanted to go to Atlanta, Georgia to get my master's [degree]?"  I said, "What?  After all the money we struggled to pay to send you to Boston University, you want to go south?"  And she said, "Yes, I would like to go to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get my master's."  I said, "When do you want to go?"  And she said, "I would like to go this weekend," because they had open house or something.  And I couldn't get off from my job so I told Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian], I said, "You go with her and I'll pay your way," and another girl came with them and they came down here.  And I'm telling you, it was really thrilling when they called me that night and they said, "Ma you'll never guess where we're staying," and I said, "Where?"  "We're staying at a black hotel."  They were in Paschal's [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia].  We didn't even have a white hotel in Ossining.  They were at Paschal's.
Story_ID: 390946
Speaker 1: You were talking about what attracted you to Atlanta [Georgia].  And you were talking about Paschal's [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] and the black businesses here.  You really hadn't seen--you didn't see that in Ossining [New York] or Tarrytown [New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at all, not at all, not even today after all those years.  But it was just amazing to come here and find out what was here, and like I said when my daughter wanted to come down here to go to school, I was really surprised that she was that deep into wanting to come here.  But before Rose [Rose Cherry] came here 'cause she came in '79 [1979], or '77 [1977] she came down here I think it was.  Well before then we had learned about Atlanta, Georgia only because in 1970 we gave a fiftieth wedding anniversary for our parents [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle and Samuel Kyle] and you would not believe what happened.  We had 420 people, and it was the nicest affair anyone had ever seen in Tarrytown.  On that Saturday they renewed--my mom and dad renewed their vows, and then we went into Elmsford, New York where we had the banquet at the Teamsters hall [Teamsters Local 456 Union Hall, Elmsford, New York].  Everything was beautiful and it was on a Saturday.  Sunday we had a lot of company that came from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], about twenty-two people.  They stayed over at hotels in White Plains [New York] and we invited them for dinner because the caterer gave us food that was left over.  But Monday the telephone was ringing and the first thing they were saying to us, "You better get yourself a lawyer."  We said, "Get a lawyer for what?"  And they said, "Because a lot of people are sick from the banquet for your mother and father's anniversary," and we had hired caterers from my church [Shiloh Baptist Church, Tarrytown, New York], but we did not know they were gonna prepare the food in my church.  We thought they were going to go because we had permission for them to cook at the Teamsters hall.  And so they were satisfied with everything and they suggested that we serve Cornish hens, wild rice, dressing, almandine string beans and rolls and we had ice cream in the shape--some place, they made it in the shape of a bell, and we had the bar.  My husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] said, "No one can have anything to drink until after they have eaten," because he didn't want anybody to get high.  Okay it was beautiful; it was the most beautiful affair.  They had ten women in gowns and ten guys with the tux on, the bow tie, it was beautiful.  So we said, "What happened, why do we have to get a lawyer?"  They said, "You're going to be sued because a lot of people got sick."  So that was on Monday morning, Tuesday the doorbell rang, here are two men from where, the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: The Center for Disease Control (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had come--yes, they had come up there.
Story_ID: 390947
Speaker 1: They asked for me, and my mom, my mother-in-law said, "Here she is," and I went to the door, and they said to me, what are you--something about can we talk to you and they wanted the list of names and telephone numbers and addresses of all of the guests.  And they told us.  But we said, "But what is wrong?"  I knew my mother-in-law was running to the bathroom, my husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] was running to the bathroom, but nothing was bothering me, nothing, and nobody else complained.  But then by later that evening I had a cousin from Detroit [Michigan], he was in the hospital.  He stayed, Leroy [ph.] stayed in the hospital a whole week, then people from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] called and said we had cousins over there that were in the hospital.  I said, well, gee they had two doses.  They came back on Sunday.  But as far as I know only one person got a thousand dollars and it was the A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] where the Cornish hens were bought.  On Broad Avenue in Ossining [New York] there the caterers had bought all they had and then they sent them to Briarcliff [Briarcliff Manor, New York] over in a white neighborhood--predominantly white neighborhood and they bought the rest of them over there.  Well, we got over that hurdle, and after they got all the addresses and telephone numbers, these men stayed up there in New York checking out everything.  Then after that the health department, they sent me a letter.  We had to go to the board of the health department.  But when the men came from the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia], they wanted to know where the food was cooked, and I told them and Reverend Jernigan [ph.] said he had cooked it at the church 'cause I called him and he told me.  They wanted to see my church, Shiloh Baptist Church in Tarrytown [New York].  So I called my pastor and he said yes, I take them down there.  Do you know they took baby swabs, and they went all over the refrigerator?  They said that was the nastiest refrigerator they had ever seen and they said it was the nastiest stove they had ever seen.  And you know the pipes--years ago the pipes were not covered under the ceiling and the pipes--you could see the paint, how the paint was cracked and everything.  But still I'm confused, why are these people sick?  We had never had Cornish hens and I'll tell you something that was 1970, I have never had Cornish hens since, I have never eaten it.  I've been on many occasions where they served it but not me, I'm afraid, I didn't eat it then.  They asked me why I didn't get sick and I said, "I was so excited, I was the one in charge, Lamon and I."  So I was excited, I really was excited.  Those little ashtrays over there, we passed those out to everybody that was there and I think I had seven left over.  And it was a beautiful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you weren't sued (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No, the A&P had to pay this one girl a thousand dollars.  That's the only one that I have heard of that received any money.  And maybe four or five years ago a member of my church told me if I wanted to get that information from the CDC, I could get it, and I wrote, and you should see what they sent me.
Speaker 2: What did they send you?
Speaker 1: Thousands of pages where salmonella had occurred in all parts of the country--of the United States.  They sent thousands of pages, in other words for me to search through there, and I tried, and I gave up.  I tried to find it but I thought they--because the man had told me they'll send you that and I said, "Really?"  And that's what I did.  I called up, gave them the date and everything.
Story_ID: 390948
Speaker 1: So let me pick up the Atlanta [Georgia] story again.  Now your daughters [Cheryl Cherry McMillian and Rose Cherry] moved here first?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then they--and then you and your husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] decided to move here.  Had you all retired then?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were still working?
Speaker 2: They moved here in '79 [1979], '78 [1978], '79 [1979], and my son Quincy [Lamon Cherry, Jr.], he graduated from high school, and my other granddaughter, she's getting ready to come in here.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: She followed Rose coming 'cause Rose came to go to school just for that year but then Rose loved it, and each time we came here we loved it, and that's what we kept saying, we're going to move to Atlanta in '87 [1987] when we retire, and that's what we did.
Speaker 1: So it's been a good place to live?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I love it.  The only thing that depressed me was leaving my church [Shiloh Baptist Church, Tarrytown, New York].  I cried, oh how can I leave all these people here.  I'd grown up with them.  My husband said, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Cherry], the same God we're serving here in New York is in Georgia, don't you know that?"  And I said, "I know but it's a different setting, it's a different group of people."  He said, "Don't worry about it, it will work out," and that's what we did.  We came on down here.
Speaker 1: Well what church did you choose down here?
Speaker 2: Star of Bethlehem [sic. Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], my church where I am now.  My pastor, he teaches theology at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], Reverend Parker [Aaron L. Parker].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the strange thing about that is when we joined that church, we joined under a Reverend Larry H. Williams, and Reverend--one Sunday we saw this young man sitting in the pulpit, and I looked on the program and it said Aaron Parker.  And I kept saying, no wonder that man looks familiar, we had met him when he was like sixteen years old up in New York.  He had come up with a choir.  I don't know if you remember how the choirs used to--well from the South they did to New York.
Speaker 1: They used to travel up to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would travel up there, put on concerts and everything and Reverend Parker was this young man, he had come up with the choir from Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] here.  But it was a black choir, he was in Emory so I don't know if, you know.  They had gone up to Mount Kisco [New York], where his sister lived, and the church where my sister-in-law [Dorothea Cherry Wiggins] was a member, and they had an extra day that they didn't have anything to do, and they called us and said, "Can we come over and bring this choir to put on a concert for you?"  So we said, "Yes what do we have to do?" They said, "Just call the people," in which we had to hurriedly call up members, "We're going to have a choir here on Saturday, come on over," and we told them the time, we had dinner prepared.  So when the choir came in, this young man, he stood there and--I tell him about it every time I talk to him now.  He's told all of us, his choir and all of the members of my church, to stand in a circle all around this huge dining room we had downstairs, and we all held hands, and he said a prayer, and from then on my church does the same thing.  But that was the first time that we had heard anyone do that, and everybody was so impressed by him being such a young person.  Then after they had the dinner, you know, they fellowshipped with us and everything and then later on they put on this concert, and it was spectacular.  They could really sing, and so I had said to my pastor, Reverend Williams, "That minister that was in the pulpit last Sunday, Reverend Parker I know him," and he said, "Oh no baby you don't know him, he's from Mississippi."  I said, "Mississippi?" and he said, "Yes, you don't know him," and I waited maybe two or three weeks later, and Reverend Parker was in the pulpit again, and I went up there and I asked him.  Yes, he didn't remember me but he remembered the situation and of course his sister is still up there now, and it's really strange because last Friday he was up in White Plains [New York] doing a banquet for a former student of his at Morehouse.  So he was telling everybody about it at the eight o'clock service Sunday morning.  He said, "I was up to Sister Cherry's neck of the woods," and so he remembers.  He's my pastor now because after Reverend Williams left, then we called him.
Story_ID: 390949
Speaker 1: Tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I would feel very happy if we could be more together, even a subdivision, you know.  Like here [Atlanta, Georgia], I know my neighbor on the left, my neighbor on the right, my neighbor down at the corner.  The reason why I know my neighbor down at the corner because it was the first time I'd ever saw that--is that the police squad that comes in, what do they call it, you know the people when they come in, they put a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) SWAT [Special Weapons And Tactics] team?
Speaker 2: The SWAT team, he had that incident down at his house so I know him (laughter) because that was my first time ever seeing that.  The police unloaded their cars right here, put their gear on, their helmets, and they were giving their rifles and they marched down to the corner but everything turned out all right because the young man gave up, it was the man's son, you know.  But I just feel that we should be together more especially now because it's so frightening now.  You're afraid to even let your children go in the street.  Like my grands when they want to play, I tell them they have to play in the driveway, they can't go out in the street.  I'm afraid for that, you know, and I think we should be more together.  But I have a lot of togetherness in my church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] because the people are from all over, you know, and we mingle all the time.  We have services twice on Sunday, you know, we're there all during the week, we have church school on Saturdays.  So we spend from 9:30 until twelve o'clock, you know, mingling with one another.
Story_ID: 390950
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, I mean, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us a little bit about your children.
Speaker 2: Well Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian] is the oldest, and she has four boys.  She's been married twice; both of her husbands are deceased.  And one boy lives in Michigan, Bloomfield, Michigan, and the oldest one lives up in New York in Mount Vernon, and the one that lives in Bloomfield is the third son.  The second son is a pastor of a church in Richmond, Virginia and he's married and he has a daughter and a lovely wife.  The third son, he also is a pastor of a church in some part of New Jersey, Packensacket [sic.] or something.
Speaker 1: Hackensack [New Jersey] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's with a P.
Speaker 1: It's not Paterson [New Jersey], it's not Piscataway [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Poughkeepsie, that's New York.
Speaker 2: No, Pennsauken, New Jersey [Pennsauken Township, New Jersey], and they're elders.  They have a congregation of about six thousand people.  He's not the pastor, he is a pastor in the church, he and his wife.  Both of them have served twenty years in the [U.S.] Navy, and his wife just retired last month and they both are on staff--paid staff at this church for the youth department.  She, in fact is the dean of the school, so that's the four boys.  Cheryl I told you works for Red Cross--American Red Cross.  Then the next one is Rose [Rose Cherry], she's the one that's leaving her job as a paralegal on Friday going to work as paralegal for American--Bank of America.  And then Quincy [Lamon Cherry, Jr.], that's the spoiled one (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's the junior, right?  He's in advertising?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he has a beautiful wife, LaDonna [LaDonna Cherry].  She works for Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] in the creative department and they have three children, two girls and a boy.  Rose just has Kristen [ph.] her daughter, who is a teacher.
Speaker 1: Is there any advice that you would give your grandchildren now?
Speaker 2: Yes, stay out of my refrigerator, leave my ice cream alone (laughter).  I always--well Roosevelt [ph.] and Bryan [ph.] I'm sure have Christ in their life, but I tell the others to draw closer to God, especially Scott [ph.] who has just moved to Bloomfield, Michigan.  He got married two years ago and he had a baby last year, and he's out there and we miss him because if anything was wrong all I'd have to do is pick up the phone and call Scott and he would be here.  But I'm constantly after him to get involved in something.  I tell everybody get in the church.  You know, I don't care if you're just sitting on the seat and listening to the message, you know, go, serve, serve if you can, and draw closer to God because without God we can't make it.
Story_ID: 390951
Speaker 1: Now you were saying earlier when I came in that you were surprised that in Atlanta [Georgia] that there is not as much celebration made over the birthday of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right, my church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], see I don't know what the other churches do, but my church does not do it, it does not 'cause when I asked Reverend Williams [Larry H. Williams], he said, "Baby, he puts his pants on just like I do."  In other words--like I belong to a fountain of life group that's the seniors in my church, fifty-five and older.  The most thrilling thing that happened to me--and I'm on the committee.  I work on the committee setting up trips and everything else but this particular trip I did not set up.  But you have no idea how thrilled and honored I was when we went to Selma, Alabama because I had grown up in New York and watched all of that. And you know when you watch things on the television sometimes you think that's not really happening and we could see the police with the water hose and the water was so forceful it was knocking children and people down, and how they were being treated on that Pettus Bridge [Edmund Pettus Bridge, Selma, Alabama], I could not believe it.  But when we went there that day, I was so thrilled, and we went by car.  We followed the bus, my husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] drove and when we got there I said, "Oh I've got to walk across this bridge," which we did.  We walked across the bridge and just the knowledge--the history that was put out about that, I was saying, are we really doing this?  After we had seen how people were mistreated, I just felt that was the greatest thing that we had ever done.  We even went to Birmingham, Alabama to that church you remember where they bombed the church and the four little girls (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 16th Street Baptist Church, yes we went there, and I remember all of that stuff that happened just watching the television in New York.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those names take on a mythical kind of quality, don't they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes really, I really enjoyed it and my husband did too because that was, to me that was real history.  You hear a lot of things and you say oh that didn't really happen, but when you actually go there to the place where it happened, it's a different feeling, totally different.  I really enjoyed that trip.
Story_ID: 390952
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My what?
Speaker 1: Your legacy.
Speaker 2: You know what my legacy is, the fifty-nine and a half years of a good life that I had with my husband [Lamon Cherry, Sr.].  So much so that I'm still in a grieving--going through a grieving process.  I just can't overcome it.  I just have all those memories of the things we did from the day we got married, and we have sent to each other, even if we only go to McDonald's to have a hamburger on our anniversary, we're going to celebrate every year our anniversary, which we did.  And trying to be a good mother, good Christian, good neighbor, good friend, that's what I always want to be.  You know, I just want people to remember me as [HistoryMaker] Mary Cherry.
Story_ID: 390953
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think we need to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't think of anything.  My sweet little grands, you know, they just make me feel happy, you know.  Sometimes they are a pain in the neck but they still make me feel happy 'cause I know they love grandma.  And this little one, about three weeks ago, my son [Lamon Cherry, Jr.] took me over to show me the house that they are having built, and she says, "Grandma come in here, I want to show you your room."  Now they had not even said, "Mom we want you to go and live with us," but they have already planned my room, named my room, this is your room.
Story_ID: 390954
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) People here in Georgia, they really amaze me.  We go every year up to the North Georgia mountains, up to Dillard [Georgia], and that's a good two hour ride on the bus, and the people go up there for collard greens (laughter).  You eat them?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, I do.
Speaker 1: See I eat them but I don't know how to cook them, and so we're going next week on the 24th, next week Tuesday, and everybody wants to go on that bus.  Now this lady Ms. Thomas [ph.], she sold twelve tickets for me, the cost is forty-five dollars round trip, and includes your meal at The Dillard House [Dillard, Georgia] and they serve good food, family style.  They just come out and load up the table and you can eat and eat and eat until it's gone plus they bring you a plate you can fill up and take it home.  So she has paid me for twelve people, and I guess she's got some more, but we don't have any more seats on the bus (laughter).  Our bus is fifty-five seats.
Speaker 2: Well this is the last question.  It's similar to legacy but a little different--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and we ask it of everybody.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: Remember me as a charming, (laughter) loving person.
Story_ID: 390955
Speaker 1: Go ahead and describe this photo for us, please.
Speaker 2: Okay, this picture was taken in Manhattan in New York in about 1945.  And it's myself and my sister-in-law, Dorothea Cherry Wiggins.
Speaker 1: Great, next.  Are you on the left?
Speaker 2: I'm on the left and she is on the right.  That picture was taken in 1949 and it's myself standing and my niece Pat [ph.].  That was taken in the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: About what year was that?
Speaker 2: End of '49 [1949], yeah.  Now that picture we were on our anniversary, and I'm not sure if that was in Bermuda.  I have it on the back but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: What date?
Speaker 2: That was in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of all of us Cherrys, as we were living here in Atlanta [Georgia], and that picture was taken in 1999.  That's with my son [Lamon Cherry, Jr.] 'cause every time we went someplace we took my son.  That picture there was taken in Puerto Rico in Dorado Beach and the lady sitting at the table behind us, she said to me, "Are you a VIP," and I didn't even know what a VIP was.
Speaker 1: Did you say yes?
Speaker 2: I said, "I don't even know what a VIP is, but yes I guess so."
Speaker 1: You could get in trouble.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: There's an old [President] Abraham Lincoln saying that "Better to remain silent and be thought a fool than to speak out and remove all doubt."
Speaker 2: That picture was another anniversary picture, that's Lamon [Lamon Cherry, Sr.] and I and my son.  That was taken in the '50s [1950s].  That picture was taken in 1970 as my parents [Annie Mae Shelton Kyle and Samuel Kyle] celebrated their fiftieth wedding anniversary, and that's myself and my sister Ann [Ann Kyle].  We were in with the bridesmaids.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That picture was taken in 1946.  Cheryl [Cheryl Cherry McMillian] was born December 30, 1946, and that's she, Lamon and I.  That was Lamon and I and we were--that picture was taken in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Good, next.
Speaker 2: That picture of Lamon and I was taken in the '70s [1970s], we were in Detroit, Michigan.  That picture was taken in England in the '40s [1940s].  It was in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: That's at the Bahamas, Lamon and I.  Seven years in a row we went to the Bahamas because of the golfers.  That was taken in 1946 shortly after we got married.  Lamon and I, Snookie [ph.] and her husband Robert [ph.].  That picture was taken when my grandson got married up in New York.  That was in the '80s [1980s].  That's when we celebrated our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, and we repeated our vows.  That was in 1971.
Speaker 2: Great, next.
Speaker 1: That's me when I graduated from high school, Washington Irving High School [Tarrytown, New York] in 1942.  That when we first moved to Atlanta, January 1987.  That's Lamon and I and my granddaughter Kristen [ph.] and LaDonna [LaDonna Cherry], my daughter-in-law.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My daughter Cheryl was about five years old, she was born in '46 [1946], so that's in the '50s [1950s].  That's my dad, myself, Cheryl and my mother.  This is the Cherry side of the family.  This picture was taken in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Lamon and I, and that picture was taken in the late--I think in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: No, that can't be in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Eighties [1980s]?  No, no.  Couldn't have been that, right.
Speaker 2: I think it's '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: It's probably on the back.  Is it on the back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's--yes it says 1970, twenty-fourth anniversary.
Speaker 1: This is '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 2: Okay.  How about this one here?
Speaker 1: That was taken in '92 [1992], this one, and I was a speaker at my church [Zion Hill Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  It's three other women with me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next?
Speaker 1: That picture there was taken last year.  That's my daughter, my granddaughter and my great-granddaughter.
Speaker 2: Very good, next (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That picture was pasted on there for our fiftieth anniversary celebration, but that picture was when we got married in January.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture taken at my parents' fiftieth anniversary.  That's my brother, my dad, my mom, me, my sister Ann and my sister Barbara [Barbara Kyle] and the pastor of the church.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my father-in-law [Lamon Bernard Cherry], and his wife is on the right side, Edith [Edith Cherry], and his daughter is on the left.
