Story_ID: 71853
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION):  Paul Bieschke.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  It sure isn't; it's, it's Paul Bieschke; it's not Scott Stearns.  Paul Bieschke is our videographer.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is John William Coleman, spelled J-O-H-N, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is December 18, 1920.
Speaker 1: And place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth, Glendale, South Carolina.  Glendale is a small suburb of Spartanburg, South Carolina.  And, and when I say suburb, I mean it's in the country, and it's two miles from Spartanburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Can you give us today's date and-
Speaker 2: Today's date is June the 6th--I mean July the 6th, 19--I mean 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago, Illinois, 8315 South Vernon Avenue, Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 71854
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish-type questions that we always ask when we start these interviews, and they just require a short answer.  And the first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pork chops.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Gee whiz.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71855
Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your parents and spell those and, and their birth dates?
Speaker 2: My father's name is John Henry Coleman, J-O-H-N, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.  My mother's name was Birdie O'Neal Coleman, Birdie, B-I-R-D-I-E, O'Neal, O'-N-E-A-L, O'Neal, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother or your father have any stories, or did your grandparents have any stories about how they came to be in South Carolina or any stories about what they were--what, what the family was doing in, in, in the slavery days or, or Reconstruction or any of those times?
Speaker 2: No, the only, only story that I remember my father telling is his father said that, that my--that his, his grandfather was a slave and that during--when they were released that during--released from slavery by--he became a senator in the State of South Carolina.  That was the only story that I remember him telling.  And they were land, landowners there in the State of South Carolina.  They were big farmers there.  That's all I remember him telling.
Speaker 1: Well, that's pretty important.  I mean, what was your, your--was it your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: He was a senator in the State of South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was sen--senator in the State of South Carolina.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: I don't remember his real name.  I, I, I thought--I thought it was Joe Sefus (ph.), but I just--I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did your mother have any stories?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember her telling any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did your father have a story of what happened in South Carolina with your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, nothing more than just they raised large families and he, he came out of a family was supposedly twenty-one children, you know.  He had a twin, and the twin died just shortly after birth.  And so he just laughed and said somebody asked him, why didn't you die (laughter)?  Then he said, well--then he said, well, I, I couldn't have or I wouldn't be here telling this story (laughter).
Story_ID: 71856
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you tell us about some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in, in South Carolina, in-
Speaker 2: Well, the things I remember most is, is, is this was back in the days of we grew up in during the Depression.  And my father had a small farm five miles out.  We, we lived in Spartanburg, South Carolina, and he had a small farm five miles outside of Spartanburg.  And every day after school he'd tell me to go out to the farm and see what you could find, bring home.  Maybe you can find something out there eat or bring home from the farm so.
Speaker 1: He wanted you to go hunting or-
Speaker 2: No, just go out to the farm and there was all--there were--there was always something out on the farm.  You know, if you have a farm, it was, it was--you always planting something or there were some kind of pear trees or walnuts or something.  He said just go out there and look around and see what you see, and pick up something and bring it home.  And that way, he say, you stay out of trouble.  You wouldn't be around town getting into trouble after school.  So he'd tell me to go, go on out there and take my brother and go out to the farm and work after school.
Speaker 1: So what would you usually find out there?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd go out there with a--in the fall of the year we'll find, as I say, pear trees we'd find, and walnuts we'd find, and sometimes if the sweet potatoes were in season, we could find sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd just bring 'em back from the farm-
Speaker 2: Bring 'em back to the family, yeah.
Speaker 1: How long did it take to do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, it'd take--get out there about an hour, hour--just walk--if you walk and didn't catch a ride, until such time as we, we save enough money to get our bicycles.  Once you got a bicycle, then you could ride out there.  It wouldn't take you any time.  But you get out there in an hour's time and then stay about an hour and then turn around and come back home.
Speaker 1: It was three hours-
Speaker 2: It was dark, so it was about three hours.  That's the whole afternoon you see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: From three, from three to six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Take up, take, take up the evening.
Speaker 1: So by the--you'd, you'd get home at, at dinnertime-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --suppertime.
Speaker 2: Yeah, home, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you do for enjoyment, you know, in Spartanburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, we played ball; we, we always, always played ball, base--baseball.  There was a playground right behind our house, kids, kids all around the block there.  We always played ball, and was tennis courts there, so if, if we could borrow a tennis racquet, well, we'd go play tennis.
Story_ID: 71857
Speaker 1: What did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was a plastering contractor.  He worked with a, a construction company, and they traveled, you know, from place to place doing construction work until, until the Depression.  So in the Depression, 1928, they--everything went "kaplooey", so they had to come home then.  That's, that's when he sent us to the farm.  He, he didn't have any work.  He was home then.  And, and he didn't do any work.  He just worked the farm and that's all; that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did your mother do?
Speaker 2: Mother didn't do anything.  Mother was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, basically, during the Depression when things got rough, you just worked the farm and-
Speaker 2: Yeah-
Speaker 1: --tried to make-
Speaker 2: Yeah, that-
Speaker 1: --what he could out of that.
Speaker 2: --just worked the farm until--for--from the, from the Depression, from '29' [1929]--the Depression really hit about '29' [1929] until '33' [1933] (unclear) for about four years--went four years.  And then I think it's one of the, one of the--when Mr. [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt came into--President Roosevelt came in, into office, he started the Works Progress [Administration].  I think you call it WPA, Works Progress Administration, and some others, and so daddy got a job with them 'cause he, he could lay brick too.  So he started laying brick around and for the Work Progress Administration and did that for maybe a couple of years until '33' [1933], '34' [1934], '35' [1935].  Then things started to get better and started getting little jobs, you know, patchwork, plastering, repair work; we called it patchwork for plastering, patchwork.  And then about '37' [1937], (unclear) start buildings again, and he start getting regular work again.  Things started picking up.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father own his own home?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for--fortunately for, for us, my father had just finished paying for our home when, when, when the Depression--I mean when his job broke up in 1920, the latter part of '28' [1928], '29' [1929], just finished paying for our home and the farm.  So he, he, he didn't have, well, like a lot of folks, you know, lost their home, lost the farm.  Our home was paid for; the farm was paid for.  So, well, that's why we could--we worked the farm and, you know, could stay there in the home and not have to worry too much about things.
Story_ID: 71858
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what, what was--did the neighborhood you lived in have a name and-
Speaker 2: We lived on what was called the South, the South Side of Chicago--I mean South Side of Spartanburg [South Caolina](laughter)--been in Chicago [Illinois] so long.  It's called the South Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some people called it the Baptist side because there are a whole lot of Baptist churches over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that most--mostly black people lived on the South Side?
Speaker 2: Mostly black pe--well, black people lived everywhere, but that--on that side of town where we lived, yeah, mostly blacks there and then on the other, on the other side of town too there were blacks.
Speaker 1: Was, was Spartanburg [South Carolina] most--mostly black?
Speaker 2: No, no, Spartanburg was mixed.  It was a mixed town.  Spartanburg was the fourth largest town in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know at one time, Mississippi and South Carolina had larger black populations than white populations.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's-
Speaker 1: I don't know if it's still that way.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not, not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the South Side like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--we thought it was interesting.   You know, we, we had our own little conclave--and of course we didn't mix through the--I lived on, I lived on a street called Hampton Avenue.  We lived on--where we lived for about--one end of it was black; the other end of it was white; then the other end of it was white.  You see, that's--all mixed up, you know, but that's the way it was.
Story_ID: 71859
Speaker 1: Everybody get along pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you got along because you, you knew, you know where--you know what you're supposed to do; everybody knew what they were supposed to do.  When you didn't, then you got--you fought (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what, now what were you supposed to do?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, everybody said they--everybody was supposed to have a place.  You know, blacks supposed to have their place; white supposed to have their place.  And if ever--if the whites got out of place or the blacks got out of place, you fought, that's all.  We, we fought so we--we fight the white people just like they, just like they were nothing, you know.  And it got so much so till they had--they sent the white school--children to school at eight o'clock in the morning and sent us at nine so we couldn't go to school together, never be on the street at the same time 'cause we would fight too much, you know.  They'd have to go at eight and get out at two, and we went at nine and get out at three.
Speaker 1: Were, were you involved in a lot of fights as a-
Speaker 2: Yeah, we fight--I'd say we fight 'em every time if you get--you walk along the sidewalk--if they, they--(unclear)--don't wanna give me the sidewalk.  Well, you, you-- got to have my side of the sidewalk, you know.  You don't do that, you just brace your shoulders and knock 'em down and keep going.  If they don't wanna keep going, you fight.  That's the way it was.
Speaker 1: So it was--was it a lot of tension in the neighborhood--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't no tension.  You just, you just fight and the best man win and keep going (laughter).
Speaker 1: Sounds tense to me.
Speaker 2: That's not tense.  Nah, that's not tense.  That's why I tell, I tell you this, I told you we fought so that they changed the way school, we going to--we would go to school--you can't--there was so much fighting, you know why you--they can't do nothing but just change the time for you to go to school so they wouldn't be on the street at the same time.
Story_ID: 71860
Speaker 1: Now, now did you all go to the same school?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no way (laughter), not, not no day.  No, they went to--we went to separate schools, separate, separate and unequal (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were not equal, even though they were separate?
Speaker 2: Yes, separate and unequal.
Speaker 1: They're separate, but they were unequal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--in, in what ways were they unequal?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, shoot, in, in all kind of ways they were unequal.  I remember the Depression, I got in with the, got in with the principal at, at the, call it the grammar school that I went to [Dean Street Grammar School, Spartanburg, South Carolina], so I knew the, the, the, the people at the high school, the white high school, where we had to go and get our supplies.  And they had crayons and erasers and all that kind of stuff.  So when I got to high school, then I knew you could, you could get supplies.  I tell, tell the principal over there we, we don't have supplies here for, you know (unclear).  Well, they, they don't, they don't have it over there.  I said they have 'em over there, I know it, and go over there and get it.  So they sent me to go over there and get it--"All right, go ahead."  I go over there and load my bicycle up, you know, crates on the front, load it up with supplies.  They--she gave it to me, you know.  They knew me, you know.  Go back--but I would be the one that had to initiate it.  The principal was scared, you know.  He didn't wanna ask for nothing.  They make--I go over there and them white kids throwing, throwing--kids throwing chalk at one another, and we don't have chalk to write on the blackboard with.  This don't make no kind of since, you know.  So why, you know, why don't you ask for it?  You ask for what you want, you know.  So, so I just got so, I just go on by there and go in and get materials just on my own, you know, get it for, for the school 'cause they knew me.  They say he sent me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wa, was there, there a history of a lot of violence-
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --against black people in, in that community?  Was that why the principal was so afraid or what?
Speaker 2: No, just some people are just like that.  It's just some people think that's the way you're supposed to be, you know, don't ask, don't ask for nothing; you get by on least, least, least little bit of things.  I was never like that, you know.  So, as I said, I knew because I had been over there as, in this fifth and sixth grade from grammar school gettin' supplies when, you know, before the Depression even hit.  So I knew how to get over there.  I knew what they had.  I knew all that stuff, so you can just go over there and get it, just tell him.  They have it you know.  Just all you got to do is write a note (unclear).  But some people are like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you feel about having to do that yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't mind.  I didn't mind.  I knew--I know what people like.  I knew that there were people like that, you know (laughter).  I just, just--there are people like that.  He was supposed to be educated.  He's the principal of the high school, but he just--that's the way people are, you know.  And so what, what are you gonna do?  What are you gonna say?
Speaker 1: Did you think he was an "Uncle Tom"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew he was (laughter), yeah, I knew, you know.  He got the job because his father was a, was a principal there, you know, the principal of school.  He had gone away and messed around somewhere and monkeying around.  I don't where, where he got his education.  Then he came back, and he was styling and so he got to be principal of the high school.  Yeah, I don't whether, whether he had his education or not, but it's all right.  You know, that's the way it happened so.
Story_ID: 71861
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of teachers did you have?  You have pretty good teachers?
Speaker 2: We had, we had some excellent teachers.  We had some excellent teachers, some of 'em not so good.  Those that weren't so good, well, we just let 'em know they weren't so good, and then you go and you teach yourself, you see.  (Unclear)--you don't know, then you ought to go and try to learn something, you see.  Don't stand in the way.  You got a job, but don't stand in the way of, of a student, you know, who's trying to move up the ladder.  And therefore, I can just tell you, I won't never stand in my way, you know.  You get out the way, 'cause you don't know, and since you don't know, don't get in the way of students that, that know, you know.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that you were like that?  Was your father like that or your mother like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father was like that I think.  You know, they, they were not, they were not--like you say, they were not educated.  They didn't, didn't have any background like that, but they had good commonsense, you know.  Like I said, my father was plastering contractor.  He had good sense like that, you know.  He knew how to--he could count (laughter)--add, multiply, knew that kind of stuff, had men working for 'em you know, that kind of stuff.  You, you have to deal, you know to deal with people, you know.  You tell them this is; you tell 'em that way, but some people--nah.  You know, it was, it was, it was an interesting trip--separate but unequal then.  I wouldn't take anything for my education, but I was a good student, you see.  Now, I'm not so sure that those--well, what about some of those students that weren't good students.  I don't know, I don't know what happened to 'em.  I don't whether they, whether they, wa, wa--I don't whether they got left in the bag or not, you know, 'cause I don't--some of the teachers weren't quite up to snuff.  And you know, what happened to them, you know?  Like I say, I was all right, and three or four of my buddies was--whom I pal with who were good students.  They were all right.  We were all right.  We were fine, you know.  We didn't let 'em get in our way, you know.  So, coming up through grammar school, high school, it was, it was a blast for us 'cause we, we, we did what we wanted to do, you know, we let nobody stand in the way.  You know you going up, you gon'--what you gon' do, you know?  But-
Speaker 1: So who was your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I had a favorite.  I kind of clinged to a lady that taught me, taught me French, and I don't know why 'cause I, I, I didn't particularly like French.  But I was--I, I guess it's just because something about the flow of the French language I guess is the reason that I like.  But basically, I was into the science and math.  I wasn't--that was my field really, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good science teacher?
Speaker 2: So-so, so-so.
Speaker 1: So did you do--you have to teach yourself a lot--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically.  But we didn't have--we didn't have a whole lot of good science, you know, in high school, you know.  So we--high school was--the science was just, you, you got it by reading so, you know, it just wasn't there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now you had some brothers and sisters, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, I had--I have a sister still living.  I have, I had two brothers.  They're dead now.
Speaker 1: And where did you fall in the birth order?  You-
Speaker 2: I, I was the oldest boy--the two boys.  My sister's [Sadie Coleman] older and then I was the oldest boy, and the two boys [Charles and James Coleman] are younger than I was.
Story_ID: 71862
Speaker 1: Okay, did--when you were in school, did you have any idea what you wanted to do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, I always wanted to be a doctor, knew that from, I guess from--I had older--my, my, my, my mother had her cousin, lady that lived diagonally across the street from us is her first cousin.  And she used to take us to the, we would go to the show, picture up there at the theater.  I guess I must have been maybe--I, I don't know how old I was, but I saw a picture of a doctor, you know (unclear)--just a, just a kid.  And from that movie I wanted to be a doctor, you know.  And then just growing up, her mother and this lady took me to the show.  Her mother was sick.  She had a doctor come and see her, and I'd see him.  This doctor come and see her, and I, I like--I kind of liked that--I'll be like, be like that doctor, make house calls to people.  So, so yeah, I kind of knew all along that's what I, I wanted to be a doctor.  So it was never any doubt that I was--how I was gon' get there, I don't know, you know, no money, no nothing, you know, but that's what I wanted to be.
Speaker 1: Now, what was it about the profession of being a doctor that interested you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I don't know whether it was something that--or whether or not it was this doctor in this movie, which--that helped this kid--I don't know whether he broke his leg or something.  Some way he helped this, helped this kid, some kind of way this doctor did something to help that kid.  I think it--that's what I wanted to do, you know.  But just, just something about that, all along, every, every chance I'd see somewhere where the doctor--what was the doctor doing, watching what he did on every hand just to see if that's what I--if that's what I wanna do, let me see if that's what I want--it still, you know, do I still wanna be a doctor, you know, and then try to read and find out what does it take to be a doctor, you know.  And then when I found out what it took to be a doctor, then maybe I don't wanna be a doctor (laughter).  Maybe I wanna be something else, you know.  But basically, I, I wanna say I wanna be a chemist, but basically in the back of my mind I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black doctors in--were, were there any black doctors in Spartanburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, there were, there were three or four black doctors there, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how were they treated by, by people?  I mean did people look up to them or?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah they were--yeah, looked up to 'em and they, they looked like they commanded the respect of the community.  As I said, this one doctor that went to visit my aunt, he was a nice fellow, you know, nice, nice enough little fellow.  He was an older man at that time.
Story_ID: 71863
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about high, high school.  What was high school like?  Where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: High school, I went to--the high school--they, they built a high school there for us.  I don't know whether it hadn't been built too long, but they built a high school there for us.  And they built it around the outskirts of Spartanburg [South Carolina], right behind the incinerator (laughter), so we--
Speaker 1: Was that a bad spot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right behind the incinerator, right where they burnt up all the trash, so you smell on certain days when the wind blow.  But anyway, that's where we went to school, called Cummings Street High School [Spartanburg, South Carolina].  That was--it was on that street, and they named--all the schools were named after the street they were on in Spartanburg.  So I went to Calyer Street for grammar school and then they transferred me when they got too, too many of us, they transferred me to Dean Street [Grammar School, Spartanburg, South Carolina].  That's where I told you I went to the, went to Dean Street, then I was down, right in town sort of met--so I could go over to the high school where I could get the supplies and all.  Then there was this other grammar school and then Cummings Street High School, and that's where I graduated from high school, Cummings, Cummings Street High School.  And that was, that was during the Depression, '30--'33' [1933] to '37' [1937], and it was all right.  It was--nothing wrong with high school.  It was just during the Depression.  Wasn't--it wasn't nothing going on, just, just school, that was it.
Speaker 1: Well, well, did you participate in a lot of activities in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no, no activities, no.  They cut out everything.  See, football was cut out.  Everything was cut out, so they--but that was all right.  I wasn't gonna play no football anyway, see, so.  No, we had to eke out a living, as, as they, as it was said I those days.  You work to eke out a living, and that was it, and you went to school, and that was, that was, that was the extent of it.  And that was what everybody did.  That's all we thought about was doing from '33' [1933] to '37' [1937], was how to make, make a living; go to school, make a living.  Keep your head above the water, so to speak.  And, and yeah, we had fun, sure, you know, like I told you.  We played ball, baseball, tennis, and, and we played a little golf.  We--I was caddy at the country club.  You know, we'd go out and caddy so we could make a buck or two carrying the man's bag, you know, and make, make fifty cents or around.  And they'd tip you and pick up a buck.  That was, that was enough, and you learned how to play golf.  And get over there behind the trees, out of sight, and you play, and you play a couple of holes and you learn how to play (laughter).  So that was interesting, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna change tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 71864
Speaker 1: Okay, we were just talking about the lack of activities, I guess, in the high school.  And you were still determined--or you, you had thought that you'd be a doctor, right, you'd, you'd become a physician?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this was in your mind, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was, this was still in my mind.  So, as I say, in '37' [1937], we gra--graduated from high school [Cumming Street High School, Spartanburg, South Carolina]--of course, no money and everybody (unclear), so I (unclear)--second in my class.  I applied to various colleges, and I got a scholarship to go to Johnson C. Smith [University].  Johnson C. Smith [University] is in Charlotte, North Carolina, which was seventy miles from Spartanburg, was close to home.  I--so I went to Johnson C. Smith.  It was a nice Presbyterian school.  Even though I was a Baptist (laughter), it, it was all right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is that a black college?
Speaker 2: Black college, yeah, all-black school, so--and, and well thought of.  You know, they high, highly rated black school, so.
Speaker 1: Did they tell you who Johnson C. Smith actually was--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I got there, wanted, wanted to know who, who is Johnson C. Smith?  So I got there and found out that the school originally was Biddle University.  Say it was, was Biddle, Biddle University.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-I-D-D-L-E, Biddle University.  But this man from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], his name was Johnson C. Smith, so he told the school he would give 'em so many millions of dollars if you changed the name.  So you know what they did.  They changed the name to Johnson C. Smith University, and he gave 'em so many millions of dollars.  And it was--wasn't, it wasn't said how many million, but he left one million dollars in trust just to buy Bibles for every graduate, every--now a million dollars now just to buy Bibles.  Listen, a million dollars to buy a Bible--every graduate would get a Bible.
Speaker 1: That's all they could spend the money for?
Speaker 2: That's all they could spend the money for was Bibles.
Speaker 1: Now were, were you very reli--religious as a youth?
Speaker 2: I was--yeah, I was, I was very religious as a youth.  Yeah, I was--I said I was a Baptist, but I was very religious, so this, this was all right with me.  It didn't, it didn't matter.  It, it--I was, I was already into the church.  You know, I went to--I was--my father was the superintendent of the Sunday school, and I was already into it big time in the church.  So going to Johnson C. Smith University didn't bother me.  We, we had to go to midday service, as they called it.  I forgot now what they call it--the noon--but anyway, we had to go services noon--devotional services noon every day.  We had Sunday school and church and vesper service they call it, the Presbyterian Church--and vesper, five o'clock vesper service on Sunday.  But it was all right with me.  I (unclear)--this was nothing--not in Baptist Church.  I had gone to Sunday school church and BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union] anyway.  So this, this, this was just right down my line, you know.  'Cause this was all we ever did in Spartanburg [South Carolina] anyway.  If you didn't go to church, it wasn't nothing else to do, you know.  This, this was a big time thing; going to church in South Carolina was the thing to do on Sunday, 'cause it wasn't nothing else to do, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this was--was this during Prohibition too or was-
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's Prohibition--yeah, this was during Prohibition and, and still is, for the most part, even though they sell whiskey, you know, that's whiskey there in whiskey stores.  But on Sunday everything is tight.  If it's in South Carolina, it's locked up.  You know, it's church; you go to church on Sunday.  That's the big thing, you know.  So, going to Johnson C. Smith [University, North Carolina] was, was all right with me; I, I didn't mind that, the services, and, and the school was good, you know.
Story_ID: 71865
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in social activities in Johnson C. Smith {University, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, as much as--such as they would allow, you know.  But see, Johnson C. Smith [University, North Carolina] was, it was a predominantly a boys school.  We only had women there in the, in the, in the junior and senior years when I was there so, but we had the fraternities there.  So I got involved with that, joined the fraternity, you know.  I'm a, I'm an, an honor student, so you know, you, you get involved with the, with the, with this honor society and the this and the that, so you, you get busy, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, what fraternity did you join?
Speaker 2: I was in Omega.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you date and go out, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah, you know it--not a whole lot.  See, I was just sixteen.  See, I was sixteen when I grad--I graduated from high school when I was sixteen.  I graduated from college I was twenty, see.  So, I'm still not even grown yet, so you know.  So you know, here you are, you're in school, you're away from home, and as I say, and then there are no women.  It's not like a, like a, like, like a regular college where you got women on the campus.  And then they didn't have women there on the campus to date.  You have to go out of the city to date, so I really--we used to have to go out, out of town to see girls.  I used to come back home to see girls and date, you know, but we didn't get into it until a couple of years after, you know, when I was 18 years old.  So, we--dating was--it was two years before there were juniors in, in school, juniors in college before we did--think about any dating amount to anything, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the instruction like, and do you think that you were prepared to go on to pursue a higher education when you left John--Johnson C. Smith [University, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  See, now this is where I did get prepared because they ask you and--what you wanna do.  And you say you wanna prepare to go to med school, then you take enough courses to prepare you for medical school.  But you also took enough courses to prepare you for anything else, that you take enough courses.  As I say, I wanted to be a chemist, so you take enough courses to prepare you to go on to graduate school to get--further your education along the kinds of being a chemist or go on to be a--If you wanna begin to further your education up the other way, become a teacher, you know, but, so you have many tracks.  So in case you, you get sidetracked, you, you want--don't wanna be stymied here (laughter), left holding the bag, you know.  So you set, you set yourself up, prepare yourself to teacher, prepare yourself to go to graduate school, prepare yourself to go to medical school, prepare yourself to go out and be a chemist, if needs be, and go right--get ready, ready to go right into the, into the--well, I thought it was the time to apply to go and be a chemist in the [U.S] Army, you know, whatever it was.
Story_ID: 71866
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when it was time to graduate from Johnson C. Smith [University, North Carolina], did you know where you were gonna go to medical school?
Speaker 2: No, no, now, here's, here's the thing, when I graduated from Johnson C. Smith [University, North Carloina], 19--as I said, 1941, no money.  So things are picking up now, though.  There's work--my father (unclear) have--has work.  I'm a plasterer by trade now.  I've learned how to--going home in the summertime, I learned how to plaster from my father, so I--now I know how to plaster.  So I go home and decided, well, I'll work a year with my father and save my money, and then I'll go to med school.  So, I go home in the year 1941, and so now you know what history--history tells you December the 7th, 1941, was Pearl Harbor.  So I turned, I turned 21 December the 18th, 1941 (laughter).  I had to register for the draft, but I had also applied to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and--I hadn't, I hadn't applied to Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee], 'cause I, I, I was messing around.  I was, I was busy making money and doing some other things.  But my, my roommate, he called me.  He was, he was out of school too.  He was living in High Point, North Carolina.  He said, you-"Did you apply to Meharry?"  I said no.  "You go on and apply," so I went on and applied to Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee].  And make a long story short, I was accepted in Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee].  And after I was accepted to Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee], I got a notice from my draft board to report for induction into the Army.  So I carried it to--the head of my draft board was a physician there in Spartanburg, so I carried the notice to, to the, to this physician and showed him, I showed him my acceptance to Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee].  He took my notice, my draft notice, induction notice, tore it up.  He said go to med school, and said when you come home, vacation, come by to see me.  Let me know how you doing, and don't come to the back door.  Now this is in South Carolina--don't come to the back door.  Come to the front door and ring the doorbell.
Speaker 1: That's unusual-
Speaker 2: Oh no, it just was one of those things.  You know, this-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yeah, that's the way you do it, you know, so I did, you know.  All the time--I go--when I go home on vacation, I go, go there to see him, go and sit down in the living room, chat, tell him, tell him how I was doing.  And I did that for while I was in med school, you know.
Story_ID: 71867
Speaker 1: Now Meharry's in Nashville.
Speaker 2: Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: It's part of--is, is it really part of Fisk University [Tennessee]--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: No, no, it's a separate school.  They're across the street from one another, but they're separate.  They have, they have some affiliated programs now, but they didn't--they didn't even have an affiliated program when I was there.  They're just, just two separate schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at the time, it was considered one of the top black schools in the country, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did, did, did you find out anything about the history of the school, or did you--do you know anything about the history of the school?
Speaker 2: Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know anything about the history of the school.  The only thing I knew was there weren't but two places I could go.  Well, I didn't--'cause I didn't know about it--two places was Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee] and Howard [University, Washington D.C.], and I was accepted to both of them, so I chose How--I chose Meharry [Medical College] 'cause I didn't wanna get tied up in Washington [D.C.].  I had a girlfriend in Washington, and I didn't wanna be up there and see her up there (laughter).  So, but--so I--that's the reason I went to Meharry [Medical College].  And then I found out the history of Meharry [Medical College], but that was the only place.  It--it didn't dawn on me that you could (unclear) to try to apply to the other schools, you know, but I figured I'd be turned down anyway, you know, but any chance that I would have, you know, with the things being-what they--  I had good grades, but I'm sure they would have turned me down, you know.  I had good grades.  A lot of people have good grades.
Speaker 1: So how did Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee] start?
Speaker 2: Well, Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee] started in 1876.  Some doc--some fellows decided they wanted to start a medical school, and, and they just got this--just, just got together and just, just started--and they just--with a little Omega [Psi Phi] funds.  It was a university, it was a university they already called Walden University [previously, Central Tennessee College], and so they be--they just started off as probably Walden University.  And that was the beginning of it.  Then it, I don't know what happened to Walden, but then they broke away from Walden [1915].  And the Meharry [Medical College] brother were, were in around, around Nashville [Tennessee] there some ways.  And one of the black doctors helped them out, one of the doctors around town, around there helped them.  He fell, fell off the wagon on something and hurt himself, and he, he, he, he worked on him or something.  And he said what, what, "what are you doing?  Where did you go to school?"  And he told me, he said "the medical school?"  I said well, "we need money for this."  You know, "we'll give you some money.  We'll, we'll help you," so they--them brothers gave him some money so they named the school Meharry [Medical College], and that's how they got the, got the, the money and started the school up again, really got it going.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a wealthy family named Meharry--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--yeah-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --they basically funded them to get 'em, get 'em going again.  They were already going, but they didn't have enough money, you know, after Civil War, not much money around, you know.  You stop and start, stop and start, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so, so what was the ca--the course of study like?  Did you, did you learn a lot of Meharry, I mean, I guess you learned it (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --course, course of study, course of study was top-notch when I got there because they had, they had, had recruited a new president [Edward Lewis Turner] from--who had been over teaching internal medicine, been over to the American University of Beirut in Lebanon.  He'd been over there for several years, so he, he, he was top-notch.  And he'd come over here and took over as president of Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee], and he had straightened things out.  And he'd, he'd been on three or four years, and he had really hadn't gotten things straightened out when we got there.  He had gotten--everybody was on the ball and moving up, going--straightened it very well, and getting better each year, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Edward L.--Edward L. Turner, like Edward L. Turner [Edward Lewis Turner].  He, he was there--he had been there I think--let's see--Dr. Turner I think had probably been there (unclear)--we went there in '40--well, I went there in '42' [1942].  And he must have been there maybe four years before we got there, and he left that same year that we graduated [1938-1944], 'cause he (unclear)--said it was his mission.  He had, he had accomplished what he came there for and he moved on.  He'd gone on to some other place, another, another medical school.  He went to University of Washington Medical School out in Seattle [Washington] to help them get there set--medical school started.  That's, that's what he liked to do, get, get the young medical schools--get 'em on their feet and get 'em, get 'em moving up, you know.  He got out there and got that one started and then came back here and worked at the uni--worked at the American Medical Association [AMA] till he died.  He was, was, you know, he was an old man by then too.  But that was just the way, way he supposed to spend his life, which was good, you know, if that's what you like, you know.
Story_ID: 71868
Speaker 1: What was your, what was your favorite aspect of medical school?  I guess, what did you like the most about medical school?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, well, medical school was the all--everything was interesting in medical school.  You were learning, you were learning the whole--everything.  I liked the, I liked anatomy.  I liked the anatomy of the human body, just--yeah, the, the work and the physiology of everything, the mechanisms and the, the--the mechanism of walking was just amazing.  You know, you see that how a cat, cat can walk, you know (laughter).  You know, it's amazing if you stop to think about it, you know.  We--all of that was just interesting.  We, we were there, and as I say, we were there during the war [World War II], you see.  So it was, it was imperative--'cause they tell you if you, if you flunk out of here, you're going to the [U.S.] Army, 'cause they put us in the [U.S] Army.  I didn't tell you that.  We went there--the first year we were there, we were on our own.  It was--told us to go home in June, '43' [1943], say "go home and stay, and we'll, we'll call you; we'll let you know what to do.  Don't come back till we send for you."  They sent for us, come back, come back in there so we'll be in the Army.  And they sent us down to Fort Benning, Georgia.
Speaker 1: So-
Speaker 2: Fourth of July [1943] put us in the [U.S.] Army.  And there was (unclear)--the guy come telling me, "Coleman, Coleman."  I said "yeah"-"Private Coleman, you on, you on, you on guard duty tonight."  I don't know what they call it at night--I think patrol duty.  I said "where's my gun?"  "Oh no, you ain't got no gun."  I said "I ain't no duty then."  Shoot, I ain't run out there in the night walking no guard duty without no gun, you crazy (laugher)?
Speaker 1: Well, how did you feel about having your, your, your studies interrupted like that?
Speaker 2: Well, our studies were not interrupted.  What they did was they inducted into the service, and they called it the [U.S.] Army Specialized Training Program, and they sent us right back into school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All they did was inducted us into the service, and called it the [U.S.] Army Specialized Training Program, and sent us right back to school, and told us to finish our training, finish, finish school.  And then if they need us, they would take us into the [U.S.] Army.  All right, well, I was just a--we were just sophomores, so we had, we had three more years; we had sophomore, junior, and senior year, so we went back--sent us right back to school.  And we stayed there till we graduated, to Septem--'43' [1943], '45' [1945].  The war [World War II] was over.  The war was over when we-
Speaker 1: 'Cause you didn't have to go-
Story_ID: 71869
Speaker 1: When we graduated, the war was over, so that was all right.  We graduated and we were commissioned, commissioned second lieutenant in the United States Army Reserve.  And then we were free to go and do our internship, so I came to Chicago [Illinois] to Provident Hospital.  I did my internship, and I finished my internship.  Somebody told me that Dr. [William] Quinn, who had just come here in radiology, was looking for a resident in radiology.  Said you--maybe you're interested in that, so I went down and talked to him.  And I was interested--yeah, I was interested in radiology.  I didn't know much about it, but I was interested.
Speaker 2: Now what is radiology?
Speaker 1: Now radiology is that branch of medicine that utilizes x-rays, radium, and other radioactive isotopes in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases. Did you get it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I can repeat all, but I know (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: All right, I'll--all right (laughter)--I did it.
Speaker 2: One more time.  You said-
Speaker 1: All right, now it's-
Speaker 2: --x-rays-
Speaker 1: --it's that branch of--radiology is that branch of medicine that utilizes x-rays, radium, and other radioactive isotopes in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases.  Okay, so this--then I had just had--we had had--in medical school the radiologist came by and taught us one course when we were juniors--said this--of course radiol--put up x-ray of the chest.  He said x-ray the chest.  He said x-ray the so and so, so and so, so and so and so and so and so on (unclear)--I mean, talking to a whole class, and he put a film up.  You can't learn nothing like that.  That was all we knew about it, knew that you x-ray department around there and this kind of stuff, but that was it, you know.  So, well, this was a whole new field for me.  I was--this was great.  I would--I learned a whole lot.  Fortunately for me that Dr. [William] Quinn was head of the department.  He was just getting out of the, out of the [U.S.] Army, you know, so he hadn't had a chance to set up his practice.  So his--that whole first year that I was with him, he didn't have anything to do but sit there and teach me.  He was--boy, I got a, I got a good grounding, and he gave me--just like being in medical school all over again.  He gave me assignments: "Go home tonight and read this." (Laughter) (Unclear)--boy, I--this was a mess, but I loved it 'cause I was, I was really getting grounded.  This was new, you know, and I was learning, and, and it helped me a whole lot.  And then he did grill me on it.  If I didn't get it, go back over it again, you know, and he was there.  He'd look at this, look at it, this is this, this is this, this is that, right there with me all the way so for a whole year.  That was great.  I was, I was top-notch.  That was the best training I had (laughter), you know.  Then after that, of course he went on out and opened his office.  He would practice after that.  He left everything in--Provident [Hospital, Illinois] for me.  After that, every--the residents were--I had to tell them then, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, were you on--the, the, the only radiologist at Provident [Hospital, Illinois]?  I mean when, when he--after he trained you, were you-
Speaker 1: Well, he was still there, but-
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --but-
Speaker 2: He trained you-
Speaker 1: --but I as the resident.  I was the chief resident.  I was the oldest resident, so he, he was (unclear)--leave things to me.  You know, he'd come in in the morning.  He's there to one, one o'clock--he'd be gone, gone back to his office, you know.  There was--I (unclear) afternoon that was mine--my--little (unclear) wa--wagon, you know, doing, do what I want to, you know.  So I would have to set up things for the other doctors so they could teach them the way he tried to teach me.  Some guys were good; some of 'em wasn't, you know; some of, some of 'em learned; some of 'em you try to do 'em--give 'em assignments, come back the next day, they didn't know nothing.  See, you, you, you, you couldn't embarrass me like that.  I mean I ask you some--ask you something today and you don't know it tomorrow, I'm gon' know that.  You know what I mean?  I'm, I'm going somewhere and find out from somebody.  You ain't gon', you ain't gon' come back tomorrow and ask me the same damn question, and I don't know it.  That, that's just, just don't make no kind of sense, you know, but there are people like that, you know (laughter), so.
Speaker 2: So you take a lot of pride in what you know, you know--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, you ought to, you ought to.  You ought to take a lot of pride in what you know.  Never let nobody, never let nobody ask you the same questions over and over and don't know.  You ought, you ought to have enough pride if, if, if, if somebody ask a questions and you don't know it--if they don't even ask it to you, if you overhear it, you, you ought to go find the answer, you know, even if he wasn't asking you.  You heard it, you go there and find out the answer to it.  That's the quest for knowledge, you know.  That's, that's, that's, that's where the quest--I couldn't understand when you, when you ask somebody point blank, you know, and, and, and he, and he doesn't know the answer.  But we have people like that.  We, we had, we had, we had classmates like that in medical school, you know.  So I knew they were like that (laughter), yep.
Story_ID: 71870
Speaker 1: So, now, Provident Hospital [Illinois] there, that's the new--so there were at Provident [Hospital] then for three years.  The training period was three years, so that was in order to make yourself eligible to take the examination to be certified by the [American Medical] board.  Then you call it--then when you get certified by the board, then you call yourself a, a certified specialist in that field.  So, my chief told me that's what I have to do if I, if I wanted to do it.  Was I prepared to stay three years?  I told him yeah.  So, now I wrote my father and told him, you know, I was gonna stay three more years.  So some things that he could, he could get rid of 'cause I wasn't gon' be doing that, and I was gon' be messing around for three more years.  That's a long time.  You know, you can't take care of your parents messing around all this time now, you know, (laughter). 'Cause you figure it's not--if you fail medical school and then your internship you think you gon' come out and be a doctor, but now you're gon' three more years, you know, no.   Well, anyway, I told him what I was gon' do, so they, they went along with it, and so that's what I did, three more--I did, really did four years, stayed four, four years 'cause I, I got a fellowship under the auspices of the, under the auspices of the National Cancer Institute, where--and this was 1948, and they paid ten dollars a day.  Well, ten dollars a day was good money you see.  You know, ten dollars a day for what?  You know, just ten dollars a day to study.  Well, that was good, you know.  So I got that fellowship to study for a year and a half under, under them.  And that finished--comp--helped complete out my three, three years to get ready for the board, you see.  So I wrote the board and told them what I had done and where I was, my training, what I, what, what I need, what--would I be eligible to take the board.  They wrote me back and told me that I needed some extra work in--when--in, in therapy, so cancer cases or something, suggested maybe I could get in touch with Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  So I talked with Dr. Ulman down at Michael Reese [Hospital], and he told me to dress up my suit.  This, this the way--1940--dress up in my suit clothes and come down there, and come in the front door and walk in, and just come on up to--and, and go with them to the Tumor Clinic in the, and, and, and, and just go around, and just go around with them just like nothing, no white coat, nothing, just, just clothes.  And he would, he would give me credit for it, so that's what I did.  That's how, that's how I could get to Michael Reese [Hospital].  I couldn't go in-
Speaker 2: 'Cause otherwise, if you dressed as a doctor, they-
Speaker 1: They, they, they'd run me out of that (laughter).  Ain't that something?
Speaker 2: Different one-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--satisfy that--they'd run me out of there if I dressed as a doctor.  But I could go in front there, go there in street clothes and walk around there all day, as a visiting door, see.  And he said he, he could tell 'em I was from anywhere.  Visit--I was a visit from Ethiopia (laughter), you see, if, if they asked.  Nobody asked where I was, where (unclear).  He, he just taught me just like he taught everybody else, you know.  He, he knew what he was doing, you know.  But--and-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --that was great.
Speaker 2: Okay, we have to stop-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and change.
Story_ID: 71871
Speaker 1: Okay, we were--let's see--we were--where were we?  We were talking about the-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --oh, talk, talking about Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're having to come in a civilian (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I, I--yeah, I had to, had to dress-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Ethiopian (laughter).
Speaker 1: I had to dress as a civilian, and he, he told me you have to do anything.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I could, I could dress, just dress as a civilian and don't put me a white coat or anything.  He could, he could disguise me any kind of way.  Anyway, I got my years--year in and so I could become eligible for the [medical] board that way.  And send, send in Dr. Ulman signed off on it.  He was a, a German-Jew.  He was head of radiotherapy at Michael Reese Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  Radiotherapy was separate from diagnostic radiology at Michael Reese Hospital.  Now, in some hospitals, the, the, the radiology, radiology was combined--I mean radiotherapy and diagnostics was all one department, all set up all together.  And the radiologists--I, I was qualified to do both diagnostic and therapeutic.   Radiology was--some radi--some of them were called rinkynologists (ph.).  A rinkynologist can only do diagnostic radiology.  He's just trained in doing diagnostic stuff with, you know, reading x-rays an interpreting x-rays.  He's not trained to do treatment with x-rays, whereas I was trained to do treatment with x-rays.  So, but at some of the older hospitals in the country where radiotherapy was separate and distinct from diagnostic radiology.  Michael Reese [Hospital] was one of them.  And some of your larger hospital was always--Cook County [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] was always separate like that.  Many of your older hospitals were--radiotherapy was separate and distinct from diagnostic.  Af--after I finished my training period and fellowship, then I went out into private practice.  I opened an office first on the West Side, corner of Madison and Western.  I had an office there, and I was part time attending physician at Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and worked Provident Hospital in the morning, go to the office in the afternoon.  And I did that for oh, for a year, year and half.  Let's see--I opened an office in December of 1950 and got called into service.  It was the Korean Conflict in 1952 and had to go into the service in the early part of 1953.
Story_ID: 71872
Speaker 1: You were still in the [U.S. Army] Reserves then?
Speaker 2: No, let me tell you the story of that.  I don't told you I graduated as a second lieutenant in 1954 in the [U.S. Army] Reserves.  The secretary of the--I think he was called the Secretary of War.  The name was Louie [Louis S.] Johnson.  About a year and a half after, after the war [World War II] was over, some of us got telegrams, and the telegram read like this: "The war is over.  We have no further use for colored officers.  Please resign your commission."  And we got two or three, two or three such, such telegrams to--and these were insulting telegrams to such extent that many of us just, just, just, just went on and resigned our commission stupidly enough, saying for the war is over, you know and, and not thinking.  Well, what's this guy up to, you know?  And the war is over, have no further use for color officers, resign your commission.  Resigned--anyway, resigned our commission.  Now, the Korean Conflict breaks out, now they need what--they need, they need officers, so they, so they did decide well, well, we trained--we paid for these guys to go, go, go to medical school, some of 'em.  They have, they have, they have--they didn't give us any time.  Well, they gotta come back and gotta give us some time, so they wrote us nicely and said "give us some time."  The heck with you.  You, you told us you didn't have no further use for us.  They said that was then.  This is now (laughter).  But anyway, they said "If you don't come, we're gonna draft you.  If you don't come, we'll draft you as a private.  We can't make you practice medicine, but we can sure make life miserable for you."  And there was one guy that went as a private, and I saw it.  He was a little Jew boy, went as a private.  And he was--and he, he's--he was in there and they were doing things to him.  I know I couldn't take that.  So I said well, I'd better go on and, and, and, and apply for my commission and see what I can get out of this.  So I applied for my commission, and they offered me--said I can be a captain, so I got, got a captain--to be a captain.  So I got to be a captain in the [U.S.] Air Force, so I went into the service then in January of 1953, and I stayed January '50--January of '53' [1953], '54' [1954], came out January of '55' [1955], so it just but two years.  And--but that was the story about--of, of that--we had to go back in.  We had to go and serve.  We had to go back.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have to serve in Korea at all or (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: No, I--fortunate for me--fortunate, fortunately, for me, the [U.S.] Air Force was, was a relatively new branch.  You know, the new--then the [U.S.] Air Force broke off from the [U.S.] Army and sep--was separate now, and they were new.  They were trying to establish good policy, so they, they would try to utilize you to the best of your ability there.  I was a radiologist.  They said we're gon'--they stationed me stateside, big, big, big [U.S.] Air Force hospital where I could utilize my services.  I was the radiologist.  I was in the big ah--big [U.S.] Air Force Hospital [Sampson] in Upstate New York, and that's where I stayed for the two years.  So I, I loved it, great (laughter).
Story_ID: 71873
Speaker 1: So when you were finished, did you come back to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I finished, came right back to Chicago [Illinois] and opened up my practice and this time on the South Side though.  I opened up my practice on the South Side and, and what is 841 East 63rd Street in what's the Maryland Building.  That was a famous building on the South Side where a lot of doctors went, doctors' off--office building.  That's where I practiced for thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And went back to Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] part time and stayed there for another three or four, four years.  And then I, in 1958, I went part time with the West Side Veteran's Administration Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  And, and I worked at West Side Veteran's Hospital part time for 30 years, 'til I, 'til I retired in 1988.
Speaker 1: And now what kind of medical problems did people have over there?  I know they had all kinds, but what, you know, what were the things that stood out on the South Side and on the West Side when you were in private practice?  What did people come to you the most for?
Speaker 2: When, when, on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Either, either, yeah, either one?
Speaker 2: Yep-
Speaker 1: Private practice, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, in private practice, oh, my practice primarily was referred practices.  Yeah, I had a radiology practice.  Other doctors would send their patients, their patients to me for me to do x-rays on to, to determine what was wrong with them or what was not wrong with them.  So we would do things--the ma--major things were chest x-rays, or if they fall and hurt themselves, we would rule out fractures of leg, or foot, or ankle or something like that.  We'd do lower lumbar spine 'cause there's always problems with your back.  Some people had pain in the lower back was one of the big things that we did, in particularly for work when, you know, they'd get hurt on the job or lifting things, just always coming in complaining of back pains.  The big, a big moneymaker for us in the practice, lumbar spine x-rays.  But that was a general trend of, of what, of what x-ray practice was like.  It was, from the diagnostic standpoint was chest x-ray 'cause for a while it was make sure you don't have T.B.--tuberculosis or in the wintertime you get a cold you wanna make sure you don't have pneumonia or something.  And then the use, as I say, fracture trauma cases, you rule out, rule out breaks in the bones and then low back pain, predominantly that was what my practice consisted of.  And treatment case was primarily breast cancer and, and cervical cancer and a little prostate cancer main--mainly just the three kinds.
Speaker 1: Was the radiation therapy fairly successful against these diseases?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, radiation therapy was, was fairly good, particularly if you catch 'em early enough for, for uterine carcinoma and for post-op breast, when we used it very well and for the occasional skin carcinoma that we were seeing in (unclear) in blacks, didn't see a whole lot of it; occasionally we'd see some.
Speaker 1: That's usually contracted by staying out in the sun too long.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's mostly because of ig--ignorance and not knowing that the sun is too bad for you.  It's--the sun is a bad thing.  You shield yourself from the sun or you lucky like us.  You have--you're born with enough melanin in your skin, which protects you against it, protects you against some, some--protects you.
Story_ID: 71874
Speaker 1: Now, now in nine--now when was it that you all sued the-
Speaker 2: Well, now this-
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: We were--when we came back from the service, there as, there was always something on, on, on, ongoing with the practice of medicine.  The doctors that came back from the service who had, who had served during the Korean Conflict had had a chance to, to practice integrated medicine and had really seen good hospital practice.  And we can back to Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  Provident Hospital was really the old lying in hospital to start with, so it was now, it was just old and dilapidated--dilapidated.  So we asked the board of trustees of Provident Hospital, you get us a new hospital, you know--we help 'em get us a new hospital.  But they messed around and fiddled and fiddled for about three years, and they just couldn't overcome the, they couldn't overcome the deficient of a hundred thousand dollars.  So if you can't overcome a deficient of a hundred thousand dollars, why, you couldn't build no new hospital.  So, we just decided that, that, that the doctors deserved to be practicing medicine in all of the hospitals that were available in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  And so we would attack it, we would attack it from two fronts.  I had a patient that got sick on a weekend.  Her husband had good insurance with Illinois Central [Insurance].  She had--somehow or another, she got--through her insurance, she got sent to--Illinois Central Hospital was the, was the hospital here over on Stony Island Avenue there at--it's now, it's called Doctor's Hospital [Chicago, Illinois].  They just closed recently, but that was the old Illinois Central Hospital then.
Speaker 1: It was near Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that, that hospital, at that time, was the Illinois Central Hospital.  And this, this man came in.  His wife had cancer.  He said, "Doc, will you, will you go see my wife."  I said I can't go over there and see your wife.  I said the only way I can go over there and see your wife, I have to go over there as a visitor.  I can't get nothing--no way.  So he, he begged me.  So I went over there one night as a visitor.  And they finally showed me that lady, and I found her in the basement, in the basement on a cot.  Now he, he got good insurance.  Now he--Illinois Central--worked for Illinois Central Railroad, got good insurance, but she's a black woman, and she on a cot in the basement in the hallway.  This is ridiculous.  This don't make no kind of sense.  So I got my (unclear), and I told him, I said you go over there and get your wife.  Take her out of there and bring her back to Provident Hospital [Illinois] where she'll be treated like she got--like, like a decent person, and he did.  And (unclear)--I, I was talking to my buddy who I was in practice with, and his friend--his broth--his brother was a lawyer.  And we were, we were talking about things about these hospitals, and we're talking about suing the hospital.  So this, this was just the one episode that just, just kicked it on up to old board.  So we sued the hospital on behalf of the black patients and on behalf of the black doctors.
Story_ID: 71875
Speaker 1: So you sued the Doctor's Hospital or?
Speaker 2: All the hospitals.  We sued every one of the hospitals.  We sued every, every, every predominantly white hospital in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  We named them all.  It was fifty-eight of 'em I think.  All of 'em, we sued every one of 'em except the, except the County [Cook County Hospital] and, and the Veteran's [West Side Veteran's Hospital], named them, you know, named all of 'em 'cause they all was--all of 'em was, all was the same.  They all, all did the same thing.  And we sued--we did this, put the suit in, in 19--I don't whether it was 1960 or '59' [1959], something like that [1961].  We put the suit in in federal, federal district court, Northern District of Illinois, and went under, under Judge Hubert Will.  And as we started gathering information and putting that stuff in, the lawyer--they started laying that stuff on the line so much, Judge Will told 'em, said "you all better--you all, you all know what you doing?"  Told the lawyer, you all, you all, you all better, you all better straighten up and fly right.  You all better--they're not asking for much.  They're just asking you all to, to integrate the--integrate and let some black doctors on the staff.  He said that's not asking much.  He said you all gonna lose your tail if you don't let 'em in.  They didn't wanna.  They, they paid for every--they really, they really didn't wanna let us in.  But they finally got around and somebody told 'em if they--they gon'--they'll win this suit, and if they ask for money, you're gon' be, you gon' be up the creek, said they haven't said nothing yet about money.  So, we won the suit.  We didn't' ask for money.  They, they came around.  And all we wanted to do is let the patients in the hospital without, without any discrimination whatsoever.  You come there, you just a patient.  You don't see it.  You just a patient to--and the black doctor, he, he gets into the--he gets in on the staff if he's qualified--that's all--if he wants to be.  So that's the way things left.  And then they were gonna hold the suit open for ten years, and that's the way we did it.  We--end of 1961--we kept it open for ten years, and we didn't see or hear anything.  So, things went along well, and that's how we integrated all the hospitals around here.
Speaker 1: Who was the lead lawyer on--who was the leader for you?
Speaker 2: John Morris was, was our lead lawyer, along with Judge Layton--George Layton, and a fellow named Rippey (ph.), and Smith; I think it's a brother named Smith.  It was four of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who was the first, the first one, Mar or some-
Speaker 2: Morris, John-
Speaker 1: Mar-
Speaker 2: John Morris.  John Morris was the lawyer and my, and my partner, his brother, was, was a doctor, radiologist, Bob Morris.  They're both dead now.  I'm, I'm the only living doc--well, Charlie Williams may be still living.  He was one of the named--ten of us doctors signed in on the suit.  So all of them are dead.  Charlie is still living, and I'm the only other one that's still living.  All, all the rest of 'em are dead now.  But we, we signed in on it, the suit, so that we could get all the doctors in these hospitals.  And that's why they opened up Michael Reese [Hospital, Illinois] and, and Lying-In [University of Chicago Hospital] and Mercy [Hospital, Illinois].  It's, it's, you know, around, which is good, you know, which is as it should be (laughter).
Story_ID: 71876
Speaker 1: So, so when your resistance was 19-
Speaker 2: This was 1961.
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was 1961.
Speaker 1: Now, in opening these other hospitals up, did act--or how did that act affect Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]?  Did it affect Provident at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Provident [Hospital] started going--was going downhill, so now see, Provident [Hospital] lost its, lost its rating 'cause--lost, lost, it lost 'cause, it lost obstetrics, lost obstetrics 'cause it had--the doctors had to have somewhere to deliver to ba--babies.  That was the first one to go, was obstetrics, pediatrics.  The two went hand in hand.  And then various other of the programs lost out of them, and Provident [Hospital] was just as they are.  You know, it wasn't--they lost all their training programs, and then it was just a, it was just a hospital that was just there seeing patients.  And then after, the next thing you know, they weren't seeing nothing but welfare patients, no paying patients, 'cause nobody on the staff--all the doctors had left.  And all the doctors had taken their patients somewhere else, you see, and nobody there to bring in no paying patients.  You can't live off of just welfare patients, 'cause the welfare department only paid you what they wanna pay you, when they wanna pay you.  And that's--and you can't live like that, you see.  See, welfare is such that it's something that you all--everybody ought to do, but you ought to be able to do it the way you wanna do it.  You see what I mean?  You take care of a, a certain amount of it, 'cause you, you know, you know you may or may not get paid, so it's just one of those things.  It's a negligent sort of thing.  But it shouldn't be one of those things where you're forced to do it, and you, and you think you're gonna get paid and then you don't get paid.  So it's, it's, it's--even though they have the money, like Medicaid, and the state Medicaid is a federal, is a federal program.  And the federal government send the money to the state, but the state won't you--won't pay off, will, will take that money and won't pay you (laughter).  So it still won't do you any good, you see.  If you don't get it, if you don't--if they don't pay you, then it's, it's no good to you.  So the few patients I used to see, I just say, well, I'll write it off.  But I couldn't, I couldn't do my x-ray 'cause I couldn't afford to spend no film money, you see.  Now I could see a patient.  If I wanted to practice medicine, I could see the patient just to give 'em a service and write a prescription.  That's all right.  That's a different story, but I couldn't do no x-ray and, and spend my money on no x-ray film.  That's spending money on you.  And now the government--no, no, I can't do that.  That's a waste of time, you know.  You know, you can't do it that way.  But that's, that's what happened to Provident Hospital.  It's why it went bankrupt.  It had no staff.  By the time they built a brand new hospital, they had no medical staff, you see.  So you had a brand new hospital, but no medical staff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the loss of obstetrics and pediatrics must have really been a blow 'cause I know there are a lot of children born on over there--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, but see that's, that's what I'm trying to say.  It was done backwards.  You, you get, you get the nice man this--John Cesak (ph.) was a nice fellow, but he was off on a tangent.  He was way off over there by himself with, with, with money to, to build a hospital, but hell, you, you, you got to, you got to have some goodwill and, and some medical staff.  You can't build a hospital and don't have no medical staff.  You, you're, you're in trouble, you see.  You've got to have a medical staff 'cause you've got to have somebody to bring patients to the hospital.  You need a good medical staff to keep bringing patients to the hospital 'cause you need to keep fee--feeding it, you see, feeding the good paying patients, good well--good, good money source, good, good sure--insurance source, you know, some kind of, some kind of funnel that you, that you get, you know.  So that's what happened to dear old Provident, dear old Provident [Hospital].  So it went down the drain because it had no medical staff to, to fund, to fund the brand new hospital.
Speaker 1: That's like around 1960 what?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, this is 19--8-
Speaker 1: It last-
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, it lasted until the '80's [1980s].
Speaker 2: This is 9--this is, yeah, 1980 when they, when they built a new hospital [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, see, see, when they built the new hospital, all your staff is gone; the staff, the staff been gone.  Then you built a brand new hospital without going out and getting some doctors.  You can't build no hospital and saying--hoping they gon' come.  You go--you either recruit beforehand or do something, saying I got a brand new hospital here, nuclear, big.  Get somebody on, on--get somebody, beg it, get on the staff.  Just because you build it, it don't say the doctors gonna come and do it, you know.  No, they ain't gon' come.  They don't have no allegiance.  The doctor practicing there now had no allegiance to Provident Hospital [Illinois].  These guys don't know nothing about Provident Hospital.
Story_ID: 71877
Speaker 1: What was, what was the base of Provident [Hospital] with that hospital?  What, what, what individuals and what organizations formed the, I guess the financial base of Provident?  I mean did--was the community organizing in any way to support the hospital?
Speaker 2: Provident Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] is supposed to be a community hospital, but it, it--the board--we, we asked the board--when we asked the board in 1955, when we came out the service--these "young turks", I said--us--we, we, we actually took over the staff, Provident Hospital's staff.  And that's when we asked the board to help us.  We'd help them build a new hospital.  Let's, let's reactivate, let's reactivate the Provident Hospital--whatever they called it, whatever it is, you know.  So that you, you can get--it's  supposed to be, it's supposed to be--I forget the name of it, but it's supposed to be you get a dollar from so many people, and they then elect the board.  But Provident has a self-perpetuating board, you see.  And they then own all of Provident and everything, then they, they didn't do nothing, you know.  They can do anything they wanna do with a self-perpetuating board, and they wouldn't do anything, you see.  So they went and, went and built a new hospital (unclear).  Then they went down the drain, you know, and then wouldn't get, wouldn't even get good people on the board (laugher).  If you don't get good people on the board, you know, you know.  You gotta get good, you gotta get good people who could raise some money or people who can get some money or something, you know.  A whole lot of things go.  So, you had a period of, from, from '61' [1961] to--'61' [1961] to '81' [1981], where a period of twenty years where it just did nothing, just, just went downhill.  And the doctors were going out everywhere, going to different hospitals.  Then they built a new hospital, and they doctors been gone twenty years, so nothing, you know.  All the older doctors, those of us who came up in Provident Hospital who had allegiance to Provident Hospital, who know what it was like in the old days, you know, would, would have allegiance to it, would, you know, say, make an outpatients there and that kind of stuff, we're too old; see, we, we, we over the hill now.  These young doctors, they don't, they don't care nothing about Provident Hospital.  Provident, Provident, what is that, you know (laughter)?  Just another hospital to them; don't mean nothing to them.
Speaker 1: Well, had--is, is--has Provident [Hospital] kind of outlived its usefulness as a--I mean as it was originally--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, now, yeah.  As it was designed, yeah, it's outlived its usefulness.  Once it went down, once it, once it's gone, it's gone, you see.  It was--for what it was doing, if we could have sustained it, it would have been ideal, 'cause we were gon', we were gon'--we would made it an integrated, up-to-date, top-notch hospital with, like I said, trained, trained black doctors.  That was the idea, you know, keep it going.  But no, you know, it's just if you let it go, once you let it go, it's gone, you see.  You can't never get it back.  Once you lose that, you never get that back.  It's gone, and all we have now is the history.  We'll never get that back, you know.  You, you can't recoup that kind of thing, 'cause it's nobody to recoup it, see.  With, with us, there's nobody left by me and Walter Johnson out of the old group, and we old, you see.  These young doctors, they don't care nothing it.  They just wanna practice medicine and make a duck--make a buck and that's it, go on about (laughter).  To hell what, what history means to them, nothing.  It's just Provident [Hospital] means a lot to me 'cause I trained there.  You see what I mean?  That's why I would, would love to see it flourish, you know, but-
Speaker 1: Now Provident is--oh.
Story_ID: 71878
Speaker 1: Okay, let, let me just--we're rolling again--I wanted just, just follow up on the (unclear) of the Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]discussion.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Provident is now a county hospital, right?  There's a big community fight to, to try to get it reopened in some way or another.  And it's a lot of nostalgia about Provident [Hospital], but do you, do, do, do you think this is just a, a situation where it just has outlived its initial purpose or what?
Speaker 2: I think that Provident Hospital [Illinois], as, as us old-timers know it, is, is not gonna exist again.  Provident Hospital was, was a community hospital, and a community hospital means that it is supported by the community.  And that means that you, you get voluntary contributions to make up for deficits to take care of, of indigents and to take care of any deficits that might accrue during the course of a fiscal year.  And, and, and then that's not gonna happen again.  Now presently, the, the, the, the Provident Hospital is owned by Cook County [Illinois].  And, and so far as I'm concerned, that's a good thing.  We need a branch of Cook County Hospital on the South Side [Chicago].  And, and having said that, I can think of no better institution than Provident Hospital to be there to do it, so, for funding purposes, for everything else.  If, if it's just a name that they need, why, then (laughter) you have Provident Hospital.  But the--for training purposes, it's not gonna be tra--for training of predominantly black doctors like, like it was when, when we came along.  It's, it's never gonna be that again, and, and I'm not sure that we ever, ever--anybody even wants it to be that.  So, so to, to say that you, you want it to be, be what it was, I'm not sure that anybody, anybody wants it to be what it as.  Or anybody that said they want it to be what it was, I think maybe just, just talking.  I don't think they-
Speaker 1: They don't understand-
Speaker 2: I think--I don't think they really understand the ramifications of, of what they're talking about.  I think, I think, I think they're daydreaming.  I think they're kind of--there's some na--some nostalgia, maybe nostalgia for a name and a name only and, and that's about it.  As I say, I--the, the, the day for that is gone I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 71879
Speaker 1: What about some of the medical organizations that you're a member of?  I know you're a member of National Medical Association and, and some other--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still a, I'm still a member of the local--I'm just retired.  I'm a, I'm a retired member--Cook County Physicians Association is the, is the local [Chicago, Illinois] chapter, and the state [Illinois] chapter is the Prairie State Medical Society, and then the National Medical Association is the national organization [for African American doctors].  And all of 'em are functioning, are functioning organizations, and they're still a good, is a good society and still very much needed because there are problems that exist, that, that still exists that are peculiar to the black patients, the black doctor, and can only be addressed by, by the National Medical Association, which was why it was founded more than a hundred years ago [1895].  And so, having said that, why, of course it's purpose remains the same.  And so, and you don't, and you don't have to go far to, to find out that its purpose remains the same because we just, we just got a report that--I think the report called--talks about the disparities in, disparities in health care for blacks.  And it's--and for a long time the National Medical Association--the hierarchy has been trying to tell people that there are, there's a difference between what--the medical care that blacks get and the medical care that the majority of society gets.  Now, American Medical Association tried to say to say it wasn't no difference, but there is a difference.  And we found out that if you take for instance the heart attack.  For heart attack patients, it's black patients just won't get what, won't get the kind of treatment that the white patient gets.  The--we found out that, for instance, if black patients have a heart attack, he can go to, he can go to the hospital and he can have the same insurance, all kind of insurance, and he will not get what, what we call the recommended treatment.  He will not get the--say, if it's, if it's medication, he won't get the, say, the angiogram.  He won't get that.  He won't get the drugs.  They call 'em--I call 'em beta blockers.  He won't (unclear)--just prescribe it 'em for him.  We don't know why.  What is going on, you know?
Speaker 1: So, so, so it's same resources and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Same resources.
Speaker 1: --black people-
Speaker 2: Black people.
Speaker 1: --going to major medical institutions don't get the same treatment.
Speaker 2: Don't get the same treatment, yeah.  So just, you know, just, just--there so, you know.  So now we, we're gonna have a, a, a study, and it's gonna have it--I think we're gonna run it about five years.  We're gonna really see if we can't nail this thing down.  We're gonna run it (unclear) (unclear).  We're gonna do a thing and see if we can't get some people on track and, and, and, and, and get this, and get this thing going so we can follow the patients and make sure that they get the right treatment, and, and see if we can break this thing.  And we're gonna, we're gonna tack--attack it from another angle.  The National Medical Association is going to do something that I thought they should have done a long time ago.  They're going to, they're going to go in cahoots with the black church, and this is something they should have done.  They started it with the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, and that was good.  That's all right.  That's always a good start, but go get with the Baptists and the Methodists and all of 'em.  Because number one, first thing we gotta do is educate black people.  That's the first thing, and then you just--if you just educate 'em.  They, they just don't know all of the things out there that's available to them, you see.  Just, we got to educate them on preventive medicine, things that they can do for themselves that can prevent certain things, and the only way you can do that is to tell 'em, educate 'em.  You see, and you can't do it, you can't do it just saying that they know, 'cause they don't know.  Or they should know, 'cause they--see, they just, they, they don't--we know now they don't know, you see, 'cause they keep dying every day.  So, we've got to launch an all out campaign, and the only way to do it is to attack 'em where we know where they go.  We know they go to church, so that's, that's, that's, that's--I think that's an excellent place.  So, we're gonna do that, and as I say, I know they started at AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church on the, on the East Coast.  So if they just start--if they just, if they just keep going west, and then they go to get all the other branches of church, that would be the best way to, to keep doing it.  You see what I mean?  (Simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 71880
Speaker 1: Okay, so what the--is the plan then to send the physician in, into a church and then talk about-
Speaker 2: Yeah, talk about, talk about not, not just, not just, just, just to, to break it down, to, to get it down to the grassroots.  Tell 'em, tell 'em what, what things that they need to be--they can do for themselves, little things just, just that, that they need to know, you know.  We're gonna put it out there, then they can spread it out--whoever can tell 'em, maybe, maybe the physician.  Maybe, maybe it don't have to be the physician.  Maybe it can be a nurse, just somebody, you know, you know.
Speaker 1: Is this a, this a--is the plan to have-
Speaker 2: Plan-
Speaker 1: --just lecturers come out or-
Speaker 2: Plan to have--plan to-
Speaker 1: --or ongoing consultations?
Speaker 2: Plan to have, have, have, plan to have it as an ongoing thing.  I, I, I, I, I, I just, I just read this, and I, I can't tell you all the details, but I'm sure that the AMA [American Medical Association] is having a convention that's coming up in August.  It's gon' be in Hola-Honolulu [Hawaii], but I'm sure they're gonna, gonna have some further things on this, and then they said they were gonna have some local things on it too.  So they, they, they, they need to get this out, because if they gon' get, if they gon' get it out, then get the word out and spread it, tell people exactly what's going on because that's the only way we can do it, you know.
Story_ID: 71881
Speaker 1: Are, are people thinking about filing lawsuits against hospitals that don't give the people--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I don't think you have to do that.  I don't think you have to do that, you see.  I don't think you have to do that.  You, you would be filing against every-it would be for many people, you see.  All of 'em were doing it.  You know what I mean?  Well, you see, what were they doing?  What were they thinking?  Here's a, here's a recommended course of therapy, and everybody found out it was good, but ain't nobody using it.  What is wrong with them--crazy, you know.  That was wrong.  So, well, we'll just have to wait and see.  But I, I mean this is, this is something that's imminent.  It's gonna be--it's gotta be within the next few months, and certainly within the next year.
Speaker 1: Because it seems like you're fighting on two fronts.  You had like, ignorance in the black community that needs to be fought through education.  Then you have like, basically, malpractice in the hospitals against people that are ill who are coming in expecting to get the up-to-date treatment for an ill--illness, and they really don't get everything that they're supposed to get.
Speaker 2: Well, they, they, they--that's not, it's not quite like that.  It's not quite like that, yeah, not quite like that.  It's, it's that you see, you put out (unclear)--I say you're supposed to get a beta blocker, but now somebody say we, we know that so many people that get beta blockers, if you bay--if you block off--somebody gets it, and then his heart doesn't beat quite right, doesn't beat fast enough.  And he doesn't like--he doesn't take it 'cause he said oh, that'll make me feel bad.  That's why I don't take it.  Then you have to find out why the patient didn't take the medicine, so this is the other angle.  See, this is the other angle that I didn't tell you.  The patient didn't take it.  The doctor didn't give it to him.  The doctor didn't give it to him 'cause he didn't like 'cause the patient didn't like it.  So you got to find--you got to find out the real story, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, it's a, it's, it's a, it's a give and a take.  It's a give and take.  It's a give and take, but you got to follow, got to follow it right down the line because it's too good to let it slide.  It's too good to let it slide on that whim.  You see what I mean?  Now, I take a beta blocker every day, but I've been taking a beta blocker now for five, six, seven years, so I, I can take it.  I don't know, I don't know what will happen to--if I, if I were new to it.  You know, I don't know what, what, what, what--if I were new, how I would feel, you know.  But I'm just saying that it's just seems that it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's old hat to me, but it might be something else to somebody else, you know.
Story_ID: 71882
Speaker 1: Do, do you think the state of health care for the black community has increased or gotten better over the years, or has it gotten-
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no doubt, no doubt.  The state of, the state--the medical care is, is much better than it was thirty years ago.  Why?  Because it, it, it's, it's just better 'cause it's--everything is better.  Everything is better.  Now, now, you take all that for a grain of salt, you see, 'cause you--(unclear)--I look at you and you look at me, you say what?  What's better, you know?  Then we can rip it apart, but I, but I can tell you a whole lot of things.  Yeah, it's, it's a whole lot better.  Things are easier now, you know, I mean what they were thirty years ago.  We got all kind of new drugs now.  We got all kind of newfangled things that we do nowadays that we--my field is so--my field's moving so fast it'll make your head swim.  Radiology's moving so fast, you, you--you see, it's, it's, it's new.  They're moving so fast now, 'til--I ask them over there the other day, you all do film--I said you all do--using film over here?  No, we don't do film anymore; we're totally filmless.  Everything's digital now.  So, they wiped out film, no more film.  When, when I wanted--went over there, 'cause I wanted a film to take to my doctor, that's something special.  They had to go in there and do a special, go in there, do a (unclear), and make me a film (laughter), 'cause that's what they do now, nowadays.  They had to make me a film, and said here, you take that thing and take it with you (laughter) and take it on out of here 'cause we ain't got no place to keep it.  Take it on with you, (laughter) and take it on out of here.  We, we ain't got no place to keep that junk.  It's yours.  I said well, now that's how far we've come, you see, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what do you think about the state of--I mean the, I guess the pa--potential for new black doctors?  Are, are we getting the--are we, are we reaching our potential for new black doctors these days--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: No, we're not reaching our potential for any doctors.  The potential for doctors is going down.  The potential for doctors, doctors--the-
Speaker 1: You had the most white doctors--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: You don't have enough doctors--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: We don't have enough doctors-
Speaker 1: --don't have enough-
Speaker 2: --period because, well, they thought they had a glut of doctors, so about ten years ago they, they (unclear) clamped down and clamped down, clamped down on the money.  They stopped trying to train, stopped trying to train doctors.  They had too many doctors, and boom, all of a sudden they don't have enough doctors, you see.  So, they--if they'd let things alone, it would have been all right.  But when they started messing with it and clamping down and-
Speaker 1: Is this-
Speaker 2: --put-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--was this American Medical Association?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was American--not just Amer--not the American Medical--see, there's a, there's a layer of people in between the American Medical Association and, and, and, and, and the people that deal with the, with the, that, that, that, that, that, that take care of the doctors.  That's this--that's the--I don't know what they call it, but it's the, the group that has to do with the education of doctors.  The AMA [American Medical Association]is there, but they are, they are a small part.  There's another layer of people in between that, and they're the council on (unclear)--council of the medical schools is in there.  And they got together somewhere in there and got to fiddling around with number of graduates, the number of specialists, and the number of something, and they thought they--then they went--and this was ten years ago when, when Clinton and those were talking about the--started talking about the health care thing.  You remem-
Speaker 1: Talking about socializing medical--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, when that-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they talkin' about-
Speaker 1: --medical plan and-
Speaker 2: Yeah, talking about the health plan and all that.  They were trying to figure out something about the health plan.  And when that went kaplooey, the whole thing went kaplooey, and everybody threw up their hand and forgot about what they'd done, and they forgot.  The whole thing--then boom.  Now, they're--now they got a shortage of doctors.  And then they got these, all these people with all the brain--the brain drain.  These guys coming along now can't make--could, he could up until now--could make a whole lot of money doing computers and a whole lot of this and a whole lot of that.  And he got to go no med school and mess around and get his brain burned for nothing.  So (laughter), so why, why would he wanna do that (laughter).  Oh, well, we'll see how it works out.  But you, you, you--if you, if you, you--medical education is such, you, you can't hardly, you can't hardly miss two or three years.  You know, you be--can supply--need to keep, keep--stay in there, you know.  You, you mess around there and four or five years, you'll, you, boom, you got a mess on your hands, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are, are, are you involved in any projects and programs to train black doctors or the youth interested in medicine?
Speaker 2: Not anymore, but we were for, for a long time.  We were with a, with a group around here called Biomed Engineer.  And we, Biomed, we try to get the kids from high school, get on track, go--they--get--head out one way or the other.  You got enough money, here I can go to med school, you know, not that--any part of the medical, you know.  It's always some part of it if you can 'em interested.  But I don't know.
Story_ID: 71883
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on this, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy is, is, is the, is the, is the suit we put in against the predominantly white hospitals here.  And that's my, that's my crowning glory.  That's, that was it.  That's--we, we did, we did--the black patients, number one.  (Unclear) a beautiful job for the black, black patients and a better job for the black doctors, you see.  'Cause the black patients can just flow to the hospital, with insurance or no insurance, you're home free, you see.
Speaker 1: Okay, just for the record, what, what, what was the name of that lawsuit again?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a lawsuit, didn't have a name.  I'll get you--before you leave, I'll, I'll get, I'll get the thing and show it to you.  But I don't think it, I don't think it had a name.
Speaker 1: Something versus--was it--(unclear) I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'll get, I'll get it for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, and anything else?  I mean, is there anything else that you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: No, you know, (unclear)--that I--that was it there.  I thought that, that--of course, you know I practiced medicine, but that, that was after I did--after we did that, that was--after I made that trip over to, over to, to that hospital and saw that woman in that basement, and we got that, that suit and got that, got that suit, sued the federal district court, that was it.  And then I saw black doctors on the staff, and I'd been down at Mercy Hospital [Illinois], Michael Reese Hospital [Illinois].  This is, this is, this is something.  These are things that (unclear) just telling you what I had to do to go in Michael Reese Hospital, about, you know, for my training.  Yeah, this, this is, this is something, you know.  That is, that is quite a thing, you know.  These guys will--they don't believe, they don't believe this when I tell 'em, you know.  They--oh yeah--they don't even know that, you know.  Yeah, (unclear)--don't come in here.  You can't come--white folks come in here (laughter).  You do, you get run out of here, you know.  That was it, you know.
Story_ID: 71884
Speaker 1: And what do you see or, or what do you hope for when you look at the black community in Chicago [Illinois] and other cities?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope, I hope for the same thing that Martin Luther King [Jr.] said, and the same thing I hope for us is that we would have everything just like everybody else has on the face of this earth, just whatever your desire is.  If you--that's what you want, you'll get it, and race doesn't stand in the way of you, you know.  I, I just--it just galls me to think that you wanna do something, and the color of your skin stands in the way, or that somebody think that the color of your skin stands in the way, you know.  Now, that is part of my--I wanna fight till the day I die if that--that would be part of my legacy, fight till the day I die to make sure that black people could have that cha--that opportunity, you know.  Man, the vice president of the bank asked me in 19--1955, I guess it was, what did black folks want.  I don't know what black folks want, but I said I can tell you what I want.  I want you to get out of my way.  And he didn't know what I meant.  I want you to get out of my way.  That's all I want.  He didn't have the slightest idea of what I meant.  See, but that's to show you they don't know, you see.  'Cause he didn't know that I didn't mean, didn't, didn't mean just but him, you know.  I'm not talking about you in particular.  I'm talking about white people in general, you know.  If I start to do something, and I really wanna do it, there's going to be an obstacle in my path, you know, and, and, and I can't do that 'cause you think I shouldn't do it, see.  And I don't--I want that to get--I want that to be out of the way.  It's just that.  And that, that's the kind of thing I'm talking about it, you see.  That's, that's what I mean when I say if, if you decide that you, you want to do something, then you can, you can go and do it without, without some fear somebody gonna put an obstacle in your way, you know.
Story_ID: 71885
Speaker 1: Now did your, did your parents live to see you become a doctor?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, they, they were, they were proud.  My father had a--you know people like--some people like gold teeth and that kind of stuff.  He had a, a solid gold tooth here and then a gold, gold facing, you know, kind of go around the--and he just, he--now I gave my--when I gave the sal--I was salu--salutatorian of the high school class, when I gave my speech, he was just like, just like this.  And I could see it, boy, mouth wide open, middle of the church, but he--mouth wide open, but he, he was there, he--mouth wide open.  He was there.  He proud as he could be.  And he was--as I say, he was there when I graduated from college.  He was there when I graduated from medical school.  And yeah, he lived, he lived a good long time.  My dad was seventy-four when he died.  My mother was eighty, so they both lived a good long time.  They saw me up and, up and around, you know, so that, that was good.  They even--they saw the boys were up, nice young men, you know.
Speaker 1: You have sons or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got two sons.
Speaker 1: Two sons.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so as a matter fact, my younger son was, I think he was, he was down at--was he, was he at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] here?  What was he doing?  He had finished.  Had he finished Morehouse [College]?  He had finished then, I guess, when my mother died.  He was messing around.  He was in Atlanta [Georgia] when my father died I think, yeah.  Yep, so.
Story_ID: 71886
Speaker 1: So, so how would you like to be remembered though?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Well, I'd like to be remembered as a good old fashioned, hard fashioned radiologist and, and, and one that taught some fellows along the way, you know.  We, we, we taught, we taught a few fellows along the way, so maybe some of 'em will come along and remember that he helped me, he taught me, he gave me a helping hand, said, said something that, that, that stuck in my head (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there anything that we haven't asked you that you'd like to say or address?
Speaker 2: I, I think we discussed all of it.  I think we touched on all the things.  Let's see, we talked about the suit; we talked about--oh, managed care.  Managed care I think is, is, is going to go out the window.  I don't think that it, it ever was, it was ever intended to, to do what it was supposed to do.  I, I think it was, it, it was--I think it was an ill--ill-founded approach to, to saving money.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're referring to the HMOs or-
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the HMO, that's, that's managed care.  The HMO is health--that's, that's a new name for HMO, Health and Maintenance Organization, that's what HMO stands for.  Now, what do you mean by Health and Maintenance Organization?  What do that says?  What does that say?  So when I look at it and (unclear)--you poached the purpose.  Well, we, we'll going to--we're going to maintain your health.  Maintain it where?  How?  What are you gonna do?  And they couldn't answer the question.  So, they said well, we're gonna get gatekeepers, and when, and when people come in we're gonna examine them, and we're going to, we're going to, we're going to make sure that, that they not spend money foolishly.  So, then I said well, that's managed care--that's not managed care.  That's manage the money.
Story_ID: 71887
Speaker 1: --You know, you go to the doctor, you hardly know 'em, and everything's so impersonal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, somehow or another somebody, somebody went around and they saw that doctors were not handling the money quite like they thought it should be handled.  And they got the bright idea that they could handle the money better than the doctor could.  And--but there's only so much you can get out of that, that, that, that medical dollar.  And that medical dollar can--out of that medical dollar you're supposed to get the--enough money for the doctor, the nurse, prescript--prescriptions for drugs, and maybe a little bit for some miscellaneous stuff, and, and that's about it.  Now that--there is no, no whole lot of extra money there that these doc--like these businessmen thought, for overhead.  There, there wasn't no whole lot of money there to play with, so they thought that out of that that they could take forty cents out of that dollar 'cause doctors was just blowing that money.  There was a lot of money there.  And, and there wasn't a lot of money there, so, so they came up with the idea of a managed care, HMO, Health and Maintenance Organization.  When, when you ask 'em what did they mean, they couldn't tell us what they meant.  So, what are you gonna do for the patient?  Well, when the patient comes in we're gonna screen 'em, and, and we're gonna decide what they need.  And then we're gonna, we're gonna, we're gonna have a what we call a gatekeeper.  Each patient will have a gatekeeper, and that gatekeeper will decide what the patient needs, and that will be the maintenance.  And I said well, you're not maintaining the health.  You, you, you maintaining--you're not maintaining the care.  You, you, you trying to maintain the dollar (laughter).  So, we, we, we got into an argument about it with--this was with some people that work for managed care or as they called it at that time HMO.  But they felt like that--they felt like--that's the other side now.  I'm, I'm on this other side.  I'm on the good side.  They felt like, number one, doctors were not, were not treating the patient fairly, were not examining the patient.  The patient was not getting a bang for his buck, so they could do a better job.  They could take the, take this, this patient, and they take this patient's dollar, and they could do a better job than this doctor was doing.  So we said, all right you take the patient and you take the dollar and see what you can do with it.  So he took it, and took it for about six years, and this is all the mess that you--now you hear about it, all the stuff that they, they couldn't get this test, they couldn't get that test, couldn't get the other, couldn't get this kind of appointment, couldn't get that because they didn't have the money 'cause they couldn't pay these overhead people that they had hired to write up this or write up that, or do this or do that, instead of they couldn't pay the nurse, they couldn't pay the doctor, couldn't pay this, and couldn't pay the people they were supposed to pay; they couldn't pay them, so this is what happened to managed care.  Managed care ran out of business 'cause it just wasn't there to be managed.  So, in a nutshell, this is what I told 'em ten years ago, I said, in ten years you'll run out of--going out of business, and I'm gonna be there to pick up the pieces.  I didn't know I was gonna be cripple.  I said I didn't, didn't intend to go back to practice anyway, but that--I, I figured in ten years the patients would be mad enough that they'd come back to me, and then I would be back practicing, you see.  So basically, that's about what has happened.  Patients are sick and tired of them and they, they--the patient wants, wants the same thing, but they don't want all this "who shot John" along with it.  They, they don't mind paying for the insurance, but they want to be taken care of, you see.  And they don't need nobody telling them what they can't get.  Tell me what I can get.  That's the important thing.  Tell me what I can get.  That's the--not what I can't get.  That's the difference.  So I think it's where we stand with managed care.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 71888
Speaker 1: This, this is, this is at the [fifiteith] 50th anni--anniversary of my uncle, uncle, uncle, Uncle William Howard Coleman.  There's, there's William, Jr., Maurice Murphy, and James Arthur Coleman.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's from left to right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, from left to right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  What year?  How recently was this?  What year was it?
Speaker 1: This was, this was 19--this was 1990, his wedding anniversary party.
Speaker 2: This was--this year was, this was 19--oh, boy, what year was this?--19--1948, 19--1950--(unclear)--what year--1918 to 9--1968.  This was 1968.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what it look kind-
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is; it's '68' [1968].
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1968.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  And who's from left to right?
Speaker 2: From left to right is James A. Coleman; Charles H. Coleman, my brothers; then sit, sitting, my father, John Henry Coleman, my mother, Ms. Birdie Coleman; my sister standing, Sadie Coleman; and far to the right, myself, John, John Coleman.
Speaker 1: That's in Spartanburg, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's in Spar-
Speaker 1: And my uncle and my brother, my son and my brother.  Was that taken--you got a date on that one?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  It might be on the back, oh, 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay, James Reginald Coleman to--my son, and my brother, Charles H. Coleman.
Speaker 2: And which is which?  On the left, left to right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, left to right.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's, that's my [fiftieth] 50th class reunion, Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  From left to right, that's John Coleman and my friend, Dr. Charlie Witten (ph.), my classmate, and the president of Meharry, Dr.--oh, boy, blacked out that quick--Dr.--what's the man's name?
Speaker 1: It's written on the back here.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Go ahead and check it.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's John Maupin.
Speaker 2: Dr., Dr. Maupin, yeah, Dr. John Maupin, yeah.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  M-O-P-P-E-N?
Speaker 2: M-A--no, M-A-U-P-I--M-A-U-P-I-N, Dr. Maupin.
Speaker 1: Is that 19--is that 1995?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: I should have looked, but wait a minute.  See, '95' [1995], yeah, [fiftieth] 50th class reunion (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Fiftieth class reunion.
Speaker 2: --Col--College 1995.  Is that in Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in Nashville.  That's, that's a whole lot of folks there (laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Could you repeat what it is again?
Speaker 1: That's class reunion, Meharry Medical College [Tennessee], 1995. Fiftieth.
Speaker 2: Fiftieth class reunion.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Where are you located in the picture?
Speaker 2: I don't know where I am.  Let's see.  Oh, I'm sitting, I'm sitting next to the young lady.  I'm sitting in the middle.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah, I'm sitting right there, next to the young lady, yeah, third from the right--third from the left, sitting third from the left.  There I am.
Speaker 2: May 1975, that was taken at Lake of the Ozarks [Missouri] (laughter).  We were--that was also at a reunion.  That must be--1975, you say?  That was class reunion.  That would be the [thirtieth]30th class reunion.  We--the after party, the Lake of the Ozarks.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's you and your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's me and my wife, Elizabeth.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Just for the tape, what's her name?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth.
Speaker 1: Say that's the [twentieth] 20th class reunion.  We'd be guessing.
Speaker 2: This--(unclear), you know when that, when that, when you know when that, when that pa--picture was take there?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, '92' [1992].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  (Unclear)--(unclear) was '92' [1992].
Speaker 2: Okay, '92' [1992], 1992.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Church picture.
Speaker 2: Taken for the church bulletin, huh?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Also the same year for this one?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --(unclear) that particular year.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Cumming Street High [School] Reunion, Spartanburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This is your graduation from?
Speaker 1: Meharry [Medical College, Tennessee].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  What year again?
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
