Story_ID: 80977
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Warrick L. Carter, W-A-R-R-I-C-K, middle initial L, which stands for Livingston, L-I-V-I-N-G-S-T-O-N, last name Carter, C-A-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 5/6/42 [May 6, 1942], Charlottesville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm president of Columbia College Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  Today is the, the 27th of February, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're actually in my office in Chicago at 600 South Michigan Avenue.
Story_ID: 80978
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish-type questions that we always ask, and they just require short answers.  The first one is what your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I think fish, various kinds of fish, anything from lobster to crab to shrimp, seafoods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 80979
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue, any shades of blue, dark blue, powder blue, sky blue, but all shades of blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, any time, but winter (laughter).
Speaker 1: Which we're in now.
Speaker 2: Which we're in now, so any time but winter.  It's not that I dislike the snow, because I actually like the snow.  It's not so much about the cold that I dislike.  It's the gray, and I, and I, and I just detest the gray.  And so that's, that's my least favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  It's St. Martin.  I've, I've thoroughly enjoyed going down there and, and, and we've spent some nice time in St. Martin, and so I always look forward to getting down there.
Speaker 1: All right, now, and finally, the fifth question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I do or not.  There are probably two or three things that, that end up being, being part of my language.  One is that I've, I've, "I've got it."  I say to my staff a lot: I've got it, meaning that you don't have to explain anymore, that I've, I've caught the concept, and sometimes, "are you with me," or "do you know what I mean?"  Those kind of work their way into my, into my speech pattern.
Story_ID: 80980
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about your family history.  How far can you go back?  What do you know about the origin of your family?
Speaker 2: On my maternal side I can go back to my great-grandparents, who were slaves.  And they were Frank and Effie Nichols.  And so I do know, I do know who they were and, and approximately when they were born.
Speaker 1: Now can you spell their names for us, even though it may seem self-evident what their names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's Frank, F-R-A-N-K, Effie, E-F-F-I-E, Nichols, C-I--N-I-C-H-O-L-S.  And they were from, from Earlysville, Virginia, where they had been slaves.  And main, the main reason why I'm so knowledgeable about them was because of their, their daughter, who was my grandmother, who, who made sure that we, we had some sense of, of our lineage.  On my father's side I, I wasn't quite that fortunate because I didn't know any of my grandparents.  They'd all passed before I, I was born.  And my ma--and my maternal grandfather had also passed before I was born, so the only grandparent that I knew as my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, and these were her parents who I just mentioned.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she pass down any stories or songs or memories about them in specific--
Speaker 2: Yes, she, she talked about her father would, would always ra-ra-ra--relay the story of when he was a slave.  He was a young boy when slavery ended.  And they were on a relatively small plantation, and I guess my, my great-grandfather really detested this man 'cause of how evil he was.  He would call the young boys up to the, up to the big house every Sunday and spit tobacco on them, just to, just because he could do it.  And this was something that my, my great-grandfather remembered and my--and passed that on to my grandmother.  And so it's part of that, that, that lineage of the family, of being able to, to "overcome" I guess, quote, unquote, you know, whatever kind of diversity [sic, adversity].  It's rather, it's rather interesting that the [clearing throat], these, these great-grandparents, none, neither of whom could reen or--read or write, really understood the importance of education.  And so their, their, their oldest child, who was my grandmother, they decide, decided to send off to, off to, off to school.  In my hometown, by this time Charlottesville, Virginia--they had moved from what, what was called the country in Earlysville into the city, which was not that much larger--education for blacks only went to the seventh grade.  And so if you wanted education beyond the seventh grade, you had to go someplace else.  And so at the end of the seventh grade, my great-grandparents send my grand--sent my grandmother away to what was then Hampton Normal School for Negroes and Indians [sic, Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute, now Hampton University in Hampton, Virginia].  And she went there in 18--I wanna say 188--'88', '89' [1889], someplace in there, and stayed there until she graduated from high school and college in 1896.  And so it was really starting from that maternal grandmother that the importance of education became so, so, so embedded in my family.  And so I kind of celebrate those two former slaves who didn't have any abilities at all to read or write, but understood the importance of education.
Speaker 1: Now what was that grandmother's name again?
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother's name was Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, Nichols, and she became eventually Carrie Nichols Jones when she married my grandfather, who was Lucian, L-U-C-I-A-N, Lucian Jones, Lucian Warfield Jones was his name.
Speaker 1: Now did, did she teach as result of her education--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She, yes, she taught, she taught for a very short period of time.  I never knew her as a teacher, because she and my grandfather married and they began to have children, she stopped working, and my grandfather--and she became an at-home, an at, at-home mother.  She had six children, five boys and one girl, and the girl being my mother.  And she was the second, second youngest.
Story_ID: 80981
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us then something about your mother, and can you give us her full name, and date of birth, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Jones, eventually becoming Evelyn Jones Carter when she married my father, Charles Carter.  She was born in Charlottesville, Virginia, in nine--1913 on June the 23rd.  And as I said, she was the fifth of six children, and she had four older brothers and one younger brother.  She exhibited early in her, early in her career I guess an interest and facility in music, taking piano lessons and singing.  And so she went to Virginia State College [now Virginia State University], at the time it was called, in Petersburg, Virginia, where she earned a Bachelor's of Music degree and became a public school music teacher and played--and, and it was a church musician, and directed a, a community choir there in, in town called the Harry T. Burleigh Choir, named for the very important musician, Harry T. Burleigh.  And that group would do concerts; they would do operettas and so forth and so on.  So that was the environment in which, in which my brothers and I grew up and this surrounded by music all the time, because of my, my mother's interest and her vocation involved in music.  And so she taught piano at home, and so we all started playing piano because that was just part of what was expected of all of us.  And so that's probably the reason why three of the four of us ended up as music majors in college.
Story_ID: 80982
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Harry T. Burleigh, now may, may, maybe we should go back him.  And can you explain like, who he was, and can you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, Harry, H-A-R-R-Y, B-U-R-L-E-I-G-H-T [sic, no "T"], was the spelling of his last name, he was a very important black composer and, and musician who was very active during the '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], and, and, and had done some arranging for choir and so forth with some Off-Broadway shows, and was rather well respected.  He began to do some arranging of spirituals for concert choir and so forth.  And so, because of, because of his popularity, he had also been an associate of [Antonin] Dvořak, who was the Czech composer, who had come to America to study American music.  And Burleigh be, and Burleigh or Burleigh, as some people pronounced his name, became a, a student of, of, of Dvořak's.  But more importantly, he really was the one who introduced Dvořak to black music.  And then Dvořak's Ninth Symphony, which is called Symphony of the New World [New World Symphony], a number of those melodies work their way into that symphony because of the introduction that Burleigh, that Burleigh gave to Dvořak to black music.  It was mostly spiritual music, but black music of the day.
Speaker 1: Was, was Burleigh from that area--
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.  Actually he was from Pennsylvania, and--but, but, but was well respected in the music--in the black music community.
Story_ID: 80983
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of person was your mother [Evelyn Jones Carter]?  Can you tell us a little bit about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a very busy person.  As I just described, she, she taught school.  She taught piano lessons after school, and then had, had these various other music activities in which she was involved.  She had a, a church choir, of which all of us participated in, and then this community, community group which rehearsed once a week actually in our living room.  And as we grew older, we participated in that as well.  My mother had these four boys that she was very, very proud of, and she always talked about her boys and even introduced us by number.  So I was number two, so (unclear)--it was always "Warrick number two," and "Charles number one," and, and then my middle brother's name was Lucian, named for my grandfather who I just mentioned, and then the youngest was Orlanda, and we called him Lanny.  And so she always referred to him as "the baby Lanny."  So she always said this is number one, number two, number three, and the baby Lanny.  But, but, but, but we lived I guess a, you know, what, what I can only describe as a, as a traditional black Southern life.  You know, we, we grew up in an integrat--in a, in a segregated environment.  We really didn't think much about it, because that's the environment in which it was.  But, but we went to schools that all the teachers knew us.  They all cared for us.  They knew our parents and cared for our parents.  And, and so, there was no getting away with anything, because, because the community would make sure that they corrected you.  And so that, that was a very welcoming, and warming, and, and supportive community.  In fact, as, as my brothers and I have always said, is that we, we grew up on a street where everybody knew us, and everybody loved us, but everybody would correct us as well, and so every kid on the street was the say way.  Parents would, would interfere when kids were doing bad, regardless of whose child it was.  And, and so they made sure that all of us always stayed as, as much on the right path as we possibly could.  Being boys, you know we didn't always do everything right, but we did most things right.
Story_ID: 80984
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your father.  Can you give us his name, and spell it for us, and his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, his name was Charles Carter.  And, and he was born also in 1913, on the 13th of September.  His father died when he was a senior in high school.  My father was one, two, three, four, the fourth of six children as well.  He had one, one older brother and four sisters, and, and so, therefore, he, he graduated from high school, but had to begin to work immediately.  And so my father didn't go away to college.  He was drafted in the war shortly thereafter, after graduating--after getting married, and spent three years in the [United States] Navy during, during World War II, was injured and actually lost the tips of his fingers in the Navy.  At that time in the--there were only two positions that blacks could hold in the Navy, actually three:  well, and one could be a cook, one could be a servant, or one could be a musician.  And since my father was not a musician, he was a cook.  And so he spent his time in the, in the Pacific during the war, and, and then returned.  And bringing that skills, he, he, he went into food service and ended up being a waiter on the, on the, on the railroad, on the C and O Railroad [Chesapeake and Ohio Railway], and, and worked on the C and O until it became Amtrak, and he retired from Amtrak.  My--and so my father was gone a, gone a lot because he was on the railroad, but, but, but then when he was home, he was home for long periods of time.  And so, unlike other fathers that who had nine to five jobs and so were, were at home all the time, you know, at nights, when my father came home he did everything.  And so, therefore, there were--we didn't grow up with any separation or differentiation between men's work and women's work.  Because my father was home; he'd wash clothes; he'd wash dishes; he'd cook; he would do etc., etc.  And so all four of us grew up with that kind of expectation, that there's no such thing as work in the house for a man or for women--or for a woman; you did what had to be done.
Speaker 1: That's unusual for those days.
Speaker 2: It was very unusual.  It was very unusual, yes, very unusual, but, but, but that's the kind of father that, that we had.  Both of my parents have passed.  And when my brothers and I get together, we, we still have these wonderful memories of my father doing all kind of things.  And when we see ourselves doing these things, we, we, we say okay, that's Charlie Carter, because we know that, you know, I--and even to this day, I get up from the table when, when my wife and I have eaten, and I start cleaning the kitchen.  And so my brothers say oh, that's Charlie Carter.  So it's just part of, you know, that environment in which we, in which we were raised.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sounds like a disciplined kind of productive environment.
Story_ID: 80985
Speaker 1: Can, can you reflect back on your childhood, and give us some sense of some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of the neighborhood you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, we grew, grew up in a segregated neighborhood, and we did all the, all the traditional things that kids did I guess at that time.  We played football and baseball.  And during the summer we went to the park or the playground and participated, you know, in activities there.  Wasn't a lot of basketball then, it was mostly baseball and football.  And, and we had little music groups.  We had--we organized parades.  I organized a parade every summer that we would have, and we'd get the little kids to march down our street into the parade, and pull the little cute girls in wagons and, and things of that nature.  We, we, we put on circus shows and little variety shows, and would charge admission for the parents to come, and parents would make all kind of costumes.  And you know, we did, did those kind of things.  We worked little jobs.  I started--my, my father [Charles Carter] and two of my mother's [Evelyn Jones Carter] brothers owned a grocery store as a side business, and so we started working in that after school as young kids.  And so we worked--we were--I worked in that in the seventh grade, maybe seventh and eighth grade, and probably ate more produce than, than, than, than I sold, and ate more cookies and stuff like that.  But, but, but, but it was a nice--you know it was fun.  And, and, and so we had that little store that, that was fun to, to work in.  The church was very important to us, and so, as I mentioned before, my mother was involved as a church musician.  And so we went to Sunday school with my grandmother [Carrie Nichols Jones], and then we would go back to--at the evening to the Baptist Training Union--I'm, I'm a Baptist--in the evening, and, and we would have little activities and so forth.  And music was always a, a great part of everything that we did.  And, and then there was school and, and, and teachers and, and music again, because band was important to, to my brothers and I.  In fact, all of my friends were all participating in band and, and, and, and choir.  Most of my friends were not--didn't grow up to be athletes.  Two or three of 'em played ball or something of this nature, but most of us were music folks.  In fact, in my ninth grade year, I guess it was, eighth or ninth grade year, I decided I was gonna go, go out for the football, and realized immediately that I wasn't gonna, was, was not gonna be on the band bus with the girls.  And it was much more fun to be on the band bus with the girls than to be on the football bus with the guys.  And so, especially when, when my buddies kept saying well, you know, the girls are on the bus, Warrick, and look at you over here riding on this other bus.  So I think I, I stayed on the team a half, a half a season and got back in the band, 'cause you couldn't do both; you couldn't be both in the band and play, and play football.  And I wasn't getting any--in, in any games anyway.  You know, I was, I was a scrub scrub.  There was a fourth--if there was a fourth strength, that's what--that's where I was.  I was, I was on the very end of the bench.
Speaker 1: Well, what instrument did you play in the band?
Speaker 2: I was a drummer.  I was a drummer.  I, I started an interest in drums as a, as a little kid, and, and kept that interest for forever.  I, I swayed from it for a short period of time and, and moved and played baritone horn and trombone for two years, I think maybe my seventh and eighth grade year.  But clearly, playing drums was the thing that, that interest me the most.  And so I went back to, to playing drums and timpani and mallets and all of that in high school, and so when I went to college I was a percussion major.
Speaker 1: Now did you, did--had your mother taught you how to play the piano before?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we all started playing piano at probably by, by the age of six, and, and played for--and you know, each of us played for different lengths of time in terms of studying, studying with our mother [Evelyn Jones Carter].  My youngest brother [Orlanda P. Carter] stayed--studied the longest.  I probably, I probably studied maybe three, four, three years, four years at the most, because I, I think by the time I was twelve I wasn't studying anymore, the brother under me maybe a little bit shorter period of time, and my older brother maybe a little bit longer.  My youngest brother studied the longest.  He studied about ten years of piano with my mother.
Story_ID: 80986
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about school, I guess, more--I mean grade school.  Go back to that.  How did you like school and--seems like it's obvious that you liked it, but, tell--
Speaker 2: You know, it, it's kind of interesting.  It's kind of interesting.  I don't know if I should tell this, this truth or not.  I flunked kindergarten.  In fact, I probably flunked nursery school, because I was interested in this little girl, and I didn't, I didn't learn a thing.  And every day when I'd come home, my mother [Evelyn Jones Carter] would ask me: Warrick, what did you learn?  And I would talk about what this little girl had been wearing.  And so finally the teacher--I guess it was kindergarten.  The, the teacher and my mother decided that they would hold me back a year to let that little girl get out of that class so that I could finally started learning something.  And so she moved on, and I stayed back.  And at, at that time, at, at least in, in Charlottesville [Virginia], you went to kindergarten, you, you would go straight to second grade.  You wouldn't do first grade; you'd skip first grade.  And so in actuality, I stayed in, in kindergarten two years and went to second grade, so ended up with my age group of those who had, who had started first grade.  And so I ended up with them anyway, with the same age group.  But I would have been, I would have been a year, I would have been a year ahead of myself, probably wouldn't have learned anything at all, because probably I would have been in love with that little girl all the way through because she eventually came out my girlfriend in high school.  And, and I had claimed that she was my girlfriend all the way through elementary school anyway, so I wouldn't have learned a thing.  So it was good, it was good that she was a year ahead of me because we didn't have classes together.
Speaker 1: That was unusual to latch onto someone that early in life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess that's probably been my downfall or my, or my, or my glory, one or the two (laughter), all my life.  But, but yeah, see, and, and we're friends, we're friends to this day.  I'm friends with her family, and she's friends with mine, but--and, and we kind of look back and laugh about that, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but elementary school, I--was, was really enjoyable.  My second grade teacher was a woman who I actually knew, because she lived in our neighborhood.  And, and, and she, and shh--and because I knew her, I knew that I had to mind her, and, and, and, and, and, and I found her to be a, you know, a real, a real good teacher.  It was kind of interesting because, you know, in the neighborhood I called her one thing, and then, but outside the neighborhood I had to car--call her something else.  And that happened more than once in terms of teachers who, who were my mother's friends that, that, that, that, that we had called them maybe by their first name amongst our, amongst our parents.  But then, all of a sudden in school they, they were something else.
Speaker 1: Did, did you call them Ms. by their first name, like maybe as they--as is most of the custom in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yep, yep, yes, that's right, that's right, yes, yes.  Yes, yes, her name was, her name was Mrs. Taylor, but we called her Ms. Bessie.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, Ms. Bessie was her name, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was my second grade teacher.  My third grade teacher was a young woman.  Ms. Bessie was, was probably in her, in, in her late 50's, early 60's then I would imagine.  But my third grade teacher was a woman immediately out of college, and so she, she, she was rather young.  And so we, we all thought that we were just as old as she was, and so she, she had problems with my class.  And it was, it was her very first year of teaching anyway.  But I found--I think I really began to get a spark of interest in learning, starting in her class, and definitely in the fourth grade.  In the fourth grade I had a, a staunch teacher, who I really didn't like at first, but it was that teacher who really set me on the path of the joy of learning and how much fun it was.  And when, when I first started with her, I didn't like her.  But by the time I left her class in the fourth grade, I knew that something different had happened to me from--at, at that period of time and, and that learning now had become something that I enjoyed doing and searching and reading and, and all of that.  And it really happened in the fourth grade.  And, and, and it was also in the fourth grade that, that we had organized, organized music instruction.  In, in the third grade you could play tonettes or you could play recorders or something.  But in the fourth grade, you got--you could choose a real instrument, and, and I already knew what real instrument I wanted to choose, and so, and so band started in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Jefferson Elementary.  As you can well imagine, as I said, it was Mr. Jefferson's country, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: But this is a black segregated school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a black segregated school, and so the name of the, the name of the, of, of the black school was Jefferson.  It was Jefferson Elementary and Jefferson High School.
Story_ID: 80987
Speaker 1: By the time I got to go to high school, there, there was a new consolidated high school for, for the county and the city for--which was still a segregated school.  And that was, and that was called Burley, not the [composer Harry T] Burleigh that I mentioned before, but for a local man by the name of Burley, and that was B-U-L-L-E-Y--B-U-R-L-E-Y, Jackson P. Burley High School.  And so that's where I went to high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You say this, this was a new high school that was created--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, what--
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and, and the county and, and, and the city.  What had happened was that there had been a small black high school in the county and this small black high school in the city.  And so the county and, and the city decided that it probably would make sense to consolidate the high schools into one larger high school, especially since the county was so large that there were kids who has--who lived in the county who had to come through the city to get to the county high school on the other side of the county.  And so, and so, since the city was kind of centrally located in the county, they decided to put the consolidated county-city high school in the city of Charlottesville [Virginia].
Story_ID: 81485
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school.  You told us something about it, but what was your favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: It was music.  It was clearly music.  Probably after that, it was history; I enjoyed history.  But, but, but music, indeed, was, was, was--by that time I had a real good sense that I wanted to be a musician.  I probably wavered once in, in high school.  I thought of being an architecture, architect--architectural engineer.  And we offered some courses in drafting and stuff of that nature, and I took them.  And, and they interest me, and, and I, I, and I, I did enjoy them and in fact so much so that when I--I'm kind of getting ahead of myself, but when I got to college, I was--I, I tried to be a major in one and a minor in the other, you know, majoring music and minor in architectural engineering, or a major in architectural engineering and a minor in music, neither of which were possible at Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee] because their fields were so far apart, so.  I mean, as we know what I did, so I decided to major in music and that was the end of it.  But, but in high school, music was, played a major, a major part in, in, in, in my high school career.  And so I was high--I was in choir and in band, the marching band and concert band.  I was president of the band and president of the choir at one time.  And, and so, you know, it was just, it was just, it was just what I did.  And the majority of my friends were people who were involved in music.  As I look back, in terms of all of my, my, my closest buddies, although we did other things together, music was the thing that, that, that really kind of, you know, bound us together, you know.  I played Little League ball in, in, in, in elementary school, and that was fun, but, but music was the one focal point in, in, in my life.  We had--and but I participated in a, in a variety of things.  I was president of my senior class.  I was editor of the yearbook.  I, I was, and you know, I mean just involved in a, a variety of things in, in school.  I, I took the college prep areas, so, so I was in the French Club and, and, and took science and math, and, and did rather well in, in math, in fact; in fact, math, math and music were, were my best subjects.  And, and I took as much math as they off--offered, all the way up through trigonometry.  They didn't offer calculus.  And we, we were--in, in my senior year, we were trying to get enough of us to get a class for calculus.  And we couldn't get enough students who, who were interested in doing, and so we didn't get the class be--because, you know, they needed an X number of kids--I don't know the number--and we didn't have enough.  But, but I thoroughly enjoyed math, mainly because I had a fabulous math teacher.  And I just enjoyed being in her class, and so whatever she taught I was willing to take, because she was just, just such a wonderful teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81486
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation [from Jackson P. Burley High School], you, you knew you wanted to study music, and had you chosen a school at that point?
Speaker 2: I was, I was going back and forth.  I'd been offered a scholarship at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia]--excuse me, [coughing]--at Virginia State University, which, which was, which was Virginia State College then.  But I clearly had decided that I didn't wanna go to school in, in the state, and, and mainly because I wanted to kind of get away from all my friends, as much as I loved them, but I knew that we would have our same cliques.  And, and, and then a lot of my friends were already down there at Virginia State, and, and I wanted some, some kind of independence and, and, and difference experience.  So, so I really wanted to go to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida; FAMU].  That's where I decided I really wanted to go, but my mother [Evelyn Jones Carter] specifically felt it was just too far away from.  And, and so she was encouraging me to go to A and T in North Carolina [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, North Carolina] where my oldest brother [Charles M. Carter] had gone to school.  And, and so I went down there and I auditioned, and I, and I was offered a scholarship there as well.  But I didn't wanna go there because, you know, I'd been Charles's brother, and I wanted to be Warrick, and there's nothing wrong with kind of being yourself.  And I knew that if I had come to A and T, I would have been referred to: well, that's Charles's brother.  And I wanted to be Warrick Carter, and as much as I love my brother.  So, so I chose not to go to A and T.  And so I was kind of caught with, with really no place to go now, because I'd turn down Virginia State, and I, I was turning down A and T, and my parents [Evelyn Jones Carter and Charles Carter] wouldn't let me go where I wanted to go.  So my oldest brother, Charles, was the one who suggested Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  He said I've heard that Tennessee State has a real fine music program and that they've got a good band program there.  And so, out of no place, I said I'm going to Tennessee State, sight unseen.  And so I applied to Tennessee State and got accepted, and I didn't have a scholarship, didn't, it was just going.  And so my parents said all right, and so I went to Tennessee State.  The interesting thing about it was that af--when--you know, it's a long distance from Charlottesville to Nashville.  It's not--although the two states are contiguous, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's a good, it's, it's a good amount of travel.  And after doing the trip, my father decided to look up the, up the, up the mileage difference between Charlottesville to Tallahassee and Charlottesville to Nashville.  And Tallahassee was only a hundred miles further (laughter), although a number of states further, because Tennessee is, is such a narrow state.  So, so I could have gone to Florida A and M, but I'm glad that I didn't.  I'm really pleased that I went to Tennessee State, that, that was the best decision that, that I could have made.  And, and I really thank my brother for directing me toward Tennessee State because of a variety of reasons.  It has a--had a wonderful music department, probably far better than any of those schools that I was looking at, at, either at Virginia State, definitely A and T, and even Florida A and M.
Speaker 1: That, now that's saying a lot, because Florida A and M had Dr.--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right, Dr. [William Patrick] Foster.
Speaker 1: Foster, right.
Speaker 2: You know, one of the things that, that was different at Tennessee State was that Tennessee State had a well-rounded music department.  Florida A and M had a real strong band department under Dr. Foster.  And as much as I, I respect him and, and, and know him, he, he--the emphasis there was on band and band only.  The, the re, the remaining parts of the music were, were, were really overshadowed and not supported.  With Tennessee State choral music and, and--was supported, and piano was supported, and, and, and all instruction, in music theory, and comp [composition], and, and, and history and so forth.  And so it was a real solid education at Tennessee State.  And what actually during, during during, during my time at Tennessee State, we ended up marching against Florida A and M at a game in Florida.  And ask anybody who was there, even, even from Florida; we were better.  And that was probably the glory of my life as an undergraduate because I'd wanted to go to Florida A and M so bad.  And I'd see their band when I was in high school, because they would come up to A and T when my brother was a student at A and T.  And so I had seen Florida A and M's band, and I was very impressed with it, and, and, and I'm still impressed with the work of Florida A and M.  But at that point, at that time, on that day, Tennessee State was better, and that's all that mattered to me.  So, so--but, but, but, but from an educational standpoint and, and from, and from a friendship standpoint, I've, I've made friends there that are now lifelong friends.  I've got people in my life who I've met on the first day at Tennessee State 40 years ago now, because I graduated from high school in 1960.  And so it's 42 years ago, almost 43 [whistle]--boy that scares me--but a number of years ago, I guess I'll say that, that are still, are still very close friends of mine.  I met my first wife at Tennessee State [clearing throat] and, and, and because of that, I have a fabulous daughter [Keisha Thrash].  So, so Tennessee State was a wonderful, a wonderful choice for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81487
Speaker 1: Now, you, you were there [Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennessee] for your bachelor's degree and for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a master's degree, right?
Speaker 2: No, just for my bachelor's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I just got my bachelor's there.  I was going to stay.  I, I ended up graduating early from Tennessee State.  Because I liked it so much, once I got there, I, I went home the end of my freshman year, and then after that I didn't come home summers.  I would just stay at Tennessee State, because I like--I enjoyed Nashville; I enjoyed my friends; I enjoyed--you know, I mean I was a little country boy from Charlottesville [Virginia].  And, and although I thought I was cosmopolitan, I really wasn't, but I thought that I was.  But Nashville was the first real city in which I had, had an experience, and, and I liked, I liked the city.  And so it felt good being in a, a metropolitan area, so, so I would stay, I would stay during the summers.  And so I ended up graduating early from Tennessee State, ahead of my class, in about three and a half years.  So, I was gonna stay around Nashville and take some graduate courses, but a friend of mine found me a job (laughter).  And I wasn't looking for a teaching job, but a person ended up getting drafted.  And they were looking for a band director in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and so he recommended me.  And I went an auditioned and interview, and, and was offered the job.  So I called my parents back to tell them that I had been offered this job and--but I wanted to stay in Nashville and start graduate school.  And my father said, "Well, that's what we sent you to school for.  He said you're taking the job" (laughter).  That was the end of that.  In other, other words, my dad "Okay, I'm, I'm finished with that tuition.  I've got the other tuitions to pay later on."  So, so I, I, I moved to Chattanooga in the middle of what, what would have been my senior year, and worked in Chattanooga the remainder of that year and then all of the following year, and taught at, at a, at a jun-junior high school there [Alton Park Junior High].  And then at the end of the, the full year, I, I quit and went back to school.  And that's where I went to Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], where I got my Master's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got the Master's and the PhD in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and PhD at Michigan State, yes.
Story_ID: 81488
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in Nashville [Tennessee]--let's drive back there for a minute--did you have very much interaction with the students at Fisk [University]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  Yes, we did.  And in fact, [clearing throat], I mean the campuses are relatively close, the Fisk campus.  Everything's on Jefferson Avenue [sic, Street].  The Fisk campus is--starts at 18th and Jefferson and, and goes a little bit north of that.  And then our campus starts at 28th and Jefferson and goes south.  And, and, and so, therefore, you know, it's just that ten blocks in between us, which is--which at that time was filled with all of the various kind of support units for college kids, and so restaurants, and, and, and laundromats, and cleaners, and you know, and little joints, little clubs and so forth.  And so we were back and forth in that little area all the time.  And also, just as I was leaving Nashville, was the beginning of the, of the true engagement of students in the Civil Rights Movement.  Because the Freedom Riders were--came originally from Nashville, and, and I, and I had friends who were involved in, in, in the, in, in the Freedom Riders.  We were involved in sit-ins in Nashville when I was a student, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know [HM Reverend] James Bevel--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah, yes, yeah, [Ernest] Rip Patton, Lucretia Collins.  I mean all of them were, you know, in, in, in the leadership of the, you know, the movement.  And then there was Father--oh, I can't think of his name now.  But he was a Episcopalian priest, who had a, a church closer to Fisk than to us.  But, ba-ba-ba, but we had a lot of the meetings, meetings there, and, and would organize our marches and so forth.  And we could march from, from the black campus areas, because it was three schools there, 'cause ma-Meharry [Meharry Medical College] is right across the street from Fisk.  And, and we would gather, in most cases, someplace close to Fisk, because that was closer to downtown.  And then we'd march from there downtown, and was always larger numbers of Tennessee State students than Fisk students because we just had more students.  You know, Fisk was always a relatively small school.  They probably had 1200 kids then; Tennessee State probably had 4000 students then.  And so, so, it was always--ba-ba, but it was always that combined effort in the, in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: And there was, from what I understand, there were like, there was preparation for those--I mean they, they would sit down and tell you how the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --discipline (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --James Lawson (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, in fact, in fact, I can recall we, we were demonstrating, a, a friend of mind and I--his name is Le--his name is Leonardo Lindsey.  He was a clarinet player from West Palm Beach, Florida.  And we'd been trained for nonviolence, and we were going to do some sit-ins at, at a Woolworth's counter.  It was a bunch of us -another guy who was a musician, is name was Harry Golf [ph.], play trombone, and, and, and some kids from Fisk.  But, it probably was about twenty of us, and we'd been trained in terms of holding your temple and so forth and so on.  And, and a person came up and dropped a lighted cigarette down, down Lindsey's back, and, and so, and so you could see it smoldering.  And so he just said grab it, and so we just grabbed it in the back and put it out.  I knew right then that I could not be nonviolent, because if that had happened to me, it would have been a fight and the whole--and I'd have been in jail, and, and the nonviolent movement would not have been good.  So therefore, I, I indicated right then and there that the best things for me to do would be things which would be supportive.  Because I couldn't be up on the front line being nonviolent, because I was gonna violent if someone was violent to me.  So, so that was the last time that I participated in the, in, in a nonviolent activity up front.  And so from that point on, I was, I was a behind-the-scenes person.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a thing that's tough to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, it is.  And, and, and, and Lindsey could do it, and, and others could do it, but, but I, I knew that I would have, I had, I would have responded in, in an inappropriate manner, I guess, for, for what the movement was trying to do.
Story_ID: 81489
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell me about Michigan State [University].  Now you go up to East Lansing [Michigan].  How did you choose Michigan State, though?
Speaker 2: Well, I was looking at--I had decided I was gonna go to a Big 10 school.  And I had, and I had taken one school off the list, and, and it was University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And the reason I'd taken Michigan off the list was because when I was in high school, I performed in the All-State Band in high school.  And we had had William Revelli, who was a conductor of the Michigan band, as our guest conductor.  And I had really not enjoyed that musical experience.  And although he was well-respected, I knew that music was fun for me, and I loved music.  And the entire time I played under him I didn't like it.  He, he--from my vantage point, he, he, he, he conducted through fear and intimidation.  And that was not what--the way I wanted to spend my graduate years, although I knew that Michigan had a wonderful school of music.  But I had made that decision, and so, and so Michigan was not a choice.  So therefore, it left the, the other Big 10 schools with, with strong music programs.  The place I really wanted to go was to Purdue [University in West Lafayette, Indiana], because I'd also played under Al [G.] Wright, who was the conductor at, at Purdue in, in a previous year as--in high school, but they didn't have a music major.  But I thoroughly had enjoyed working under him, and I had looked forward to that.  So, so that meant two Big 10 schools that, that were not possible.  So I applied to four schools.  I applied to Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio], to Michigan State [University], to--now Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] didn't have an interest in, it's interesting, I don't know why--to Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois], and to [University of] Iowa [in Iowa City, Iowa].  And I heard back from Michigan State first.  And so I said if they, if they want me, then I--if they, if they want me, then I want them.  And, and that was another good decision, because I thoroughly enjoyed Michigan State.  When I went to State, Michigan State had 40,000 students, which was larger than the population of my hometown [Charlottesville, Virginia], which is kind of interesting, and--but there were only about 600 blacks at Michigan State at that time, scattered throughout that entire 40,000 students.  Most of the black kids would get together in some kind of way.  They--there, there were more undergraduates than graduate students.  In fact, in music, there were three blacks in, in, in, in graduate school.  There were two on the Ph--no, four: two on the master's program and two on the PhD.  And there were--I guess it was two, two, and two, because there were two undergraduates, one a clarinetist, a very fine clarinetist, and one was a saxophonist, and then piccolo.  But that was it, and so, and so, and so it wasn't a lot of us.  And so you could go periods of time without seeing each other.  And when you'd see each other on campus, it was like a celebration, had been that long since you'd seen some, somebody look like you, yeah.  But, but, but State was a, a, a good experience I had.  I, I got good instruction in Michigan State, and I have friends from, from both, my first time there, as well as my second time there, that, that long last, that, that are long lasting.
Speaker 1: Now what you just said raises, you know, an interesting phenomenon as to a lot of--on a lot of campuses now where there aren't that many black students, it seems like the students are afraid to speak to each other when they do meet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's been so much talk about not being narrow and not--you know, everybody's trying to be diverse and everything, and it seems like their ashamed to talk to their, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, ye--
Speaker 1: --people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, ye-yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's a shame.
Speaker 1: --just--
Speaker 2: --yes, ye--
Speaker 1: --not every--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yeah, that's a shame.  Because, you know, one of the things that, that, as I look back over at, at Michigan State, we were so pleased to see each other that, that, as I said, it was almost a celebration.  And, and there were chapters of each of the fraternities and sororities on campus.  And when, when, when each one would have anything, everybody would show up.  So the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] had something, all the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta] would (laughter) be there too, because, because they were just happy to be able to get together.  And, and, and, and the lines between undergraduates and graduates were not that strong because there were so few of us.  And so, and so we--and I wasn't that much older than the undergraduates anyway, so.  And so, you know, I, I, I thoroughly enjoyed mingling with, you know, with the kids who I met and became friends there.
Story_ID: 81490
Speaker 1: Okay, well, now what did you--I, I, I--tell me if I'm wrong.  People who major in music education really have to take instruction on all the instruments, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct, that's correct, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems like an awesome--you know, when you're a non-musician, (unclear)--you know.
Speaker 2: Wa-well, you know, I guess, and it's like, just what you do, and so you don't think of it as being that, that strange because everybody who's, who's a music educator has done it.  And so you just expect that you will do it, and, and fare well, and you know, develop the skills.  It was mostly during--as an undergraduate.  Because when I was at Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee], we had classes in brass, classes in woodwind, classes in string; in fact, I took string--I, I took private instruction in string.  And, and throughout you had to take piano; you had to take two years of piano, and everybody has to do that, regardless of the major.  And then, and then your major instrument.  So it's just, it's just what you expect to do.  And, and, and I developed an interest and, and some facility on flute and clarinet.  And when I taught in Chattanooga [Tennessee] at the, at the junior high school [Alton Park Junior High School], it ser--it served me real well, because I had some kids who, who were rather, who, who, who were rather accomplished at--to be junior, junior high school kids.  And we used to, to stay after school and play trios and, and, and, and stuff together, and it was fun; I really enjoyed that.  These were some good kids.  And we'd just stay, and, and sometimes I just have to get--make 'em leave the band room so I could get home, you know, because they would stay forever.  Because they'd say okay, well, let's, let's play the next one, let's play the next one.  And so, and so that, that experience of learning to play the other instruments served me well to be able to do those things with those kids.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's, that's--the way, way you described that, that, that, that is a consuming kind of experience when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --instrument or, or achieve some facility for the first time, and you, and you hear yourself playing like people you've heard--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah--
Speaker 1: --you know.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, yeah--
Speaker 1: --you can do--
Speaker 2: --it's, it's, it's nice, it's nice, yeah, it is.  Now, I don't have any, any of that facility at all now, you know, it's been so long.  In fact, in fact, I, I, I don't think I've got much facility on drums anymore.  I tell everybody I play desk, and, and that's about it right now.
Speaker 1: So does it actually go away (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's like anything.  If you don't use, if you don't use it, and you don't, and, and you don't keep it tuned, you, you, you lose the facility.  And now you may not use all of it, and you've got part of the memory.  But what happens with woodwind and brass instruments is that it's the embouchure that begins to be the problem.  And so you may remember this, or you may remember this, but, but these just won't help you to do what you need to do because, be-because you've lost the embouchure, and you've lost the, the muscle in the lips and so forth.  That, that's important in terms of controlling the sound and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, and so for brass and woodwind instruments, the facility and the memory happens real good here, but it's, it's the facility here that, that goes the quickest.  That's the reason if, you know, if you talk to any, any brass player, they, they'll tell you that they practice every day, just, just to, just to remind the mouth what it is to have that, that, that mouthpiece against the mouth and so forth, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Story_ID: 81491
Speaker 1: What was your experience at, at Michigan [State University in East Lansing, Michigan] like in terms of--I mean be, being in that, that--it was the first time you've been in an all-white environment basically in school.
Speaker 2: It was, it was.
Speaker 1: Did you find it--were they, where they helpful to you, or were they indifferent to you, or how, how did they--
Speaker 2: You know, it, it's--this goes back to Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  One of the things that, that probably is why I celebrate Tennessee State so much is, is that our instructors told us--Dr. [Edward C.] Ed Lewis, who was chairman of the department, Dr. W. O. Smith, who was my history teacher--Dr. Lewis had gone to [University of] Wisconsin, had got his PhD there; Dr. Smith had gone to [University of] Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa].  They said that when you get there, don't think that you're inferior to anybody.  They said in most cases, your education has been better than whomever you're gonna be with.  And so don't think that, that you're the, this young black kid who doesn't know anything, that you, you know, pra-pra, probably more than anybody because you've had this kind of personal education that's been very, very close to you and with teachers who cared and who nurtured you and so forth and so on.  And so, and so when I got to Michigan, probably the best thing that happened to me was that I was in a class with a guy from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], when I got to Michigan State.  And you know, the University of Michigan had always been this kind of never shall be able to reach ac-activity.  And this kid did--and this kid didn't do as good as I did on theory, on theory (unclear) exam.  And, and from that point on, I said I know what I know; what I don't know, I don't know, and I'm here to learn what I don't know.  But, but what I know, I know.  And I, and, and I found out that I had one--I'd had wa--a wonderful theory background.  I had always been able to hear.  And so when it came to ear training, and, and you know, I, I knew what I was hearing, because I'd been listening all my life, and had been involved in listening and identifying--and, and identification; I'd been writing and taking things off records and so forth.  So, so I could hear, and, and, and so I felt comfortable.  And one thing I can say about Michigan State, almost across the board, with few exceptions, and there were, there were some, some racist teachers there, but--and I'm speaking of in school of music [College of Music], there were some who, you know, who didn't want us there and so forth--but, in most cases, you proved yourself, you proved yourself.  And most of 'em didn't care, didn't care if you were black or white, just long as you could do the work.  Now, you know, there, there, there, there were some.  There was this conversation that I overheard when I, when I came back to Michigan State to get--to work on my doctorate [PhD].  I came back in, in '60--in '68' [1968].  And, and there were some other doctoral students there who, who I didn't know, black doctoral students.  And two of us, we had just met, and we were, and were headed to the Student Union building to just kind of get to know each other.  And I--and we overheard a teacher saying "it's getting so bad now, you can't spit out the, spit out the wa--you can't, you can't spit out the window without spitting on a nigger trying to get a PhD."  And this is the guy who I knew I was gonna have to have a class with.  But, but I knew that I knew his topic cold and, and that I had a good background.  And so, therefore, you know, I was gonna be able to do what I had to do to get, you know, to get it done.  So, so we had some like that, but when--then we had others who that, you did the work, you did the work.
Story_ID: 80995
Speaker 1: So you, you started--after, after the master's degree at, at Michigan State [University in East Lansing, Michigan], you went to Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Maryland, to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore [Princess Anne, Maryland] as my first college job, and I worked there for two years, doing percussion and, and band.  And, and I had applied to go back to Michigan State in the summer--at the end of the summer of my second year to start my doctoral program.  And so I had then entered--I had been accepted into the program, but, but really found out that summer that, that I just couldn't afford to do it.  And so I didn't go back, but stayed in Maryland and worked and, and you know, taught summer school and, and that kind of stuff.  And then the Maryland system had a wonderful grant program that they wanted to develop young faculty and help them to get their terminal degrees.  And so, a friend had, had received the grant to go back to school in, in the fall of '68' [1968], and he decided not to go back.  And the institution didn't wanna turn the money back in, and so they asked me if I would, if I would take the grant.  And so fortunately I had already been admitted into the program at Michigan State, so I had a place that I could go, and so I said yes.  And so I took the grant and, and moved to East Lansing and, and, and started on started on my doctoral program.  And so I stayed at Michigan State for two years and finished my degree in two years, and then returned back to Maryland for two years, and then left there and you know, I returned doing the same thing that I'd been doing before - percussion and, and, and, and band and band classes, and I think I taught a history class as well.  And then--
Speaker 1: That was a, that--was it the history or was that meet--musical--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yes, musical history course, yeah, ye--yeah, music history.  I taught methods; I taught percussion methods; and I taught, I taught brass and percussions methods to, to music education students and private, private percussion, and, and did marching band, and did a lot of writing for the marching band and arranging for the marching band.  It's just, you know, it just, it was, you know, whatever needed to be done, you did it, and so it was just part of the, part of the job.  And then that summer, I had been invited to Michigan State to teach a course at Michigan State that summer.  And so I came back up to East Lansing that summer.  And they actually offered me a job at Michigan State to come back and, and teach with a joint appointment in African American Studies and in, in music department.  And we could never work out the salary thing.  It just wasn't happening right, and so I decided to go back to Maryland.  And in the midst of that, I got a call from a former colleague of mine who had been at Michigan State with me, who had come to a new school in Illinois known as Governors State University [University Park, Illinois].  And, and he was directing financial aid there.  And they were looking for a person to come and start their music program, because Governors State was just opening that, that fall [1971].  So he sent me some information, and I talked to the dean, and, and then came over here for an interview, kind of a whirlwind affair.  This happened over a period of three days.  I got the call; they faxed me some stuff real quickly; I, I read it, then I got a, a copy of my resume over to them; they read that and then asked me if I could be there the next day.  So, my, my, my wife and I few over from East Lansing [Michigan] to, to Chicago [Illinois].  And on a, on, on a Friday morning, interviewed all day Friday and half a day Saturday, and went back Saturday night, or maybe we went back Sunday.  I think we interviewed on Saturday too.  And I decided I was gonna take that job.  It was a brand new, brand new institution.  It didn't have students yet, didn't have anything, and, and it, it didn't even have a music curriculum.  And so it meant that I was gonna have the opportunity to write the curriculum and, and be the, and be the leader of this, of this program.
Story_ID: 80996
Speaker 1: So I, I, I took the job and then, and got back to, to Michigan State [University in East Lansing, Michigan] on that Sunday and wrote a letter immediately to the people in Maryland [University of Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne, Maryland]; in fact, I called the chair first and told him I was gonna, I was gonna--I was resigning.  This was late July.  And so I resigned and the-the then wrote a letter thanking them, because the-the they really had been very, very supportive of my career.  And they were the, they were reason why I had, had been able to earn my degree earlier than, than I had planned, because of the financial support that, that the University of Maryland given me.  But, but this was an opportunity that I thought was the right opportunity for me.  And so, and so, we moved.  I went back to, to Maryland and packed up all of our stuff in the, in the, in the apartment.  And my brother and I--the brother immediately under me, Lucien [Carter], and I--he came over to help me.  And, and then a, a, a buddy of mine and I drove out with me.  We stopped in Michigan and picked up the stuff that we had in the little, the little apartment there that we had rented for the summer, and then came on over here.  And, and that was in 1971.  And so, that, that's when I started working at Governors State [University in University Park, Illinois].
Story_ID: 80997
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what was that experience like?  You, you had a lot of freedom to create what, what, what you wanted.
Speaker 2: I really had total freedom.  It was, it, it was really, you know--you don't get that opportunity at in, in today's, in, in, in today's environment to, to start an institution.  I mean, you know, when's the last time they started a new institution where, where, where, where you, you could be brought in when--and to exercise your ideas in terms of the way you'd like to see that--see things done.  And, and so I came in, and I developed a curriculum.  And I did the hiring - first hired part-time people, hired three part time, three or four part-time people to buttress what I was doing to teach the other courses and to--and, and ss, ss-since I was an instrumental person, I hired a vocal person who would do the choir, and I hired piano people and some people to teach theory and so forth and so on.  And, and so, we did that the first year.  And, and so, I was the only full-time person in the music for the first year.  And then we added another full-time person the next year in music, and still used a good, a good number of part-time people.  The third year we hired another full-time person, and we, we, we eventually got up to five full-time people in music, and still used a number of, of part-time folks.  And we developed that program from--that very first year I had seven music students, and by the time I left there, some 12, 13 years later [1984], we had almost 200 students in music.  And so we developed that from nothing, I mean really nothing, to, to, to a program that, that ended up getting some national and, and international visibility and respect.  We turned out a, a good number of kids who who've made some names for themselves and have recognizable names in the, in music fields.  And so, and so I feel real proud of that part of, of, of, of, of, of my life and what we did at Governors State then.  We did some good things, some exciting things.
Story_ID: 80998
Speaker 1: Who are some of the, those students?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's kind of interesting, probably Chico Freeman, who is, who's a recording artist--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's related to Von Freeman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's Von--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He's Von--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, he's Von's son, and Chico got his master's with me.  Henry Threadgill, who's a, who, who's a wonderful saxophonist of, of, of, of, of international acclaim, he got his master's with me.  See, Dawkins--
Speaker 1: Ernest Dawkins?
Speaker 2: Ern-Ernest Dawkins, he got his bachelor's and master's with me.  Let's see, Billy Howell has a PhD now, and, and he got his bachelor's and master's with me.  [Steele] Sonny Seals, who, who just passed recently, got his bachelor's  with me.  There are two men young men, David Willens [ph.] and Ken Placoon [ph.] that probably are not recognizable names, but, but they have a very successful business that they are, that they do wedding business, and they provide everything for weddings.  And they're the number one wedding provider for--in the city.  And they started with a little--doing a little--with some little gigs themselves and grew that into a business.  And they also do manufacturing of percussion instruments.  So, so, you know, we have had, we've had some real nice success.  We've got a young woman who is an opera singer who lives in, in Italy, who, who was one of our products, and so it's ja--just a,  you know--and then a number of teachers in and around the Chicago area - Richard Evans, who is a very, very important name in, in writing, he did--he's written for Buddy Rich, and Natalie Cole, and Peabo Bryson and others--he got his bachelor's and master's with me.  So, so, so we had some real good success and, and, and turned some good products there.  And, and, and so I'm proud of that, of, of that, of that time at Governors State.
Speaker 1: That's impressive.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 80999
Speaker 1: And Governors State is out in Park Forest, Illinois?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Park Forest South, actually, was the name of the town.  Now, now it's called University Village [sic, University Park].  And it was a--GSU [Governors State University] was an experiment.  The State of Illinois created two new institutions at the same time in the late '60's [1960s], both have a charter of '69' [1969] I believe - it was Governors State University, and the other was Sangamon State University.  Sangamon State was in Springfield; Governors State was in--outside of Chicago [Illinois].  And they were established as upper division institutions, meaning that they didn't have freshmen and sophomores, but were created mainly for community college transfer students.  Sangamon eventually became the University of Illinois at Springfield, and is now a four-year institution with both freshmen and sophomores and, and juniors and seniors in master's programs.  Governors State is still one, one of the few institutions in the country that's, that, that's clearly--that, that is still upper division.  So it has juniors and seniors, and it has a master's program.  And it's, and it's in three or four different areas: the school of Business, arts and science, and, and education I think are the, are the three areas that, that, that they have there now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, I didn't realize that.  It's good that you--simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: -(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's the--that was a movement that was happening at the end of the, at the end of the '60's [1960s] and into the '70's [1970s], these new schools that, that were gonna be upper division.  There, there, there were a group in Texas, some in Florida, and the two here, and some in California.  All of the others went to being all four-year institutions, but Governors State.  And, and it ended up being politics for Governors State, because the other institutions who were four-year didn't want Governors State to be a four-year institution.  And so they argued at the board of education to keep Governors State an upper division so, so that, that they don't compete with them at that level, and so, and so they still are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81000
Speaker 1: So that puts us about right, 1980--in the early '80's [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, early '80's [1980s], yep, yeah.  Yeah, I stayed at Governors State [University in University Park, Illinois] until, until '84' [1984], and, and left and moved to Boston [Massachusetts] in, in 1984.
Speaker 1: Now how did you--now you went to become a provost at Berklee College of Music--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yes.
Speaker 1: And what--how did that occur?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, I was--while I was still at Governors State, I'd become--I developed a bit of a notoriety, both for the school and, and for myself as well, and had, had developed some level of respect in the jazz education community.  And I--and by that time, I had been elected [clearing throat]--excuse me--president of what was then called the National Association of Jazz Educators [sic, National Association of Jazz Education], which is now the International Association of Jazz Educators [sic, National Association of Jazz Education; IAJE].  And so I'd become its president.  And so--and, and also I'd, I, I had started doing some work for the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts], and I had become chairman of the jazz panel for the National Endowment of [sic, for] the Arts since--and so, so those two activities kind of put my name, my name and, and, and, and credibility in front of folks.  And so when Berklee was looking for a, a, a, a leader for the academic unit, they got in contact with me, asking me if I had an interest.  And so--and, and asking me if I would send in some names of recommendation, so I did.  I sent them some, some, some names of re--and I, I recommended three names.  And I heard back from them, asking why, why I hadn't included my own name.  So I thought that was kind of nice for them to put it that way, and so I had said, I said well, I will put my name in this, in that list, and sent them my resume.  And so I, I ended up being chosen out of whatever the number of applicants were.  And, and so I stayed there for twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81001
Speaker 1: Now how did you find Boston [Massachusetts]?  Now you're looking in--you're really, you're really getting around, you'd have to think.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  Well, you know, it's kind of interesting.  Boston--and I've lived in--I, I'm born and raised in the South [Charlottesville, Virginia], educated in the South with a undergraduate degree, and, and then ended, ended being here, here in the Midwest for that good period of time at Michigan State [University in East Lansing, Michigan] and then in Illinois [Governors State University in University Park, Illinois].  And Boston was the first place that I was, that, that I was moving to that people began to tell me where not to look for homes.  I'd never had that to happen before.  And the person who ended up being my associate dean, who, who ended up being a very close friend to this day, and said, said, "Warrick, I'm not gonna tell you where to live, but I'm gon' tell you where it would not be safe for you to live."  And this is a white guy, saying, you know, you don't wanna even spend your time over here because I don't think that you'll be safe living in this community.  So that, that was kind of interesting.  And Boston has this huge dichotomy about it.  You know, on the one hand, you--it's, it's, it--you, you think of it as being the cradle of, of, of, of, of liberalism, you know, with, with, with all of the, all of the liberal thinking at the institutions there, with the Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the MITs [Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge], and Boston University and, and BU, and, and, and BC [Boston College], I mean you name them, and just all of the educational institutions there that, that, that lean toward, toward just, just enlightened thought, on the one hand.  And then you have on the other hand, the, the, the most interesting response to integration in the North that's ever happened.  And so it's that dichotomy, and so you've got, and you have both of those communities side by side.  It was, it was the only--it was the first place I ever move--I have ever lived that people would not--that the workers were the ones who had this kind of, of real racist feelings toward, toward, toward blacks.  And the first time I noticed that, that, that, that you would go to a grocery store, and rather than putting the change in your hand, they'd drop it to keep from touching you.  It's was the most interesting, you know, observation.  But all of that said, I loved Boston.  I loved doing what, what I was doing.  I met some wonderful people there.  I think we, we, we did some excellent things while there.  We turned out some tremendous, outstanding products, who have gone on to, to make their name in every conceivable part of the music industry.  And, and, and, and, and I enjoyed living there the entire time we were there.  I met my present wife [Laurel E. Latta] while I was there, so, so that's another reason why it's, it's one of those soft spots in my heart, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81002
Speaker 1: Well, who, who, who are some of the, the students that you had there that you, that you--
Speaker 2: Well, I recruited Roy Hargrove to the school, and he's done quite well for himself, Antonio Hart, Delfeayo Marsalis, of The Marsalis Family.  You know, it's been so long ago, you know, some of the other names are just not coming, but, but, but you know, in, in that age group was when I was there.  There's a young, there's a young Lampkin kid, John Lampkin [John Lampkin III], wonderful young, young drummer who's, who's now the drummer with--his name will come to me in a second.  Donald Harrison was there; Reuben Rogers, who was probably one of the young--busiest young bass players around, and is recording, is recording with everybody, and was, was one of the students who was there when I was there, any number of--what's the little guy--Greg Keyser [ph]., the pianist; Cyrus Chestnut, the pianist.  All of them were students when I was a dean and provost.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81003
Speaker 1: So, then comes--the next job is, is the most glamorous sounding of all--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --or fantastic one of all--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with Walt Disney [Entertainment], you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, that was kind of interesting.  That, that, that sounds like a complete left or right or whatever kind of turn out of this, you know, out of this career path, but I had been, I'd been a consultant to The Disney Company for probably about five to s- five to eight years, someplace in there, before I took the job.  And I'd been, and I had--I would go down periodically and, and consult on projects in which the company was involved in, the entertainment unit of the company was involved in.  And the, and they had kind of dangled positions for me--in front of me.  He said, "Warrick, well, how would you like to come and join us and do this, and join us and do that?"  And, and, and I was happy at Berklee [College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts].  I was very happy at Ber- Berklee.  In fact, when I left, I wasn't unhappy with Berklee, but the particular job that they finally did offer was something that I thought that I could get my teeth around, and sounded like something that would be fun to do, and would be an, an, a, a nice direction for me and my career, and so I accepted it.  And so I went to, I went to The Walt Disney Company to work for Walt Disney Entertainment as director of entertainment arts.  And the entertainment arts pro- program was a global program in charge of training for live entertainment for The Walt Disney Company.  So, so we had offices in--our, our corporate offices were in Orlando [Florida], but we had offices in Tokyo [Japan] and Paris [France], and in, and in California, needless to say, and then with, with, with, with small outposts in Melbourne, Australia; Singapore; and London [England].  And so, and so my travel schedule kind of reflected where the offices were and the things that we were doing.  And we took new product, new entertainment product to each of the parks.  And so we introduced some using student, student groups and cali- and college students; we introduced a new, a new student program and, in Paris and one in ka- and, and one in Japan, u- using both American kids and European kids, as well as American kids and Japanese kids.  And so it gave our American kids an opportunity to get out of the country and have a wonderful experience during the summer, which was fun.
Speaker 1: So you'd identify American kids to, to go to another--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --place to entertain basically or for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sh--yeah, what, what, what was happening in the company, in the company when I joined it [1996] was that the, the company was in the process of, of, of, of creating four new parks around the world, and as, as they begin to make the plans, they realized that those parks were going to need a whole lot of new entertainment.  And the question was, where is it gonna come from?  Do we have a process by which we can put it in the pipeline to develop our own talent so that when we open these parks, we have talent available and ready and able to go in and do what has to be done?  And by talent, I mean everything from people who you see on stage, to all of the support backstage, for costuming and sound and lighting and, and, and pyroglyphics [sic, pyrotechnics], and--I mean you name it--all of that's, all of that's management, stage management, and the la- and the lights and so forth.  And so we needed all of that kind of talent.  And so, we decided to start, start developing our own talent by identifying kids pre, pre-graduation in college and working with them for a summer or two, and then choosing the best cream of the crop from those experiences to come and work at our parks.  Because, because we had the, the new park in cal- in Florida was the Animal Kingdom [Disney's Animal Kingdom], which was just about to open.  And, and on the drawing board we had a, an MGM Studio park in France, a Disney California Adventure in, in [Anaheim] California, and, and Tokyo DisneySea, which was gonna be a new park in Tokyo.  And so we knew that, we, we knew when, when they were gonna be opening, and so we had to position ourselves for that.  And so, and so that's what we were doing, we, we were developing talent.  We also developed some educational programming, also, for, for the parks.  And when I left the company to, to accept this present job [president of Columbia College Chicago], we were involved in developing a TV show, a, a kids' TV show, educational TV show based, based upon music for, for, for the company as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81004
Speaker 1: Okay, now all the while that you're doing all these things, you're, you're writing too, and you're--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, ye-yeah, yes.  I've, I've, I've kind of had these careers that, that have allowed me to kind of straddle and, and to, and to still keep engaged in, in some creative output.  And so the entire time I was at Gover--I was at Governors State [University in University Park, Illinois] I was composing, and I did a lot of writing for the ensembles there.  I got some commissions.  I did--I got a commission from, from the Chicago Symphony [Orchestra], and I did a, a, a work, a work for the Symphony.  I did a work--some work for the National Endowment of [sic, for] the Arts on commissions.  I got a commission from Chicago Chamber Orchestra.  I was writing for the quartets and quintets around town, so, so I was very, very active as a writer while I was here.  When I moved to Boston [Massachusetts], I still did some writing, had less time to play, to perform, but still do some writing.  When I got to [Walt] Disney [Entertainment], didn't have much time to do anything, and now it's about the same.  So I'm, I'm not writing or playing much since, since I've accepted this position [president of Columbia College Chicago].  But I would say that, that the downturn in my writing was started at Disney, because I didn't have--because I was traveling so much that I didn't have a time--time, you know, that time to contemplate, that time to think.  Because when you write, you, you, you need two, you need two, two blocks of time: you need a, you need a block of time to think, then you need a block of time to write.  And, and I, I would either get the thinking time and never be able to put it down, or I got the writing time and never have time to think.  And, and so, you know, that's the problem.  And, and, and, and, and it's the same thing in, in, in doing articles or doing books, you need, you need, you need both times.  And so when I was at Governors State and at Ber, and at Berklee [College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts], I, I was able to carve out those times, and so I did a lot of publishing of articles and, and, and, and monograms and so forth during that period of time in my life.  I did, I did two books while I was--one while I was at GSU and one at Berklee.  So, so, you know, all of that was, wa-was real time for creativity, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81005
Speaker 1: Now, now, you were at Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment] how long?
Speaker 2: Almost five years [1996 until 2000], mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).  And so it was a pretty fast-paced--
Speaker 2: It was, it was.  You know, one of the things about the corporate world that's so different than the worlds in which I had worked before in the academic worlds is that things move a little bit slower in the academic worlds.  You know, we--when we make a decision, we want it to be as, as--to have as many people engaged in that decision as poss--as we possibly can, the whole collegial way of, of getting, of getting to a decision.  And, and, and so, and so it's almost the "hurry up and wait" kind of thing that happens in the Army, as people talk about.  And the corporate world is "wait and hurry up."  It's that, you may wait for a decision, but once the decision is made, they want the product finished immediately.  And, and, and the, and the other difference is then the corporate world, when, when, when you get the go-ahead, the money is there.  So, so there's, there's never a thought of can I get it done, or you know, it's just bringing it on--in on budget, because the budget will be there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81006
Speaker 1: So, then that, that brought you here, that's right.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yes, that, that brought me to, to, to Columbia College Chicago [Illinois].  I never thought that I would have been returning to the city of Chicago, but I'm really pleased that, that I have.  I thoroughly enjoyed living here before, and I kind of think of myself as having grown up here.  When I moved to Chicago I was, I wasn't 30, and, and--yeah, I think I was 29 when I moved here.  And, and I left here in my early 40s.  So, so, you know, I really kind of grew up here.  I had--my daughter [Keisha Thrash] was born here, and so, so this was a, a very important place in my life.  And, and to return now as a more mature person--I won't say, I, I never call myself old--a more mature person, you know, it's very nice to, to be back.  And, and Chicago is a better city now than it was when I lived here before.  It's a much better city.  And the area in which the school is located is far superior now than it was before, because the South Loop of Chicago back in the '70's [1970s] and early '80's [1980s], when I lived here, wa-wa, was a dangerous place to be.  And now, with, with the college here and with what has happened with the development of condos and so forth, and, and the very important move of the Hilton Hotel, in terms of staying here in this area, it really has made this a very, very desirable place to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some of this was like skid row.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  It, indeed, was, yeah.
Story_ID: 81007
Speaker 1: How did you come to come back to, to Chicago, to Columbia College [Chicago]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, well, the, the Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment] corporation was going through some changes, and the person who I had come to--there are actually two people who I'd come there--who, who, who had recruited me, and I was there become of them.  One is the person to whom I reported immediately, and his name is Ron Logan.  He was executive vice president of, of, of Walt Disney Entertainment.  And the other person was Judson Green, who was president of Walt Disney Attractions, and that's all of the parks worldwide, as well as, as well as the cruise lines and so forth.  And so Judson was kicked upstairs to a new position as chairman of that, and they brought in a new person as president, who would be the operations person who, who'd run the parks.  And so he, he was moving in some different directions.  Judson, Judson had, had clearly believed in a centralized kind of quality control of things.  And so he had these quality control pac--pockets that were--that, that would go out to all of the parks worldwide, and make sure that the standards were, were, were, were one standard.  The, the new guy believed in everything being more, more handled locally.  And so he began to, to disband ss-ss-some of the global groups, and mine was one of them.  And, and so he had began to disband our group, and so we saw the handwriting on the wall that our group was gonna eventually be disbanded.  So, so I decided that, that I was gonna go back into education.  And so I began to look around for educational leadership positions that were available, and it ended up being--that year there were four important ones that, that--at least important enough that, that I thought were important enough to, to take a look at.  And I'm, and I'm very, very pleased that I was invited to interview at all four of them.  I, I put my name in.  And when, when I saw Columbia College Chicago's advertisement, I said to my wife [Laurel Lotta Carter], I said you know, that's the job for me.  I said it, it, it, it, it, it really draws from all of the things I'd been doing.  And, and it's the job that I've been preparing myself for, that I didn't realize I had been doing it, because it's got all of the, all of the experiences.  It's got the corporate experiences; got the experience with media and the arts; it's got the experience in high education in the arts.  And, and I, I said I think I'm the right fit, and evidently, when the process was over, the, the board and the, and the, and the search team felt the same way, and they offered me the position.  And so here I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 81008
Speaker 1: Before we leave Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment], I just wanna ask you about Disney corporation.  It seems that so many--it seems though, as though there would be some very interesting stories coming from that experience--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I think that, I think that as I look back over my life, you know, you, you develop a pallet from which to pull, almost like an artist.  And you've got all of these colors available, and so life is kind of like that.  You get these experiences, and you place them onto your pallet.  And then later on, as you--as something happens, you choose one, you know, which, which you feel is the best one for whatever the circumstances now call for.  And so Disney is, Disney for me is just one of those, you know, one of those experiences.  And, and from me, from, from my vantage point as I look back over it, it's no important than any of the others, 'cause I think I've learned, I'd learned from, from each of them, from my position at Maryland [University of Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne, Maryland], to Governors State [University in University Park, Illinois], to, to Berklee [College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts].  And, and, and so they each have, have some value.  But there are some things that, that have stuck with me from, from the Disney corporation in terms of the way it does things and manages things, which I think are very, very valuable, and that, and that, and that have become part of the way in which I do things.  And, and so, I think that I am a better manager because of that experience.  And although I, I, I had some valuable lessons at Berklee, I, I think that I'm better as, as a college president than I would have been if I'd come straight from Berklee, here.  And, and so, having the Disney experience is an added value that, that, that, that I think I bring to the table.  And, and, and so I'm glad that I had that experience.  You know, one of the things that the dit--the Disney corporation talks about it all the time--well, two or three things--but, but--is, is that issue of, of, of exceeding the expectations of your guest.  In other words, you say that I, I don't wanna meet what you expect me to do.  I--when you come in and, and you have a Disney experience, I want you to go, "Wow, I never thought that this was gonna happen."  And so it's that wow effect, and, and, so it's always exceeding.  And so I talk to my folks always, here, about exceeding the expectations of our students.  We don't want our students to get what they expect to get.  We want them to get more than they expect to get.  And so, and so that, I think is a very, very valuable thing, is that, that you give 'em more than they expect.  And so therefore they end up, they, they end up wanting to come back for that experience, or they value it much, much, much more.  The other thing that Disney always talked about was that their biggest competitor was--was not other people, but themselves.  In other words, how you gonna outdo what you did last time?  And so you don't even worry about it.  I mean in the park business, Disney didn't even talk about worrying about what Universal Studios was doing, because they felt that they couldn't do it as good as we could, and they couldn't.  They said, and so the question is "How do we do better than us?"  And so you go around and, and you look at the other parks, and you say oh, wow, these guys are doing so and so and so and so.  They're doing that better than we are.  We'd better raise our bar so, so we can be as good as them doing blank, blank, blank.  And so the parks in Tokyo were always pushing the, pushing the but--you know, raising the bar, raising the bar, and that was always good.  And so the parks would be in competition with, with themselves, to be better than each other.  And so that's what keeps it, it so high.
Story_ID: 81009
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment] it's, it's a smooth operation, but there have been crit--well, some of the products have been criticized, especially in terms of the way minorities are depicted in the Disney movies and, and other Disney products.  One example would be "Tarzan," where they had a movie where there, it takes place in, presumably, Africa, but there are no Africans (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --at all.  I mean, and people criticize that kind of thing.  Then, you know, contrastingly, we'll say "[The] Lion King," where all--where a number of the voices were minority--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) people minorities, but they were all played animal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, you know, one of the--you know, no company ever gets it all right.  And, and, and probably part of the reason why, why the animated film, "Tarzan," didn't do so well was because of the criticism it got, and why "The Lion King" did so well, because of how everybody just kind of rallied behind it.  Also, it was a much better story; it was, it, it, it was, it, it was done better; the, the songs were better, etc., etc.  So, so you know, you, you win some, you lose some.  And, and, and, and hopefully the comp--the, the company learns from those experiences, and as they move ahead, they do better.  One of the, one of the biggest financial flops that the company had while I was there was the animated film, "Mulan."  The--because it was based upon a Chinese story and, and had all, all Chinese characters.  From, from, from the standpoint of Asians, it was done perfectly.  But because the, the wider population didn't run to it, it didn't end up making much money.  But from the standpoint of the, of the depictions and the accents and all of that, we, we, we got very, very high marks from the Asian community.  And so, so, you know, you--and, and, and that came right after "Tarzan" having being been the big flop it was because of the, of the con--of the concerns.  And so, back to back there were two movies, one which had been handled wrong from the standpoint of, of the way it presented the, the subject matter; the next was not successful from a commercial standpoint, but did all the right things in terms of the way it treated--it, it treated an, an ethnic group.
Speaker 1: That's probably--well, I don't--my opinion doesn't really count that much, but I, I, I thought "Mulan" was one of the better--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah, I thought it was too.  I thought it was a very good film, a very good film.  But, but from a, from a, a commercial standpoint, it, it didn't do anywhere near as good as "The Lion King" or, or, or, or, or, or some of the others before that.
Story_ID: 81010
Speaker 1: So, you know, that was--so it's, it's that, it's that, it's that learning process.  As, as, as you look back, more recently the, the company has, has had its best success in terms of its animated films with the work with Pixar.  And they've--and you know, with that combination, they've done some real good things with Pixar, and probably we'll move in that, in that direction because that's, that's almost the, the kind of 3D animation that's, that's computer generated that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's like to--the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, "Toy Story," yeah, yeah, and all of those had been, have been very, very successful--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --animated films.
Speaker 2: Now did they ever call you in to advise on these kind of things at all, or they--
Speaker 1: No, you know, I was in one part of the company.  And you know, I, I was in live entertainment, and, and that's feature animation.  The company is divided into about five or six buckets, and I was in one of the buckets.  And, and all-although it's a very, very profitable bucket, in fact, for the longest period of time was driving the profits of the company, which, which is the, the, the theme park area.  The, the part of, the part of the company that, that, that got the most "respect"--quote/unquote--was the feature animation part, because that's where the company started.  I mean, that's where [Walt] Disney started the company, and, and so that still received the most of amount of attention.  Sometimes I would get to see--I, I would be involved in a look at a film when, when--as, as it was under construction, but we would be, we would be previewing it mainly from the standpoint of what kind of way could we have some synergy in our part of the company with this pra--with this new product.  So, so we get a chance to see it as, as, as it's in development so, so we could make plans for a show that, that, that we would put on, on, onto one of the properties, or a parade that we, we may wanna do that, that would be associated with it, or, or toys, etc., etc.  And so we would get a chance to take a look at it while it was in development.  Because, doing a feature an--animated film, take's 'em two to four years.  It's, it's a long period of time.  And so you, you get a chance to view various portions of it, and, and get some sense of the story, and so that we could make plans of, of, of, of a synergy.  And that's one of the things that's very, very important to the company, is this whole concept of synergy.  You take one product, developed by one part of the company, and then you make additional money from it within other parts of the company.  So, so you only have to have the creative one time, and then everybody else profits from that one creative.
Speaker 2: One clear example of that is "The Lion King."
Speaker 1: Yes, it is.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and did the entertainment end of Disney have anything to do with the development of that, that musical and all the--
Speaker 1: Yes, we did.  In fact, at one time, what is now Disney Theatrical belonged to Walt Disney Entertainment.  And the very first show, not "The Lion King," but "Beauty and the Beast," was produced by us.  And it actually was the show that had come from the park in California [Disney California Adventure].  And we took that "Beauty and the Beast" show and exc--and expanded some because it was, you know, it was a park show that was about an hour.  And no show is longer than an hour on the park.  And so it was a little bit less than an hour; it was about a, a 50-minute show, and so we, we expanded it to make it a Broadway show.  And then that became so successful that the company realized that they'd hit on something, and that they needed a separate ent--a, a separate unit to run it.  And that's when they created Walt Disney Theatrical, which, which is a free-standing unit.  And now it has three shows on Broadway.  It has "Beauty and the Beast," "The Lion King," and, and "Aida," and then it has touring companies of, of all of them, of "Beauty and the Beast," "[The] Lion King," and "Aida"--are touring all over the world.  And so that's a separate entity now.  And, and cor--and because that, it's a, a separate cost center, and it's also a, a separate profit center, yeah.
Story_ID: 81011
Speaker 1: Anything else about Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment] that you can think of be, before we move on to Columbia [College Chicago, in Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yep, probably the other thing about Disney is the--two things--is that no one is too important in the company to not be expected to, to do the most menial task.  And by that I mean, in, in, in The Disney Company they have something that they call the "Disney Scoop."  And you learn it when you go into the company, especially on the, on the, on the attraction side, is that it's everybody's responsibility to keep the parks clean.  So if you see some trash, you don't call somebody over to get it, you pick it up.  And, and, and that's rather difference when--di-different when you think of corporate, a corporate structure.  Because in a corporate structure, the president or CEO of a company will walk past trash, and he'll go and get the janitor and say, you know, this trash ba-barrel is overflowing.  You should do--in our--in that company, if you walk past it, and you see that something needs to be done, it's your responsibility to get it done.  And then you go and tell the people responsible for what you've done, but you don't wait for ss-ss-somebody else to do it.  And so, so the whole concept of, of the "Disney Scoop" is that you see it, and you scoop down and pick it up, and put it in the trash.  That's why the place is, it's--the place is so clean all the time, because everybody's cleaning 'em up.  Everybody who works there, regardless of what, what they do, is responsible for keeping it clean.
Speaker 1: Now have you kind of ingested that philosophy into what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, I have.  In fact, folks, folks around here was--will, will see me picking up paper.  And they'll say "Well, why are you doing that?"  And I say, "Because I saw it."  I said, "The next time you see it, you pick it up."  You, you don't wait for some, somebody; you don't walk past it and you go and get a janitor, or point out to someone else to do it.  We, we can all do it, and then that way the place, the place stays better, yeah.  And so I talk about that, you know.  We, we have yet to call it the Columbia Scoop, but, but maybe that's coming to some place down the line.  Warrick Carter describes the lessons he learned from Walt Disney Entertainment The other thing about Disney is that, never underestimate the importance of anybody to, to give a good input into a product or into a project.  And so, therefore, when that--when the company has brainstorm sessions, they bring every conceivable per--kind of people to the table to give their ideas and thoughts on a concept.  Because, because the janitor may have a real--because he's out there.  The street sweeper may say, "This isn't gonna work because of, because the trash cans are blank, blank, blank, so you can't have a parade with a float, so and so and so and so."  We don't know that, but the janitors do.  And so, therefore, you get all kind of people to talk about a project.  And so you have engineers; you have architects; you have, you have horticulturalist; you have the bean counters; you have the creative types; the choreographer types; you've got every, every conceivable kind of people at the table who are making--you know, who are there to listen to the concept and weigh in on what they think is good or bad, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81012
Speaker 1: All right, let's move on to Columbia [College Chicago in Illinois].  So you accepted this position at Columbia after you were offered it.  And you, you came here in 2000?
Speaker 2: In 2000, in, in the summer of 2000, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Columbia, it's rather interesting.  As I mentioned before, Columbia has grown significantly.  In fact, throughout the '80's [1980s] and the early '90's [1990s], it was the fastest growing school in, in higher education in terms of percentages of growth.  There are others who are larger, but we grew faster from, from, from whence we came to where we are.  We, we, we started that, that period with about a thousand students, and now we have ten thousand students.  We, we're now the largest school in media and the arts in the country, and have the largest film program in the world.  We've got two--almost 2,000 students in film in our film department.  And, and we have about 1,500 students in art and design department, which then those are our largest two departments.  We specialize in, in three areas: media, communications, and the arts.  And probably what has kept us successful has been our keeping our eye on the prize.  And by that I mean is that we've not tried to be everything to everybody.  We have a real clear sense of what we do and what we do well, and what kind of expertise we bring to the table, and what kind of credibility we bring to the table as an institution.  And so we're not trying to branch out into, in, into everything that, that may come along the, the line.  But we look only at those areas of medic--media and communications and the arts, and those things which are tangential to them, and develop programs in those areas, and try to keep our existing programs to be as marketable as they possibly can, and to improve on the--on those as much as we possibly can.  When I came to, to, to the college, we decided to divide the college into four schools, and we now have the School of Media Arts, the School, School of Fine and Performing Arts, the School of Liberal Arts Des--Liberal Arts Education and Science, and the graduate school, each of which are led by a dean.  Our largest school is media arts, and that's clearly one half of our enrollment.  In media arts we have film, television, radio, interactive multimedia, and journalism.  And then in fine and performing arts we have music, theater, photography, dance, visual arts; we have an arts managing marketing program.  And then, and then in, in the, in the education areas, we have science and math.  And as support courses, we have a poetry major, fiction writing major, and creative writing.  And then we have early, early, early childhood education, with an emphasis in, in the arts.  And we have graduate programs in, in teacher education with emphasis in the arts and in urban, urban education and languages.  So, and, and then, and in our graduate programs, we have graduate programs in photography, graduate programs in film, graduate programs in dance, interactive multimedia, and in an inter--int--interdisciplinary arts that are our graduate, are our graduate programs.
Story_ID: 81013
Speaker 1: Okay, and have things been fairly smooth, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know we've, we've, we came in with--as a change, as a change, change agent.  And because of that, whenever you come in as a change agent, there, there, there are some obstacles you have to get over.  No one really, no one really likes change, even though people say that they do.  No one really likes it, because, because we all have a, have a comfort level.  And we're--and, and so change is fine as long as it doesn't involve me, is, is, is the kind of concept.  But, but the kind of changes that we've been trying to do really will touch everybody at the institution.  And so, and so, we've ruf-ruffled some feathers.  But, by and large, I think it's been, it's been some smooth tr-tr-transitions, and we are moving forward with some real good projects now.  We continue to grow, and so we continue to need space.  And space has become much more of a, of a hot commodity here in the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois].  And so--and it's not as inex-inexpensive when it was when we were first here.  Fortunately, my predecessors had the foresight to do some buying of, of vacant property.  And so we have three buildable lots that, that, that, that, that are very, very important for us in terms of our growth.  And we, we, we, we can do the right kind of building on those as, you know, as, as needs arrive.  Like any private institutions, the challenges are always raising money.  We have, you know, we have the right kind of money in terms of our operating budget to operate the institution.  It's when you wanna have a, a huge, huge expenditure of 10, 20, 30 million dollars, that you can't all of a sudden just do out of operating expenses.  And so, and so that, that means fundraising, and so, and so we are always, you know, we are in the--always in the midst in fundraising.  There, there's a, an int--interesting joke that goes, goes around the circles of, of college presidents.  The joke goes is that there are two kind of people who dress up at night to go out and ask for money: prostitutes and college presidents.  So you always have to make sure that people know which one you are when you're out there doing it.  So, so, so when you see me out there at night asking for money, be sure you know which one, which one it is, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  I never heard that before.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Story_ID: 81014
Speaker 1: Now, is it, is it more difficult to manage artists than it is other kinds of academic types?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I really can't answer that because all of my life I've managed artists.  So, so I, I guess, you know, those are the only people I know, I manage.  I guess the others are probably just as crazy too, you know.  You know, artists are, are, artists are individuals, and they have to because a lot of what one does as an artist, you have to learn--you develop your tools by yourself, not collectively in groups, and you honed those tools by yourself.  And so if you're a musician, you spend a lot of times in a practice room, and you practice by yourself.  If you're, if you're a painter, you spend a lot of time by yourself painting by yourself.  If, if you're a dancer, you spend a lot of time dancing by yourself, working on moves by yourself, the same thing if, if you're in the darkroom, you're developing things; if you're a cameraman, etc.  So, so, so, so what, what, what happens in, in a collective environment sometimes is the antithesis of what artists are because it makes them work together.  Now, in some fields we do have to collaborate.  In music, we play together.  And, and, and filmmakers work, work together with an editor and a director and all of those kind of things, and so that's collaborative.  But in some of the areas it's never collaborative, and so, and, and, and so having them to develop those skills is always a challenge.  But that's, that sometimes is no different than some of the other fields, which, which are fields that require you to do your scholarship by yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And having a student population of artists, you know, has got to be challenging also--
Speaker 2: Well, it is, you know, you know, they, they are just as independent thinkers as, as, as other faculty.  And you know, we've got 1,200 faculty here, and, and 10,000 students, and so that--and, and then a lot of our staff are also artistic beings as well.  So, so we've got a community of some, you know, 12,000 art, artistic individuals.  And, and so, with all of the challenges that, that brings, but also all the opportunities, because it means that, you know, we, we're able to do things that, and, and, and think things, that others don't do and think.  And, and some of the product that has turned out is really of the highest, of the highest of quality.
Story_ID: 81015
Speaker 1: Now do you find because of the unique kind of population you have here you get more criticism than you would otherwise, or do you think that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, yeah I think, I think so.  And, and, and it's the, it's the, it's, it comes with the territory, especially when you have a, a journalism department where you're trying to develop journalists.  And so they, you know, they, they, they wanna investigate everything.  And the person who is the, is the point person is always the president; and so, therefore, there, there, there are more articles probably about me in our school paper than anybody else, with varying, varying degrees of complimenting--contemli--con--complimentiveness, I guess is the, is the, is the way I'm trying to put it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I see that there, there are--when we were doing research, you find like things on the net that were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --humorous, but I don't know what the validity is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, you are a target, you know--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep, yeah.
Speaker 1: --a target--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm a target.
Speaker 1: Right.  Or I guess anybody would be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean the one, the one that was probably, was, was the, was the house that they had purchased for the, this--the president of the college.  And they didn't u-use my name, but they used my initials and with, and with a name that rhymed with all of my name.  And so they--and so it said that, that the college had purchased some 10 million dollar house, summer home, for the president who, who would go down.  And, and then, then there was this other one about me milking the college with, with a cow, and me milking the cow and so forth.  So, you know, it's just part of the territory.
Speaker 1: You have pretty thick skin, right?
Speaker 2: Well, well, you better have some thick skin, you know.  And, and in fact, you know, one of the other things that, that, that, that goes around in, in president circles is that all college presidents say "never read your student newspaper" (laughter).  They say if, if there is something in there that you need know, somebody will tell you.
Story_ID: 81016
Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what--how do you prepare for, for student meetings, or when you have to meet a student--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what you try to do is that to get a real good sense of what, what the issues are at the institution, and, and to, and to be up to date in terms of any, in, any recent things that may, indeed, have happened to, to kind of undermine students or to, or to anger students.  And so you have some, some reason for a response to an action that may have been taken by a specific office.  You know, at no college or university are students ever happy with the Office of Financial Aid.  They're always angry with them.  And the reason they're always angry is because they never--financial aid never has all the money that all the students need.  And so there--and so it's any myriad of problems that may, indeed, happen there.  And the people who work in financial aid really have to have the patience of Job, and some don't.  And so that, that can end up being problems too.  And so, so it's, it's try to be have those folks to be as sensitive 'cause, because they probably have, have to be the most sensitive on campus than anybody, because they're dealing with that very, very crucial thing of "can I stay in school or not?"  And, and you know, "do I have enough for, for tuition?  Do I have enough support from the various grants and scholarships and so forth to make it happen and my own money?"  So, so it's always questions about.  And then sometimes, you know, it's, it's a question that, that comes from, from left field that you have no idea about, you know, about what--you know, where, where the question is coming from or the, or the, or the reason for the question.  You know, we, we put students out of school for, for disciplinary action.  And I may not know every kid who's been put out or why every kid has been put out.  I mean, the dean of students will tell me we, we dismissed three kids for fighting.  All right, and so I said okay, fine, and that's the end of it.  And then the friend of one of 'em will be in the office and said well, you know, "Joe got kicked out of school, and he shouldn't have been 'cause it was--wasn't his fault.  It was so and so and so and so's fault."  And so, and so I said well, I, "I can't discuss that now.  That's a, that's an individual case, and if--and, and I can't, and, and I can't discuss the actions regarding one specific student," and, and, and try to go on from there.  And, and, and the, and, and if students become disruptive, then we, you know, we will just end it or, or, or have them removed or something like that, but we haven't had that to happen, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you, you mainly do a policy now with individuals?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, a policy.  Yeah, because policy, policy is, is the one thing that, that, that I can, can support and can point to.  And so if, if something is--if, if, if, if, if you've been mistreated because somebody didn't follow the policy, then that's our fault.  If you didn't follow the policy, then that's your fault.  And so, and so, and so it's always a policy discussion.  Now sometimes people can just be rude, you know.  We have little things to happen.  We had a student, a student who brought a discrimination suit against a teacher, a racial discrimination suit because the teacher said something to him that he, that, that he felt was racially discriminating.  When, when, when we did the investigation, every kid in the class said, "he said that same thing to me."  In other words, this teacher just talks about everybody the same (laughter) way.  Now he wasn't singling this kid out.  And, and so the issue is: Does academic freedom protect that teacher to treat all, all the students badly?  And, and so then that becomes an, an issue before the department chair and the faculty to deal with.  But it clearly was not discriminatory, because he, he didn't single this kid out and treat him any, any better or worse than, than he's treated anybody else.  He treats 'em all bad.  He's one of those teachers who drives, drives you by insulting you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've never really liked that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Neither have I.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, I haven't.  But some like it, and some do it, and it works for some.  You know, I'm, I made a point earlier in, in our discussion about choosing not to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] for, for, for that exact reason.  I knew that I, I that I could not thrive and develop my abilities in an environment where the band director treated you that way, and, and, and that, and that he, he got his results by demeaning people.  And I saw him do the--he didn't demean me, but I saw him de-de-demean a kid and really crush a kid when I was in high school.  And I said that I--that, that's not an environment that I, I wanna be in, and so I, I made that choice.  And so, fortunately, I didn't end up in environments that, that, that treated kid, kids that way.
Story_ID: 81017
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a philosophy of education around the arts?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, yeah, it goes all the way back to almost the, the concept that Chicago [Illinois] used to have with the first [Mayor Richard J.] Daley, "early and often" to (laughter)--
Speaker 1: With the voting patterns.
Speaker 2: Voting patterns.  But in this case, it's early and often in terms of invol--involvement, to get kids involved in the arts as early as you possibly can, and to have them have those experiences as often as they can.  And what happens too frequently in, in a lot of public schools is that kids don't get a chance to start arts instruction until very late in their matriculations, sometimes junior high school, sometimes even high school.  And, and if they are getting it early, it's, it probably isn't often enough.  It's once every two weeks, once every other week, you know, once every three weeks, once a week, or something of that nature.  And so you don't develop artists that way, and you don't even develop folks who, who have a good appreciation and understanding, if they're gonna be artists or not by doing that.  And, and, and so I think, you know, we are doing a big misservice--disservice--to our youth, because the arts are the first to go whenever there's any kind of budget crunch or anything, you know.  You cut music; you cut visual arts; you cut dance; you cut theater, and, and never realizing that the skills that, that those kids learn, whether they're going to be an artist as, as professionals in their lives or not, develop various skills, which are transferrable across every conceivable discipline.  In fact, all the research is showing us ov-ov-over the past, over the past year, the past five, six years, the research shows us that experiences in the arts, and both early and often, are more important than even exposure to, to computers, be, because of the, of the way in which it helps the brain to develop.  You know, we all know that, that, that there are two sides of the brains.  We have the creative side and the reasoning side.  And what happens in the arts is that we end up developing both sides of the brain, be-be-because they demand the use of both sides of the brain.  And I'd rather be dealing with a student who uses his whole brain than the kid who uses a half a brain, wouldn't you?  I guess that's the question.  And so if the arts develop those skills, then, then we need to get arts to kids very early so they know how to use both sides of the brain and develop use of the whole brain, rather than just one part of the brain.
Speaker 1: It seem like that would make a better world.
Speaker 2: I think it would too, but, but you know, you know, who am I to say.  I'm just, I'm just a little college president at an arts institution.  And folks will say immediate well, he's saying that only because, you know, that's his discipline.  But, but, but the studies have been done by psychologists, not by artists, and have been done by child development specialists, and not by artists.  And they are the ones, who, who, who, who are, who are carrying the banners and saying that the importance of, of, of early and often arts are--can't, can't be beat by any--by, by, by engagement in any other thing.  You know, all the emphasis on reading and writing is important because our kids have to be literate and, and, and have to be, be able to, to work with numbers and, and think abstractly.  But, but the way to get to them, in many cases, is, is through the arts, because we think abstractly in the arts.  We think in abstract terms early.  At the beginning in--you know, we, we're thinking abstractly.
Story_ID: 81018
Speaker 1: Now, the City of Chicago [Illinois], are, are we going forward or we going backward in terms, terms of the commitment to the arts in the public schools?
Speaker 2: We, we probably are at a standstill.  We've made some progress, but, but that progress is, is not moving forward at all.  Now, one of the things that we and some other institutions are doing, and some community groups, are try--are partnering with the Chicago Public Schools to offer arts instruction where, where none is being offered.  We have an office on campus that's--it's o--it's O-P--Office of Public--the Office of Public Arts--OCAP--Public Arts and Communication [sic, Office of Community Arts Partnerships].  And, and what we're doing is that we're actually offering arts instruction after school with our faculty at, at a variety of, of sites.  And I think we've got like eight, eight sites that, that, that we work with.  And we're doing music, dance, theater, and visual arts that--and not for a cost.  Students just, students just stay after school, and can receive that instruction, because these schools are not offering it.  And these are all, all elementary schools that, that we're working with.  Because we feel that that's a value that, that has--that kids would be lacking something in their lives if they don't have arts, arts instruction and, and, and, and experiences in the arts.  You know, one of the interesting things, too, is that although schools are not always doing the arts and, and following through with the arts and so forth, and providing arts instruction, kids are still showing that they need it and want it.  And I believe that, that, that, that that's indicative of all of the street music that happens, because kids are not getting it in school.  And so they're saying well, I still have this need for music; I still wanna make music; I still wanna be involved in music.  And without any kind of instructions possible for them, they find their own ways of, of being involved in, in, in, in the making of, of, of arts.  The best place in the country for arts instruction in, in the public schools is city of Miami [Florida].  Every elementary school has a music teacher, a visual arts teacher, and either a dance or theater teacher, every elementary school.  That's, that's, so, so that's, that's, that's the place.  I mean that's the place that, at, at--they, they understand the value; they've brought into the value; and they've put their money where their mouths are; and make sure that every kid, that no kid, finishes elementary school with having, wa-wa-without having that exposure.
Speaker 1: That's, that's incredible.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, yep.
Speaker 1: In terms of the African-American community, especially here, in Chicago, there's a tradition of, going back to the '30's [1930s], of arts in the public schools being very important.  You know the story of [Wendell] Phillips High School--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, yes, I do, yes.
Speaker 1: --all of the people that he [Captain Walter Dyett] trained went out and became successful entertainers and artists and so forth.  South Side Community Arts Center--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --or even found the National Council of Arts.
Story_ID: 81019
Speaker 1: Have you--I mean, how have you been able to, I guess, influence the, the way Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] approaches the arts by being--or, or how does the African-American experience inform how Columbia College approaches that?
Speaker 2: I mean, I--excuse me--[coughing]--I don't know if I've even thought of it from that vantage point, but I think it's a good, it's, it's a good question.  I mean, I approach, I approach the involvement in the arts from my own experiences, as I just described them.  They were, that they were rich in the arts, both within the public schools, within churches, within my home.  And, and, and, and I think that, I think that's, that's the right way to bring up kids.  And so, and so I, I preach that amongst, amongst, amongst--every time I get an opportunity to talk about it.  Because we are an arts institution, our kids are, our kids are involved in whatever their art is the moment they step in this door, unlike a lot of institutions which make you wait to get into your major until your junior year.  Whatever you're going to do, you start your first semester here, so, so that "early and often" concept already existed here when I got here.  And so it's one in which--it's probably one of the things which attracted me here as well.  Because a, a lot of what we believe in and do, and, and, and the way in which we try to do things as an institution are in keeping with the, the way in which I believe things should be done.  So, so that early and often concept exists here; kids touch it immediately, and, and, and we, we don't believe in waiting to be a whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81020
Speaker 1: You know, I think there is something that you wrote I wrote--I mean there is a paper you wrote called "The Impact of African Music on the Development of European Concert Music."
Speaker 2: Oh, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what--tell me about that.  That was just so intriguing, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was a, a paper I wrote a long time ago when I was--I really had this, this great interest in looking at the influence of the Diaspora.  And, and so the, that paper looks at, at, at, at two kind of influences.  Num- number one has to do with those, th- those individuals who were writing European concert music who were black; that people didn't realize they were black or knew that they were black at various, at, at various hi- times in the history of concert music.  I mean one of, one of [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart's contemporaries was, was an African American--no, no, no, it was a European American [sic, Afro-European], was a European in France, whose name is George de Cavalier [sic, Joseph Bologne, Chevalier de Saint-Georges], who was a very, very important composer in France at the time, and, and his--he come from Guadeloupe.  And everybody talked about how much more rhythmically active his music was than the standard music of the day.  And so, I mean, and so we understand why that music--why it was rhythmically active, because of this African tradition that, that he'd heard in Guadeloupe.  And so, therefore, he was bringing that into, into what was cla- into, into the classic period of music.  And so his contemporaries were Mozart and [Franz Joseph] Haydn, and, and so, and, and, you know what, what that music sounded like.  A contemporary of [Ludwig van] Beethoven's was a, a violinist named George [Augustus Polgreen] Bridgetower, who, who, who was actually a friend of, of Beethoven's.  And the two of them actually argued over a woman.  And Beethoven had dedicated a violin concerto [Violin Sonata No. 9 in A Major, also known as the Kreutzer Sonata] to George, and got angry at him and scratched it out, and dedi- and dedicated it to another, another, another violinist [Rudolphe Kreutzer].  And so we, and we, we know this because we have the original, the original manuscript where Beethoven scratches off, off--scratches through George's name, and puts, and puts the number one competitor of George.  And George was known to, to favor very rhythmically challenging music, and probably was drawn to Beethoven because Beethoven was known as the, as the blackamoor of the, of the German composers.  Now, whether or not Beethoven was black or not is an argument that has gone on for long periods of time.  But, but, but he clearly had a, a friend in George Bridgetower, who was visibly black, where- whereas Beethoven was not.  And, and, and so I looked at, first, those, you know, the, those artists who were, and composers themselves who were black, and, and what they were doing and whether or not you could see some, some form of the Diaspora in their music.  And then, and then I looked at those other composers who, who, who looked to, to, to, to African themes or to, or to black folk literature, or African folk literature, to see how that worked its way in, into their music, if, if, if, if at all.  And, and you did find some examples of that, of that influence.  So that's what that article is about, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 81021
Speaker 1: Is there, is there an area of the arts here at Columbia [College Chicago, Illinois] where you think--I would imagine in the creative world that music is probably the area where you find most of the black students--
Speaker 2: No, you don't.
Speaker 1: Oh?
Speaker 2: No, you find them in, in film--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --in film.  In fact, in a survey done before I came to the college, probably about five years ago, there was a survey done about film schools in the country.  And it was done by Hispanic Higher Education Association, something like that.  And they were looking at where the minority students I film are located, and what schools do the best in making opportunities.  They were mainly interested in, in Latinos, but they look at all, all minorities.  And they discovered in their research that 45 percent of all African Americans who were enrolled in film school were at Columbia College.  That's unbelievable, 45 percent of all African-American students in film were.
Speaker 1: In the country is--
Speaker 2: In the country--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --were here.  And so, so it means, therefore, that, that, you know, because of our numbers and also be--because of how large we are, and because of our good size of, of, of a minority population, we've got about 38 percent minority students, about 18 percent of, of whom African Americans, and 12 percent about Latinos.  So, be-because of those numbers and percentages, it means therefore that, that we are training the largest percentages, espec--specifically in media and in dance.  And in, and in, in journalism, we're trai--training, in many cases, the largest numbers as well as percentages, of, of African Americans in, in a variety of areas.  A very interesting thing happened a year, a year ago.  Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] received a grant from--I, I can't recall the foundation, so I won't say, because I'm not sure--but to endow its, its journalism program.  And they got $10 million.  And the express purpose of this grant was to help to develop African-American students in journalism.  I wrote to the funding source and said that--and congratulated them on that, but indicating to them that I had more black students in my journalism department than does Hampton, which is a Hampton may, may have 90 students in journalism.  I've got 600, 18 percent of-to 20 percent of whom are black, so I've got more students.  And so I said if you really want to be supporting minority students in journalism, don't always look just to historically black institutions.  There are some other institutions that are doing some--a, a good job in terms of doing that.  And so, I got a nice response back.  But, but, but I had to make that, that case, is that, is that we are helping to diversify the newsrooms, the, the etc., etc., etc. in the industry because of the large, large percentages of minorities that we have in our programs.  In fact, we had, we had the Latino Media Association for the Midwest had, had, had a conference here.  And they, and they indicated to us that we were the reason why there was an increase in Latino, Latinos in the newsrooms, be-because of the cameramen, the sound folks, the blank, blank, blank, blank that, that we're turning out, the writers, etc., etc.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the same goes for African Americans.
Story_ID: 81022
Speaker 1: So, another aspect of the arts I think that its, it's been noted by some that it seems as though there are less young people playing instruments now in music than it used to be.  I mean, I mean a lot of the popular and successful entertainers don't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --actually.  They talk or they sit, and they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and, and I blame that on the, on the public schools.  It, it's the "early and often" concept again, is that as, as you look back historically, kids played instruments because they had the opportunity early in their lives to learn to play them.  And so they'd start in the fourth grade, and they would have--they'd be in, in, in, in instrument music programs.  Chicago Public Schools, for example, starts kids in the ninth grade.  By the time kids get to the ninth grade, the large major of them, they already have, have a, a sophisticated music listening.  And to all of a sudden go back and now play "Mary Had a Little Lamb," and the little beginning tunes is not of interest to them, when with their mou--mouths and their voices they can do something that's rather sophisticated.  And so consequently they choose not to go in the direction of instrumental music, and, and so they--but they still make music in some kind of way.  So, in fact, I did, I did an article for some, some magazine about, about the, the decrease of the number of, of African Americans involved in, in, in, in music programs and, and why that was happening and this--and point, and point to this as, as one of the examples that, that, that kids are still making music.  But we're not providing them with the outlets early enough so that they could be involved in it, and, and even in those institutions and even though in those cases where it is er-early enough, especially in the South where integration has taking place, lot of the environments are not welcoming to them anymore.  You know, I, I take my hometown [Charlottesville, Virginia] for example.  When I grew up in my hometown, we had, we had a black high school and two white high schools, one in the city and one in the county, the, the white high schools, all three of whom had real good band programs.  And so the, the black high school had a marching band of a hundred and some kids, okay.  When they integrated and all of those black kids went into those two white high schools, all of a sudden there, there were less than that amount of, of black kids participating in band, and it got down to like 30, 30, 40 kids.  Now what happened to those other 70 kids who, who had historically been involved in band programs?  Why weren't the, why were they no longer in band programs?  It's not because they didn't have an interest, because it's already been shown, shown that they had an interest.  But all of a sudden when integration happened, they, they, they were no longer participating.  And, and it's a lot of reasons, a lot of reasons, in terms of convenience, in terms of high schools not being in the community anymore, the, the band director not being part of the community anymore, you know, and, and all of those things happening.  But we lost a lot of, a lot of kids who, who would have played instruments, but, but no longer playing instruments, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's chilling.
Speaker 2: It is, it is, but that--yeah, that, that--and you look across the South, you look across the South.  When I was at Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee], kids were coming from these huge high schools throughout the South, from Birmingham [Alabama], from Memphis [Tennessee], from Chattanooga [Tennessee], from Miami [Florida].  And, and they had these, they had outstanding music programs.  I mean I ran--when I got to Tennessee State, I ran the kids who were just fabulous musicians, I mean just unbelievable.  I thought I was pretty good, but these kids were just, I mean, just smoking, and they had, had come out of these, these tremendous black high school programs.  And you go back to these same cities and you, and you can't find that, that--an equal number of black kids involved in music programs, yet there are more black kids in those cities now.  Jacksonville [Florida] had, had one of the best high school band programs in the country.
Story_ID: 81023
Speaker 1: We were just, we were talking about music education, I think; some of the lost opportunities.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yeah, unfortunately, you know, and it's, it's not only in music.  It's really across the arts, is that if you don't offer instruction for kids early enough, then, then--in, in the school system--then, then, they'll seek them elsewhere, and, and end up maybe--especially in music--choosing not to go into instrumental music at all, but will maybe stay in, in some form of music.  You know, I think that that's the reason there are so many rap kids now.  It's because they, they weren't even given the opportunity to, to be involved in, in making, in making--and participating in, in organized music instruction in elementary or junior high school.  And that's, that's not only here in Chicago [Illinois].  It's in New York [New York City, New York]; it's in LA [Los Angeles, California]; it's in, it's in small towns, you know, in Richmond, Virginia, Norfolk, Virginia, you name it.  As I said, Miami [Florida] is one of the few, few exceptions that, that values the arts and, and, and make sure that kids get arts instruction.
Speaker 1: Also, like, I think, I think what, what you see is that people are gonna create anyway--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --regardless--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, they are, yes.  You know, I think it's rather interesting, as you look at Miami, as we know that Miami is, is really a Cuban city.  And I mean the, the largest population there are Cuban Americans, and then the arts are very important in that culture, and they've made sure, therefore, that the kids in that city get, get the arts.  And arts had been very, very important in the African-American culture, but we haven't seemed to hold on to that value in the same way as the Latinos, at least in, in, in, in South Florida have done.
Speaker 1: I think--does it have to do with political power?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, they do have the power.
Speaker 1: --public school system--
Speaker 2: They, they have the power.  They have the power.
Speaker 1: That--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Have the power.
Speaker 1: Would you think that--I mean with the, the rap phenomenon, you know, its origin I guess in, in, in the black cultural movement of the '60's [1960s] and '70's [1970s]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, yes, yes, yeah, mm-hmm, mm-hmm--
Speaker 1: --do you think, do, do you think we lose continuity when we can like teach this, this--it's not a hand me down from one generation to the next in a formal way?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, you know, I think that--I had this discussion with a young woman recently about whether or not we should even try to include rap instruction or, or the new hip hop activities, you know, in the, in the academy.  And be, be, because she says that it's har--her argument that, that it would lose some of its earthiness and some of its creativity if we try to bring it within to the--in, in the academy.  And I point out that, you know, jazz was once a, a street music, and, and it's done pretty good in the academy.  And I don't think that, that the music has suffered because of it.  A post--the poster child for jazz education is Norah Jones, who just won five Grammys this week.  And she came out of an, out of an arts high school, Booker T. School of, of the Arts [booker T. Washington School for the Performing and Visual Arts] in Dallas, Texas, then went on to North Texas State University [University of North Texas in Denton, Texas], where she worked on a bachelor's degree in music and, and performance.  So she is the poster girl for music education, and showing that when you do it right, regardless of what kind of criteria you're gonna use to evaluate somebody, you can be successful when, when done right.  And, and, and it was done right with her.  She started early, involved in it often, followed it through, and look at her--and look at where her career is.  And at, and at the same time, where all of the rap and ra--and hip hop and heavy metal and everything, all of that's going at the same time her records won Record of the Year.  She because Artist of the Year.  She became Vocalist of the Year, with a real solid music education, so I just--by--I point to her as the, as the poster child, you know.  Every music organization in the, in the country ought to have her, (laughter) her face on a poster, saying: you too can be a Norah Jones, with, with good music education.
Story_ID: 81024
Speaker 1: Now, now individuals who have--who are good at mixing music and sampling music--I know some young men who've come out of Columbia [College Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were good at that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do they learn--I mean do they learn--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mic--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, mixing they learn.  We have, we, we have, we have, you know, in, in an audio program we have a variety of things about mixing and so forth.  And, and we have a radio program too, which also helps, helps kids do that.  But, but, but a lot of the, of the DJ kind of stuff, you know, we, we don't offer program in "DJing" quote/unquote.  But kids tank--take--some of those skills in terms of learning how to master the, the tech, the technology and, and, and move that onto the next level of being, of being creative, yeah.
Speaker 1: So right now that kind of instruction is really not--I mean, now on that level, where you show you this is how you actually--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --DJ--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --this is how you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, it isn't--no.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, I do know some par--there's a program in Japan that teaches DJing, and it's a, it's a two-year program at that, at a group of schools in Japan that kids learn how to do that.
Speaker 1: I've, I've heard about those kind of programs in other countries, where, where people actually--the students come to the United States and go to the community and find somebody that knows how to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --they, they study is part of formal--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yeah, yes--
Speaker 1: --formal instruction.
Speaker 2: --in formal instruction, yeah.
Speaker 1: And yet it's not in the school--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not in the schools here.
Speaker 1: And what, what about spray painting, you know, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: --painted.  There's a lot of--
Speaker 2: We, yeah, we do things, we do things in, in, in murals.  We do have of-- courses in murals, and we of--and we offer them in, you know, from the standpoint of both, both the use of cans, but also the use of paint.  The, the, the most important thing that we feel is in, in being a good visual artist is the ability to draw.  And so that's the foundation of everything that we do.  And so it starts with, starts with drawing.  And then the other thing is, is the ability to tell a story, because, because that's what the arts are about as well.  Arts and media are about telling stories.  And whether it's a written story with, with words, or a visual story, or, or an oral story with, with just sounds, it's still, it's still telling a story.  And so it's, it's trying to get kids to understand a theme, development, conclusion in whatever the entity may be.  And so whether you do it with a spray can, or if you do it with a paint brush, it's the same kind of thing.  And, and so we do teach miral--murials--murals at the institution, but we teach it from the standpoint of first the ability to draw and make a story.
Speaker 1: Now, of, of the thing that you teach here, what, what do you--I mean of the, the courses that are taught here and the direction that Columbia is going in, what do you think is the most, I guess, futuristic of the, of the direction--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Were, were--you know, it's probably, it's probably the, the things that have to do with technology, and that's technology in, in any of the areas, whether it's in, in digital photography, or whether it's in the way in which we are using technology and animation, the way that we're using technology in, in sound recording.  And, and so, you know, those are the way--those are the things, which are kind of cutting edge and, and leading toward the next development.  And, and you know, how do we use it, and you know, the whole development that we talked about with Pixar, that, that they created a whole new way of doing animation.  And so, the, there are other corporations now looking--what's the next step beyond that?  And, and, and, and hopefully our kids are involved and they're looking for that, searching for that in animation as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 81025
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your, your own career as an artist, can you tell us about your performing life as an artist (unclear) you, you performed at a high level with a lot of great artists--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I've been lucky.  You know, I started off a--you know, as a--I, I started off as a--I wanted to be a, a concert timpanist, that's what I really wanted to be.  And, and, and so that was, that was the, the, the direction I was going.  And when I got to Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee], I played timpani all the way through and even played timpani in graduate school as well.  But I started playing drum set and in high school.  And I really didn't get kind of serious about drum set until I got almost out of college and found that, that, that, that was a way in which I really enjoyed making music, and really kind of moved away from the multiple percussion stuff and all of that.  And when I came to Chicago [Illinois] in '71' [1971], I had been kind of serious about playing by that time.  And while I was at, at Michigan State, I won the best drummer award at the Notre Dame Jazz Festival, and, and at that festival, had been heard by, had been--the, the adjudicators were important jazz musicians.  And so, and so my name kind of floated in the community I guess a bit about this quote/unquote "hot kid" from, from Michigan who won the--who won.  And so, opportunities presented themselves with various artists, and so I took advantage of it and so, and so I played with Donald Byrd, and Clark Terry, and, and [HM] Billy Taylor, and [HM] Dee Dee Bridgewater, and Shirley Horn, and just, just a variety of people because the opportunities were, were there.  And, and, and I was playing and playing pretty well and, and playing often.  And so, playing often meant that, you know, that you kept your chops.  And, and so, and so that was, you know, that was a good period there.  I did some recording work with Natalie Cole and Peabo Bryson, recorded with [Vernice] "Bunky" Green and some others.  And, and so, you know, those were just opportunities.  I recorded with Nick Brignola, so I mean opportunities presented themselves, and I took advantage of them at that time.  But, but my, my academic responsibilities at Governors State [University in University Park, Illinois] and my composing things too were, you know, vying for time.  It's so much, all, all--it's only so much time, and you've got to practice all of that.  And, and, and my day gig--it was my day gig--which was being chair of, of music and chair of fine arts at Governors State, and so I had to take care of my day gig.  And then I'd began to more things in arts advocacy and, and stuff like that.  And so the playing, the playing began to take a back seat, because I was enjoying writing more than playing at the time.  And so, so I moved away from playing professionally.  When I got Boston [Massachusetts] though, I did, I did more playing as well, and, and played with the Boston Pops jazz en--jazz group for, for about four years, which was, which was a lot of fun.  I did--I had a lot of fun playing with that group, and did some playing with, with, with artists at Berklee [College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts], because Berklee had such--so many fine artists that it just may--it didn't make any sense to miss the opportunity to play with, you know, just the cream of the crop.  And, and so, and so I took advantage of that while I was there early in my, early in my career.  But, but then the job--the day gig--got to be very, very busy, and I didn't get a chance to do as much playing as I would have liked, yeah.
Story_ID: 81026
Speaker 1: Tell me now--we, we always ask people this, what are your hopes and concerns for the African-American community?
Speaker 2: You know, I have, I have real concerns about, about the young African-American males.  That's, that's, that's, that's my biggest worry.  It's more of them in prison than there are in college.  We have the hardest job here in holding onto African-American males.  They drop out in much higher a level than do any of our other students.  So, so my concern--and, and so we've created some, some, some mentoring programs and special connecting programs for, for our minor--all of our minority students here when they first come.  But we really are concerned about African-American males.  Males have lost role models; they've lost father figures; they--yeah, they've lost contact with the whole history and, and responsibility thing that, that, that I grew up with in watching my uncles, and my father [Charles Carter], and, and the men in the neighborhood.  Regardless of what kind of jobs they had, they took pride in them, you know.  We had, we had janitors and doctors all in the same, in, in the same neighborhood, but it made no difference.  They all took pride in what they were doing.  And there is no pride now in, in, in service jobs, and, and it's service jobs that got us to where we are.  You go into restaurants you don't see black male waiters at all.  At one time that was a mainstay, a very, very respectable employment for, for African-American men.  And young black men look down on that as being, as being menial.  But yet it's, it's become, it's become real good professions for large numbers of people and who make huge amounts of money doing it, but that's beneath, beneath us now.  We, we, we looked to the wrong places for role models.  We looked to, to the thugs, to the criminals, to the drug dealers, to the, to the, you know, the slick guys.  So, so I have concerns there.  And, and, and I have concerns also about some of the role models that are in the popular media that our young black males lean toward.  Some of the basketball stars and some of the, and some of the recording starts, you know, are not good role models at all, and because, because they themselves are lacking all the things I just described.  And so they carry on that same kind of attitude, but ja--but the only difference is that they have money to do it with.  And, and, and so, too many of our young black males thing that that's the way, and that, that, that, that--you know, the easy money, the slickness, the zip, zip, zip and all of those kind of things are the ways to do it because these guys have the money that they can flaunt this kind of stuff.  So, so I've, I have great concerns.
Story_ID: 81027
Speaker 1: The answers, I'm, I, I, I don't know if I've got any.  I, I just, I'm happy that my son-in-law [Clarence Thrash] is okay, and hope, hope that when they have children, if they have young boys, that, that those grandsons of mine will be all right, and that--
Speaker 2: You have one daughter, right?
Speaker 1: I have, have one daughter [Keisha Thrash]--and that, and that, and just try to help them and, and those tangential to them and tangential to them to reach out, you know, beyond the families.  We, we--young boys have also la--lost, you know--some of the things that made us a good, very, very strong community we've lost touch with.  We've lost touch with religion; we've lost touch with the churches.  You go to church, you don't see, see young boys there.  You see girls there, but you don't see young boys there.  And so, and so you need to have some kind of, of, of, of influence in your life that's positive, that gives you some morals, and, and that give you some, some, some, some directions.  If you're not getting it at school, you're not getting it at home, you don't go to church, then you go to the street to get it.  And, and the street is not gonna give you the kind of, the, the, the kind of appropriate direction that you need.  There are some wonderful community organizations that are reaching out and trying to do things, Boys and Girls Club is as an example, the Y [YMCA].  But, but, but it's not enough of those to, to reach all the kids.  So those are some of the possible ways of helping it--after school programs.  You know and, and it's back to music, it's back to music.  There was, there used to be this old saying in music education back in the '30's [1930s], when it's--and, and, and as I look about--as I look back now, we are facing the same problems in trying to impress up on the educational establishment the value of the arts.  But one of the sayings from the '30's [1930s] in music education was: "teach a kid to blow a horn, he'll never blow a safe."  And so, what they're saying: get kids involved in stuff, they won't have time to do bad.  And, and, and so it's the same thing, get kids, get kids actively involved that, that they don't have time to stand on the corner and create problems, that they are in a practice room, they're at a dance recital, if they are learning to paint, if they're--etc., etc.  You get them actively involved in something that brings out their creativity, they don't have time to, to, to do all the negative things that kids do.  Because idle minds, as, as my grandmother [Carrie Nichols Jones] used to say, is a devil's workshop, so.
Story_ID: 81028
Speaker 1: Now you, you had a very--your family is close.  You and your brothers, your, your father [Charles Carter], your brothers, your, your uncles--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes I have--I had three brothers.  I lost a brother [Lucian J. Carter] a year ago, who passed unexpectedly.  But we were, we were and are a very, very close-knit family.  I've an older brother, Charles, the brother immediately under me, Lucian, who passed, and my youngest brother, Orlanda.  Charles has two children and three grandchildren; and Lucian never married; and Orlanda has a son, and who's a freshman in college; and, and then I have a daughter, Keisha, who is now Keisha Thrash, T-H-R-A-S-H, with her husband, Clarence.  They live in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 81029
Speaker 1: Now tell, tell me sir, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, well, I would hope that my former students would say that he cared, and, and that, and that, and, and that he tried to help.  I would hope that my, my family would say that I loved them, and that I provided, and that, and that I was a good father and a good husband.  And, and I would hope that my friends would say that we had some good times together and that, and that, and that I was true friend.  So, so I would hope that those would be the, the--that that's the legacy, because are the important parts of my life.  The public parts, the public parts and, and those who've known me as a public person or know me as a public person, would, I would hope that they say that I, you know, that, that I did a good job with whatever I was assigned to do, whether here at Columbia College Chicago [Illinois], or at Berklee [College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts], or at GSU [Governors State University in University Park, Illinois] or wherever it was.  At Disney [Walt Disney Entertainment] I would hope they'd say that, that, that I worked hard, and carried out my assignments, and brought some value to wherever, and who, whoever happened to be paying me at the time, I guess we'll put it that way.
Speaker 1: So, is that how you'd like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is how I, I'd like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right, well, I think that's, I think that's it I think.  I thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you, thank you.
Speaker 1: It's been a pleasure.
Speaker 2: The pleasure is mine.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Good.
Story_ID: 81030
Speaker 1: Yes, that's my brother, Lucian [Carter], and I.  This was taken in our, in the backyard at our home [Charlottesville, Virginia].  We look like two vagabond children, almost like the kids from "Our Gang."  I, I look like I'm about five, and Lucian is about three I guess.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my, my grandmother, Carrie Nichols Jones, who I told you about, and her husband, Lucian [Jones].  The two younger children are my uncles, my uncle, James Jones, and my uncle, Elwood Jones, E-L-W-O-O-D.  And the, the young woman in between them was my mother--my grandmother's youngest sister.  Her, and her name was Amanda, A-M-A-N-D-A, Amanda Nichols.  And this, this would have been taken the turn of the last century, because my Uncle Elwood was born in 1902, and as you can see, he's a little baby there.  So that's probably in '02' [1902], or '03' [1903].
Speaker 1: A hundred years ago.  That's a hundred years ago.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my family.  That's my mother [Evelyn Jones Carter] and my father.  That's my brother, Charles [Carter], who's holding our dog.  His, his name was Pierre, as in Peter, French for Peter.  That's me on the left, standing up.  That's my youngest brother, Orlanda [Carter], in the middle, and my brother, Lucian [Carter].  This is probably--Lanny looks like he's approximately about four years old.  And so Lanny is six years younger than I am, so this would have been like in--I, I would have been 10, so, so maybe '52' [1952], '53' [1953], someplace in there.
Speaker 1: Those are my brothers and I.  This was taken probably in '85' [1985], '86' [1986], someplace in there.  We had gone to surprise my father for Father's Day.  And so that's my brother, Lucian, on the left; next to him, my brother Charles; and then my brother Orlanda.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was a picture that's taken since I've been here at the college [Columbia College Chicago].  This is at one of our events that we sponsored.  We have a, an activity each year where, where we'd auction off artwork from faculty and alums, and this is such an event.  The two people to the left with me on the picture on the picture I'm not sure of their names, but they work with the catering company that we used for this event.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Okay, what year was this?
Speaker 2: This would have been on 2001 or--yeah, 2001.
Speaker 1: This is also here at the college.  This is at an opening event.  The person with me is Victor Skrebneski, the very important photographer, fashion photographer.  He's also on our board of trustees.  And this is an event that we had that, that, that, that--at which he was in attendance.
Speaker 2: This, this is a recent picture of me performing here at the college.  This was for a fundraiser for our professional jazz ensemble in residence, the Chicago Jazz Ensemble.  And in this one, I, I sat in and played one piece with them at, at during the fundraising event.
Speaker 1: Yes, this is taken at a, at an event recently.  That's Bill Kurtis and his, and his, and his companion, whose name I can't recall.  And next to her is John Duff, who is the former president of the college, and yours truly.
Speaker 2: This was at an event at a fundraising event again.  That's Dr. Woody White on the right, who our vice president of Institutional Advancement.  That's Marcia Lazar, who is a board member and also the chairman of the President's Club, which was sponsoring this event, and yours truly.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Sir, you're mic'd.  That would be Donna La Pietra.
Speaker 2: That's right, Donna La Pietra, that's right.  Yeah, that, that's Bill Kurtis, Donna La Pietra, John Duff, and yours truly.  I couldn't remember Donna's name, thank you.
Speaker 1: I believe held, held at the president's home, that's with Sydney Gordon Smith [sic, Sydney Smith Gordon], who is one of our board members, and her, her date for the evening.
Speaker 2: This was taken last year at the conclusion of our Fashion Columbia.  Each year we have a fashion show featuring the work of the graduating seniors in fashion design.  The program is, is, is produced by the students in our fashion marketing major.  And these are some of the student designers who were involved in the show.
Speaker 1: This is [David] Henry Hwang, who is a very, very important composer and playwright.  He has recently done very successful "M. Butterfly," which was on Broadway for a good period time.  And he's also the writer of the new flower--"Flower Drum Song," and he was here for our Asian Heritage Month.
Speaker 2: This is at my inauguration here at the college almost two years ago.  The person to the right is Curtis McCray, who is president of National-Louis University here in the city.  And I'm giving my inaugural address there.
Speaker 1: The top picture is of, is at an event held at the president's house for, for the individual in the, in the middle, who is [HM] Dawoud Bey.  Dawoud is a faculty member who had just--who was being honored for having received the Guggenheim Fellowship in photography.  Dawoud is, is one of our outstanding photographers, and we were very proud of him.  The--it's yours truly to the right, and Bill Hood, who is chairman of the board, is to the left.
Speaker 2: On the bottom, this is, this is an event that we had in, in Michigan last summer, where we had a variety of activities of taking Columbia cartis--college-
Story_ID: 81031
Speaker 1: This bottom photo is of a series, it's from a series of events that we [Columbia College Chicago] held in Michigan last summer in Harbor Country.  We discovered that a good number of the people who are our supporters have summer homes there, and we decided to do a series of arts events.  We had, had an art show.  We had performances and a, and a play that ran for a, a month.  And with me is Nancy Tom on the left, who is one of our board members, and one of the student assistants on the right.
Speaker 2: This is from that same event.  This is the--a woman who is the director of the Art Museum in Michigan City, Indiana, that served as the host for our event while we were there for our art show.
Speaker 1: These pictures are all, all, all of come from the same event, these two pictures.  No, they don't.  They're two different--
Speaker 2: You have different ties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a different tie, isn't it?  Yeah, that's right, that's right, it's a different tie.  Okay, yes, yeah, but it's from--yes.  This, this is--the top picture is from an activity that we hold each year as a scholarship fundraiser for students in, in, in, in, in photography and in journalism.  And the--this is a gentleman who had been one of our supporters, up top.
Speaker 2: The picture down at the bottom is a reception honoring the gentleman in the middle, who is--had received the first endowed chair as a faculty member.  And it had been endowed by the Coleman Foundation, and so it's the Coleman Professorship and Entrepreneurship.  And the gentleman to the left is with the Coleman Foundation.  And the faculty member in the middle is Dr. Joe Roberts, who has that chair.
Speaker 1: This was taken as part of our activity in celebration of Dance Africa.  Dance Africa is an activity that we sponsor at the college, and it's the largest celebration of Africa dance in North America.  Standing with me are [HM] [Donald J.] Don Jackson, who is a, a member of our board, and his wife, and artistic director of Dance Africa.
Speaker 2: The bottom photo--
Speaker 1: Chuck Davis.
Speaker 2: Chuck Davis, Chuck Davis.
Speaker 1: The bottom photo is from an, an event that, that honors outstanding arts organizations in the city.  And that's Fred Fine and at--on, on the left.  And the honorarees from arts organizations are standing between Fred and I.
Speaker 2: This, these two photos are from, from an event that we held here at the college that said to tie one on for the former chair of our, of our television department.  He was a great collector of, of ties.  And upon his passing--that's his wife in the middle, who decided to auction off his ties.  And that's the chair of the, the present chair of the television department and I.
Speaker 1: The bottom photo are, are others of us who purchased ties and, and suspenders at this event.
Speaker 2: This is an event that we held at the house for Haskell Wexler, who is standing immediately to my right.  Nec--and then next to me on the other side is Roger Ebert and Studs Terkel, to Haskell Wexler's right.  And then next to him is Bruce Sheridan, who is chairman of our film and video department.  We had brought Haskell in to, to celebrate work as, probably, the dean of cinema photography in, in, in Hollywood.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken at Wingspread [Racine, Wisconsin] in the mid '80's [1980s] as part of a grant that we were working on from the National Endowment for the Arts and for the express purpose of establishing the National Jazz Service Organization.  And so it's a variety of us who were involved in this, including Muhal Richard Abrams, who's on this picture; [HM] Billy Taylor is on this picture; [HM] Olly Wilson's on this picture; George, George West--any number of, of individuals who were actively involved in the jazz community, and who were supportive of the beginnings of this jazz service organization.  There's Harvey Phillips, George Butler, and the director of, of the music program for the National Endowment of the, of the Arts.  Oh, there's Richie Cole there too.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter [Keisha Thrash] on her wedding day.  That was July the 7th, 2001, when she became a Thrash, and, and marrying Clarence Thrash.  The wedding took place in, in Florida.  It was a very nice and happy day for me and for her as well.
Speaker 2: That's a seventeen-year-old Warrick Carter.  So it, it was in my senior year in high school [Jackson P. Burley high School].  And these were the officers of the class, and I was class president.  And you can see who the other officers of the class were.
Speaker 1: And the picture to the left are me and the young woman who, who we served as co-editors of our yearbook, and so that's the picture of the two of us together.  That's Dorothy Taylor, who was the assistant secretary of, of the senior class.
Speaker 2: That's my senior class picture from, from high school.  That's the one that's in the yearbook.  I don't know why I'm leaning so strangely there, but that's, that's the way I looked at that age, so.
Speaker 1: You were probably distracted by that girl.
Speaker 2: That's probably that girl who was distracting me.  No, she graduate by this time.
Speaker 1: I'm learned in college that I'd better learn to type.  And so, as you can see, I'm in Typing I so I could have those skills to do the papers that I was gonna need to do when I got to Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  You're at number 14, right--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of, of memories of the band from, from, from high school.  That's, that's me there on the right with my drumsticks, and my very close friend, William D. Berry [ph.], on the left there with drumsticks as well.  We both ended up being music majors in college.  This would have been in 1960.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at my junior prom.  The young lady with me is Olivia Ferguson, now Olivia McQueen, who was my high school girlfriend and the young woman who was the reason I failed kindergarten.
Speaker 2: This, this is a picture of me in college, probably in my sophomore or junior year.  I think it's my junior year, and these are pictures of me with the officers of my fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi.  I was the keeper of records, which is the secretary of the chapter.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of, of--it's my fraternity, my official fraternity picture, in my, both my sophomore and junior year, and it's showing that I was a member of Kappa Alpha Psi.  I became a member of the turn--of the fraternity in 1961, initiated in December of '61' [1961].
Speaker 2: Now what is Sigma Delta Pi?  Is that a academic--
Speaker 1: Yeah, academic, yeah, and this group is an academic group too then.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of the officers and the members of Phi Mu Alpha, which is a music fraternity.  I was president of that organization, and it shows me and the, and the officers as well as the other members of the Phi Mu Alpha fraternity chapter in Tennessee State [including HM Bobby Jones].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  You're on, what, on the left in the front row?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  A bowtie even then.
Speaker 2: Bowtie even then.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm standing here in the concert band.  And over here, I'm someplace in the percussion line.  You can't--I don't know exactly where I am, okay.  And see, you really can't tell as well, but this, these are just pictures of the band.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Can you just identify--we would never 	be able (unclear) through all that--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  --so can you just identify when and where and then it's the band?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is at Tennessee State University.  It's our marching band.  And this, this show that--the picture that you're showing now was actually done in Baltimore [Maryland], when went to do the halftime show for the Baltimore Colts, and so that's where that is.  We're doing a, a formation of a, of a football player running.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Did you tell us the year for this?
Speaker 1: This would have been 1962.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is the concert band at Tennessee State University in 1962 or '63' [1963].  And as you can see, I'm standing over to the right, in the back, next--adjacent to the conductors, where I'm standing with my drumsticks; I was playing timpani, and I have the, the timpani mallets in my hand toward the back of the ensemble.  Yeah, that's me there.  The person standing directly to me--directly next to me--is Frank Grier, who was the director of bands at Tennessee State.  Next to him is Benjamin Butler, who was one of the assistant band directors.  And next to him is Edward Lewis Smith, who was one of the other assistant band directors.  And above them are those pretty majorettes.  Boy, they're were the pretty, they, they were the pretty--
Speaker 1: Now that's a picture of me when I was at Berklee College of Music [Boston, Massachusetts] when I first went there as dean, giving the, the hood for an honorary degree recipient to Joe Williams.  Each year Berklee would identify outstanding individuals from the music community, and would give them an honorary--a degree, and so this was at commencement.  The two people who received it that year were Joe Williams and Dave Grusin. This would have been in 1988.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my wife, Laurel [Lotta] Carter, L-A-U-R-E-L.  This was taken on a trip in 1988, when we went for the first time to Australia.  We were there--I was there on business, and she was there on vacation.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the judges and the officials at the 1997 Miss America Pageant.  I was one of the judges at that pag--at, at that pageant in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  And so it's all of us who served as judges.  There were some--there were about eight of us who were judges for the pageant, and then the remaining people are either officers of the Miss America group, or spouses of some of the Miss America officers or of the judges themselves.  And so Laurel is on, is, is on the front there in the black and white.  And yours truly is in the back with the white dinner jacket.
