Story_ID: 4807
Speaker 1: But first, I need you to state and spell your name.
Speaker 2: My name is Robert L. Carter, R-O-B-E-R-T, initial L, C-A-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what does the "L" stand for?
Speaker 2: Lee.  I was born on March 17--I'm sorry--March 11, 1917 and today is--
Speaker 1: May 21st--22nd--
Speaker 2: May 22nd, 2001, and we're in New York City.
Speaker 1: And we're at 500--at your offices at?
Speaker 2: 500 Pearl Street, the [U.S] Senator [Daniel Patrick] Moynihan's Courthouse, United States Courthouse.
Speaker 1: And your profession, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a judge.  A United States District Court Judge.
Story_ID: 4808
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: That's difficult.  I like food, so--it's probably fish.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Tan.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year for me? Favorite time of year for me is the summer.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 4809
Speaker 1: I was wondering if you could tell us your mother's name and what you know about her family.
Speaker 2: My mother's is--was Ann, Ann, Ann, Annie Martin, and she was from North Carolina.  I--she had several sisters who, they lived in North Carolina for awhile, and then they came up to New Jersey, my mother did, and my--and her sisters and so forth and the whole family, the whole family came up.  I don't really know very much more about them.  There's several sisters and cousins and so forth, but my, most of the family has died, as far as I know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories she told you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your father?  What was his name and where was he from originally, and do you know more about him.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Robert, and he was from North Carolina, and he died when I was a year old.  All I have heard of him and was told of him was from my mother.  And, that they came to New York with the [Great] Migration in 1917, and they came to New Jersey.  My mother was left enceinte in Florida--carrying me--and I was in Florida for--I was born--in six weeks and then she joined the family in New Jersey.  I don't really know very much about my father, and I've only really become interested in it too late.  So, I don't know.  I can't tell you very much about him.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem. Now how--siblings?  Where are you, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have, my family was a large family.  I had eight siblings, all but one are dead now.  One died in birth.
Speaker 1: Can you give their names in order so I know where you are in the tree?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm the youngest.  One died early, I know nothing about him.  Then when I was--shortly after my father died, then the three oldest of my siblings died, Georgia, John--John--and Beatrice.  They all died in a period of about eighteen months.  And then we were, lived for quite awhile, and then the next two oldest, in about the '40s [1940s], died, Mamie and Hampton. And then the youngest of us lived until, I think my next older--we seem to be dying--my next older sister was in Indianapolis [Indiana], and I think it was in probably in 19--, about in the late '70s [1970s] that she died, and then my sister next to me and I are the two survivors.  My mother lived until she was about ninety-six and then she died.
Story_ID: 4810
Speaker 1: Now you were, you were born, you say, in Florida, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes).
Speaker 1: But you then grew up, you moved to New Jersey and you grew up where in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Newark [New Jersey] and East Orange, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And can you tell some of your earliest memories?
Speaker 2: Memories?
Speaker 1: Of growing up.
Speaker 2: I (laughs)--we--what I remember about our growing up is that we lived in an area in Newark that was changing.  And--we--I lived in a--on the second floor of two floors in the place.  It had a no--no steam heat, and an outhouse. And, I guess one of the things that's happened--is that when I was very young, we used to have heat in the winter in a stove, and there was something burnt in the stove, some hot water, and I must have been tying my shoes, and the handle of the pot was over, and I reached up and all the water fell upon me, and my sister grabbed me, and so my legs got burned. And I remember that, I was in the hospital.  I was in the police car and stuff going to the hospital.  And I had, for some reason, I had a problem walking.  My mother was very upset, I remember, during that period of time, because of my father's death, and she hadn't recovered from it for a long time.  And my aunt, her name Lena, took me to North Carolina and laid me in the sun. I remember being in the sun and rub my legs with butter and stuff and straightened me up.  So, I came--I came back up to the North, and I don't think I went South again until I got out of law school.
Story_ID: 4811
Speaker 1: Now your--so, your family, you're the youngest of at this point eight children, and do you remember where you went to elementary school and then maybe junior high and high school?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school and high school at Burnett Street School in Newark [New Jersey].  And I went from there to--my mother got very worried about the place we were living because it was becoming more and more and more compromised in terms of things, and we moved to another section of Newark, and I went to a place called, I think, Franklin School, and then from--when I graduated from there I went to Barringer High School, and then we moved to East Orange [New Jersey], and I transferred to East Orange High School, from which I graduated.
Speaker 1: And what, what were you like as a young person, were you shy, were you--?
Speaker 2: Very shy.
Speaker 1: Very shy.  Okay.  Were you good at school?  Was there, I mean I'm just trying to understand what was, you know, what was forming you as a young person?
Speaker 2: I was very, very--I was very good in books and in school I did a lot of reading.  So, I was very introverted, and--I--during that period of time, they skipped you, so I went through school very fast.  I graduated from--I went--I graduated from high school at sixteen and went on to college.
Speaker 1: The question I have, were you in an integrated, because I ask this.
Speaker 2: Was I what?
Speaker 1: Were you in an integrated school or were you in an integrated area or were you in a separate?
Speaker 2: That was a long, long time ago.  There was no such thing as that because there was too few of us [African Americans].
Story_ID: 4812
Speaker 1: You were saying there was no such thing as--there were too few blacks, so you were getting ready to say.
Speaker 2: In Newark [New Jersey], for example, there were--there weren't enough blacks for, at the time, for there to be any school or school district for them.  I don't mean there were one or two, there were a number of them, but they couldn't, they wasn't like New York [New York] in Harlem where you had a public school for them, for them, for us. And although segregation was beginning in housing, was beginning to, you know--at the time which was the reason that my mother was beginning to move and get out of where we were, because it was becoming more and more sort of a ghetto.  It was an Italian place--community--before that time and then it was--became mixed and so forth.  There was--I was--when I was in the--there were the pressures, obviously, that are attendant to all these kinds of places.  My--I had some teachers who were, you know, very interested in me.  And because of the fact that they saw in me something in terms of pushing me academically.  My eighth-grade teacher was a woman who felt that, that what blacks should do would be go to vocational school.  So when I indicated that I wanted to go to Barringer High [School, Newark, New Jersey] and take an academic course to go to college, she was very, very disturbed.  She thought I was being ridiculous.  Unfortunately, I didn't realize that she was--this was--she was prejudiced, so it didn't affect me.  And for many semesters--well, it's not a semester, cycles, I guess, you call them--I would get grades at Barringer and they were all "As" and stuff.  I'd bring it back to her to show that I was doing very well.  And I'm very slow, you know, I didn't realize, until I was in, getting my master's in Columbia [University, New York, New York], that she, that this woman, Ms. Vogel, that she was a racist.  I didn't notice anything yet.  But, I was protecting myself, I thought back then.
Story_ID: 4813
Speaker 1: So, did you, what was--in your family, was education encouraged and did any of your other brothers and, you know, sistergo?
Speaker 2: Well, they were gone.
Speaker 1: I know, but were--
Speaker 2: My--the three youngest of us, were the ones who went on to school.  My sister and--my two sisters--one went to art school, and the other, I don't think she went to college, but she finished high school and got a good job.  My next oldest sister was a, had a talent for making things, and that's how she--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You have your hand over the microphone.
Speaker 2: --that's how she made her living, and so she did that.
Speaker 1: We're taking away all your props there. The other thing that I want to know is who was influencing you at this point?  Were there people that you looked up to or admired or people that had influence on you outside of your mother or was your mother and your aunt the key influencing factors?  Who was it?  Was it the church?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't the church.  It wasn't the church, I--it was my--my mother was the chief one, I think, during that period of time. And, I don't know.  I realized that I was, that I had to get an education, somehow.  I knew that was very, very important for me because I knew I was helpless without, you know, physically, in terms of doing things--I couldn't do anything with my hands, I was so, so uncoordinated, and everything like that.  So, that's it.  I don't remember any, really anyone else.
Speaker 1: And were you, what was the young Robert Carter like?  Was he a dreamer, was he--I mean, I know you said you were introverted and you liked books, but did you, were you wanting to be anything, you know, at that point in time?  You said you knew you had to go on, but did you want to be, did you think at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really, I really didn't, I hadn't formulated anything.  All I knew was that I knew I had to somehow get to college and get an education.  I didn't, as I went on, going on in school, I wanted to do some graduate work, and become, in terms of political science, I liked that.  And then I changed my mind about that.  But it wasn't--I didn't focus--you know, some people know what they want to do.  My younger son knew what he wanted to be almost from the time he was born.  I didn't.  The older one didn't, was like me.  But some people are like that.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects that you liked?  Did you like all subjects or were you math or--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I think--I liked literature, and I tolerated math because I knew I had to do very much of it, and I certainly did not.  I liked the sciences, but not in the summertime, when you had to go in the library and so forth.  That's when I got to college, I didn't like that.  So--which was I suppose a mistake, a big gap in knowledge. But I couldn't have myself tied up in the laboratory when there's--I looked out and saw the--all this sun and stuff like that.  I couldn't take that.
Story_ID: 4814
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you decided on going to Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and I'm wondering how that decision happened.  I mean was it?
Speaker 2: That--my decisions were necessities.  I got a friend of my family's--I think he gave me about--he had an interest in me and he gave me about $1,000. And there was a doctor who was a graduate from Lincoln and he helped go to get the scholarship, and I got a scholarship to go to Lincoln and I went and so that's how I got there.  And I had to do some work and so forth, but I kept up and then I managed to, somehow having got there, I managed to stay for four years.
Speaker 1: And that was, you were sixteen?  So you're talking about from age sixteen to age twenty you were at Lincoln University?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And $1,000 was a lot of money at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes.  Yes.  That allowed me to get through tuition.
Speaker 1: Now what was your experience like there, and what were the things that were forming you as a person, I mean?
Speaker 2: At Lincoln?
Speaker 1: Yes because this is your first time away from home?
Speaker 2: Well, you know--the--Lincoln, at that time, was a very, very close-knit place.  I met people my own age and got involved with a number of folks, but on all levels of life, you know, physical education and football and things of that kind--plus the academic, and then the, it's all business, you know, talk and socializing.  And then there was a black professor there. Lincoln, at that time was sort of the retired people from--the Princeton professors, retired, but they were teaching there--and they--and for the most part, they were white. But there was a black professor there named Hill, J. Newton Hill, who taught English. And his wife was there from time to time, and they were interested in drama and the theater, and they exposed me to that phase in my life.
Speaker 1: And who's the president at the time, do you remember, of the university?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  All I know, he was, at the time I was at Lincoln, it had not broken with the missionary sort of business, or, you know, helping the poor black up.
Story_ID: 4815
Speaker 1: So, then you, you, what makes you decide because you go to Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] next to get your?
Speaker 2: Now that also was a necessity.  I was--I was, thought I was going to go, as I told you, political science, I thought I was going to do that, but I didn't have any money. And the dean of Howard came and offered a scholarship, so that's how I, that made my decision to become a lawyer, to study law, so I went.  And I got there and, you know--well, maybe, I'm sure you do know--but political science and history and law, all the same kind of thinking is involved. And the other person who there, was a young professor who--John Davis, and he's still alive, and he was maybe about four or five years older than I was--but he was, he came there and he probably pushed me more intellectually than anyone else.  So I had two mentors, [J. Newton] Hill and Davis, at Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: But Davis, was he black?
Speaker 2: Both were black.
Speaker 1: Black, okay.
Speaker 2: And Davis is the Chicago Davis's brother from the sociologists.
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's John Davis.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that.  Okay, sure.  I know his son there, Allison Davis.
Speaker 2: Well, Allison is John's brother.  And, of course, Gordon, is here in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay.  Now you, okay, so you're at Howard and are you taking to this thing called law"  I mean is it fascinating you even though, you know, it was something of a necessity?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: But what intrigued you about it?
Speaker 2: Well, what was happening in Howard, at the time, was that Charlie [Charles] Houston's influence and the whole emphasis was on constitutional law--you know, it went into other things--but the emphasis was that the Constitution of the United States was protected--protected people. And it was, in essence, the 'Magna Carta' for blacks, and the lawyers utilized it to, to eliminate discrimination. And that's, that was why, you know, from that point on, that's what, that's what we got at Howard, in that period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how would describe Howard at that time?  Charles Houston, was he dean at that time?
Speaker 2: I think, no, when I came there, Houston had left and [William Henry] Hastie was teaching--I don't think, Houston never taught me--Hastie was teaching, but he was involved, going back and forth with, you know, the upcoming of war [World War II] and [William E.] Taylor, I think, was the [acting] dean, at the time [1937-1940].
Speaker 1: But how would you describe the environment?  Was it sort of a laboratory in some respects or was it, do you feel you got good--I mean, I'm just, was it an exciting place to be at that time?
Speaker 2: We got some, you know, excellent instruction.  I was very well trained in constitutional law.  Jim [James] Nabrit [attorney, educator] was there.  They had some--Bob [William] Ming from [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was one, one of the teachers.  Another one, [Leon] Ransom, all these men, were, you know, out of training at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Chicago, University of Chicago, or something like that.  So we had a very excellent faculty.
Speaker 1: And was that, were you able to go to Howard based on the [Julius] Rosenwald Fellowship or the fellowship came after you graduated?
Speaker 2: I got a Rosenwald Fellowship to do some graduate work, and I did that to go to Columbia [University, New York, New York].  I, when I took a year to go to Columbia, I did my graduate work.
Speaker 1: Your master's [LL.M]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was registered for a doctorate, and you, and the way it was, if you write a thesis, if you finish part of your thesis, and they regard it as being sufficiently good, then you get your masters and you come back and finish it.
Story_ID: 4816
Speaker 1: But I went into the [U.S.] Army and, after a year, and I'd been going to school since sixteen, and I came into the real world into the Army.  So, the academic pattern didn't seem to excite me anymore.  So when I came out of the Army, and I wanted to do something about it.  Well, I guess what happened in the Army--I, the Army was, at that time, made me, I guess, more militant than I would have been, because it was very racist. And I had some very, very tough experiences with race in the Army.  Actually, my first introduction into the Army was--well, not my first, I was at Fort Dix [Burlington County, New Jersey], that wasn't that bad--but after we had training, they sent a group of us down to--oh, God, I can't remember.  It's in Georgia.  Not in Atlanta.  I can't, it slipped me, but anyway.
Story_ID: 4817
Speaker 1: We went to this air base in Georgia.  And the name may come to me.  I don't know why I blanked it out, but there were a group of us from New Jersey, New York--and I don't remember, but a group of us--and they were, at the time, reasonably educated men.  Maybe about 50 percent of us were high school graduates and about 10 percent college graduates, and I had a master's at that point in law, and we were greeted by the captain, and they lined us up, and he said, you know, going through the personnel, "I looked at your personnel records and I see, all of you, I just want you to know that I don't believe in educated niggers."  That's how we were treated.  So, that was my introduction to the [U.S.] Army.  And it didn't let up.  And there was a segregated army and after Pearl Harbor [Hawaii]--I went into the Army, I think, in August of '41 [1941]--and after Pearl Harbor, they opened an Officer Candidate School.  We weren't doing anything down in this place about any training or anything like that, and I went to Officer Candidate School, and, then, you know, went to, became a Second Lieutenant, but the army was not, the army was not my forte at all.
Speaker 2: So, you did at least become a Second Lieutenant?  That was even difficult, in some respects, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: That was what?
Speaker 2: I mean I've heard a lot of people say, you know, that in the service, no matter what their education, they were given menial tasks to do.
Speaker 1: Well, you--at that point, you were, but we did become, but they sent us, you know, there was all this agitation, and, so they sent us to Officer Candidate School, and we became, some of us became second--others, you know, if I had it different then, I might have done a little better in the Army, but it wasn't for me.
Speaker 2: Now, how long were you there, sir?
Speaker 1: I got out of the Army in 1944.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, three years.  Okay.  Three years.
Story_ID: 4818
Speaker 1: And so, when you get out [of military service], what are your, because the war's [World War II] still going on at the time you get out, yeah, so you get out and what do you do then at that point.
Speaker 2: I take the [New York State] Bar [Examination].
Speaker 1: Here in New York?
Speaker 2: Here in New York.  And then I start--while I'm waiting for the Bar to start looking for a job, and Thurgood [Marshall] was looking for an assistant, and I interviewed, and that was my job.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's fabulous.  Okay.  Okay.  So, that started a very, that was a wonderful sort of thing that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, had you had any exposure to Thurgood Marshall up until that point?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't know him.  I was recommended out to him by Bill [William Henry] Hastie, and I was looking for a job, and I think that, I, you know--memory is, never rely on the recollection of old men--but I think that Hastie called me and told me that Marshall was looking for an assistant and that I go over there on my interview.  And it's my impression that, when I came in I was hired.  I don't think I was going to have any problem.  But I think he told me either--yeah, he told me before I left, I was hired or a couple of days later, but anyway, I knew I had a job.
Speaker 1: And then so you, you worked for the, this is with NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?  And you worked there for how many years?
Speaker 2: I think '44 [1944] to '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: To sixty--or fifty--.
Speaker 2: '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay. I see. But let's talk about the types of cases that you worked on.  Well, I know the main one was 'Brown v. Board of Education' [1954], but it says that you worked, and I do want to talk about that, but it said that you actually did twenty-two cases, argued twenty-two in front of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: (Nods).
Speaker 1: What type, were these all cases sort of leading up to the types of cases that would lead up to 'Brown v. Board'?
Speaker 2: No. The only case I think that I argued in the Supreme Court that was leading up to 'Brown' was the case from Oklahoma, 'McLaurin [v. Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education,' 1950], that was my first case.  And then all my other cases came after 'Brown'. And many of them that were involved were First Amendment cases.  What had happened was that after 'Brown,' the southern states began to want to find ways to make sure the NAACP couldn't function, because its theory was that they if they disable the NAACP, that there wouldn't be any problem.  They thought this was outside agitation and that their local people are happy with being subservient and so forth and so on.  And if they filed the NAACP, they couldn't do it.  So, what they were trying to do, they had--they were trying to get our membership list and, you know, expose them and therefore, the people would be exposed, in terms of their jobs.  They also tried to--or they did pass laws making, directed to the NAACP's legal activity, making it illegal by (unclear) and so forth. So that I spent a number of--time in the Supreme Court arguing that our membership list was, had to be anonymous in order for us to exercise our right to First Amendment rights and that we had the right to petition and NAACP register (unclear). And that teachers and so forth should not be required to reveal their membership in the NAACP because otherwise they'd be, they'd be fired, and this was a lot of cases, cases like that.  And then there was 'Gomillion v. Lightfoot' [1960], one of the cases I argued, where the--Tuskegee [Alabama] had decided what it was going to do in order to keep control of the city, they gerrymandered all the blacks outside the city. And that went to the Supreme Court, and it was the next step after the court decided that case, because up to that time, they called us a political thicket.  They weren't going to decide cases like that in terms of districting and so forth.  Once they decided that that case was--that districting was unconstitutional, the next step was the "one man, one vote" cases.  So, they made it--people don't, people don't understand how you make those steps.
Story_ID: 4819
Speaker 1: You know, as I am sitting here listening to you, several things are sort of coming, you know, I'm thinking about even the times, how did the, 'cause I'm thinking about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Was it well financed at this point?
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: I mean how did, it's like, but it's like this little, you know, it's like, you know, David against Goliath, in a way, and I'm sitting here trying to figure out how did it, how did it do, really how was it so--?
Speaker 2: Well, we got it, you know, we were able to finance the lawyers, but, you know, we weren't plush with anything.  And, you know, it was a lot of fun.  I remember that the Interstate Commerce Commission [ICC] was alive at the time, and I was going before them arguing about segregation on the trains, and I remember, you know, I loved, this, I was all alone here and all these railroads, lined up, me alone, and all these lawyers and the railroads, are power, power lawyers.  But, of course, they knew nothing about civil rights, and they were (unclear) and so forth and so on, so it wasn't all that, the balance wasn't really that, but it looked that way 'cause I'm standing there all by myself in front of all these lawyers.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: And I'm also thinking as, you were how old at this point, sir, you were?
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: You were young, in your thirties?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was seven--, I started working for Thurgood [Marshall], I guess, when I was about--at the NAACP, I must have been maybe about twenty-seven, twenty-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I'm thinking about all the litigation, I mean the fact that you're arguing before the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  I mean this is, this is really an amazing experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not many people in their career can say that they've been there, you know, before the court twenty-two times is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Well, 1950, seventeen was my first--seventeen [referring to docket numbers], how old was I?  The third was what, thirty-three?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was my first argument. So, that's not so young.
Speaker 1: No, that's not so young, but I'm just saying people would give their eye tooth.  You know, that's sort of the penultimate of a legal career.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, be that as it may, can you tell me, what was the NAACP?  How many lawyers were part of this group?  You said you were Thurgood's, you know, legal assistant.  Were there--?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time I came to work for him, see, I came as we started building, I came to work for Thurgood, and he had another full-time lawyer there, a man named Ed Dudley.  And I was his assistant.  I hadn't taken the [New York State] Bar [Examination] yet or I hadn't passed the Bar yet, and I passed the Bar while I was working, working for him, and what I--he was out doing a lot of things and so forth, and I was the one that had to take up the intellectual part of it and do the things and so forth. And, so I started doing it.  I started, he had a secretary, and he, at one point, we had to have something that had to be in court, and it hadn't been done, so she--you know, I'm scared and all--and she told me I should do it.  I said "okay".  And, so I did it because it turned out to be okay.  From then on, that part of the work was left for me.  Then we started bringing people, Judge [Constance Baker] Motley, [Jack] Greenberg, Franklin [H.] Williams and we started building staff up, so by the time the, the case of 'Brown [v. Board of Education', 1954] went to court, we probably had about six or seven lawyers and we also had a committee of lawyers who we consulted with.  And, of course, you know, 'Brown' was unique, we had all kinds of people there.  But, in general, we had a group of committee lawyers that we talked to and got ideas from and so forth and so on in terms of help.
Story_ID: 4820
Speaker 1: And now with 'Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas,' 1954], that case was the right case at the right time, sir, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods).
Speaker 1: This, it had, but how did you as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored Persons]. find out about, you know, Lucille Brown?  I mean did they come to the NAACP.  I'm just--
Speaker 2: Well, what we were doing at the time, this is what, this is what the states would call barristering, but we would announce to the International Office Group that we were interested in certain kinds of cases.  And our local branches would then indicate that they had somebody in these cases.  And the issue, when we announced, I think in 1950, this is after 'Sweat [v. Painter'], the Texas case in law school, and 'McLaurin [v. Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education,' 1950] that we were going to go up for the classes, I mean for the public school.  And we had a case that ame from Clarington County, South Carolina, and then a group of lawyers called us about a case in Kansas, and that's the Brown, that was the Brown, and what would happen would be that I go down there, get the papers, file the papers in court, and go down with a local lawyer, in terms of the case and try it, and that's what we, that's what we did in Clarington County and Brown and in the Kansas case.  So, that's how, that's how, that's how it operated, and that's what the states were very concerned about.  They called us barristering because we would announce that, and what we, but you know, at that time, it was not so much in Kansas but certainly South Carolina, you had to make sure that people understood what they were into, and I'd go down and talk to them and tell them, you know, what they'd have to face.  They had all these people coming up and I was sure they were gonna get pressure put on them, they might lose their jobs and so forth, and I think I only had, maybe one or two people backed out.  They was really amazing.
Speaker 1: People were, it was clear that they wanted to see change and they were willing to sort of put their lives on the line?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4821
Speaker 1: And what was the strategizing that went around some of these [civil rights] cases?  Were there whole--I mean, the lawyers [of the NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--you, as lawyers, were doing strategizing as well, about the mechanics, were there other forces at work, you know, or other groups that you were working with?
Speaker 2: Well, when we decided, for example, that we weren't going for separate, but we weren't going for equal facilities, and just for--we were only going to fight segregation, per se, we were gonna just concede that the facilities, even though they weren't, were equal, but brought in the idea that even if they were equal, that segregation was unconstitutional.  We lost some of our better lawyers, decided that this was not a good thing because they, well, you know, you go back now in 1950 and were a number of people felt that we were going too fast.  The 'McLaurin [v. Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education,' 1950] case, for example, caused a great deal of consternation among middle-class people, blacks, because they felt that we were going too fast because what we were arguing in 'McLaurin' was that the guy had the same teachers and so forth, but he's put in the back and has to be in a special seat and so forth and this is, is unconstitutional.  And they said "oh, my god, what if we lose the case?"  But, see, my theory was "what can you lose?"  You can't lose anything.  You can't go back.  They're not going to do anything other than what the status quo is, so you're losing nothing.  So, there was a great deal of consternation and agitation that maybe we were going too fast about that.
Story_ID: 4822
Speaker 1: And when you, what was Thurgood Marshall, what was he like to work with, sir?
Speaker 2: He was very, very, very good to work with.  He was, you know, he was happy-go-lucky and so forth, and he was not around very much.  You know, as all bosses are, I don't know whether, you're probably the same way.  But all bosses, they're out and so forth and they leave things to their assistants to work on and then they come in and upset things, and then they leave, and then, of course, things settle down again.  So, he was sort of like that sometimes.  But he was, you know, he was a very earthy man and an excellent, excellent lawyer, in terms of--you know, he would--he could take--the three of us would come in and talk to him and you would think he would not know a doggone thing about these ideas that we were presenting to him and he would nail them, and the next day they would go before the court, make a perfect argument.  He was terrific in that way.
Story_ID: 4823
Speaker 1: So, you--were there other things you think were critical about this period, even after 'Brown [v. Board of Education', 1954]. Well, first of all, just one thing about 'Brown v. Board of Education.'  I want you to tell us how you felt, you know, once, how was the group, this, you know, once you had won, you know, even, you know, there's the time, the, you know, the ruling was held, and I mean this is a case that is bandied around, I mean the name was bandied around, people don't even know Lucille Brown.  They don't know the facts.  They just know 'Brown v. Board of Education.'
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, it was exhilarating--but I don't believe I ever thought we could, we were gonna lose, we could lose that case.  There was, you know, there was too much at stake.  I couldn't see the country at that time saying that segregation was appropriate.  I just--but, you know, still you feel like that, you say you don't think you could lose, but obviously the reality is that you could, that we could have "separate but equal" could have been declared to be still at law.  But I just didn't--couldn't see that, and the decision itself, you know, you felt just terrific about it in terms of having won.  That, of course, as you know, being a lawyer, and other kinds of social action--a good feature about being a lawyer, you can count progress by the cases you win in terms of that, but other things you can't do it.  So you know, 'Brown,' 'Brown' was regarded as a breakthrough.  We celebrated and so forth, but it was a heavy victory, yes.
Speaker 1: And it probably created a lot of camaraderie among that group, too, that was the team?
Speaker 2: Well the camaraderie was, you know, we had been working on this for some time.  We had, the camaraderie had been fixed before that and I guess, it's--you know, you felt good about it, but we were working together on that for a long time.
Speaker 1: And the cases of the twenty, the other cases that you brought, were all those, you said all of them were victories except the ones, the other ones that you argued before the [U.S.] Supreme Court, you know, the whole experience of cases, were they all victories?
Speaker 2: I argued a case involving a, a black soldier on Guam who was accused of raping a white servicewoman ['Burns v. Wilson,' 1953]. And I didn't have the court martial, but after the court martial, the man appealed to us [NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I took the case, and you know when you get involved in a case--when you get involved in a case, you feel that your client is correct, and I really felt that this man was innocent.  I took the case through the [U.S.] Army and then habeas corpus in the District of Columbia, D.C. Circuit [Court] up to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit to the [U.S.] Supreme Court and lost the case.  The Supreme Court, and the guy, it was devastating and I can't, the guy was executed and that was tough for me to take. I have a hard time with criminal cases, but I really felt the guy was innocent.
Speaker 1: Now, do you, but you're saying that was the only case you lost?
Speaker 2: That's the only case in the Supreme Court, yeah.  Of the cases I took to the Supreme Court, that's the only case I lost. But, you know, think of the times, I would lose every case before this [Supreme] Court [in 2001], I wouldn't win a case.  It was just, you know, it's luck. I came along at the right time. I would have--talk about, what is it--twenty and one, or twenty--whatever it is and one--it would have been one and minus twenty, if I had been before this Court, the present Court.
Story_ID: 4824
Speaker 1: Now when you left the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I knew you were Director of Veteran Affairs and Special Assistant, you know, during the time, but when you left, how did the decision come that you were leaving and you were gonna go in as a partner of Poletti, Frieden, Prashker and Feldman [and Gartner, LLP]?
Speaker 2: I had a controversy with the, with the board.  They fired one of my, one of my assistants, who had written an article in that came in the magazine section of the 'New York Times' on the [U.S.] Supreme Court. And the title of the article--he didn't come up with the title--but the title of the article was 'Nine Men in Black Think White' and Thurgood [Marshall] was on the Court at the time. And they, the board met on the--I guess, it was--or the Sunday magazine--and they met the following day and they proceeded.  I was in court--I think I was handling something involving 'Powell [v. McCormick,' 1969] in some problem.  I don't remember, but I was in court here in the city, and they met here, and when I came to the board meeting in the afternoon, one of the board members met and they said "we just fired your boy." And I said "what?" And so, they--I went before the board and they said that they fired him.  I said "you can't fire somebody--you fired him without consulting me?"  Well, they gave a reason that this is the article, blah, blah. And I said "well, I thought the articl--I didn't see anything that's worth being fired in that article.  I don't see why any blacks, at this time should be satisfied with any white institution in the country, and I don't have to submit articles to you," and so it went on.  So, anyway, they wouldn't relent on it, and so I left and my whole staff left in the process.  I got--in the press, I got a halo around my head for doing it because my assistant was white.  Even a black man, it wouldn't be okay, but I got a whole lot of press on it.  But I left, and I went to--I left, I think, in the end of November [1968], and I did some work at Columbia [University, New York, New York] until, I guess, June [1969], the end of June. And then I had to decide what I was going to do, and I had no idea that I was going to practice law, and all these people with law firms started asking me to come practice law, and I ended up with Poletti and Frieden, so, that's how that happened.
Story_ID: 4825
Speaker 1: Sir, I have one question, first of all, can I go like ten minutes over?  I have one question about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund [divison of NAACP devoted to representing low income African Americans], and it's a naïve question because I'm not sure, but at what time did that organization come into being?
Speaker 2: The organization came into being, I think, maybe about 1941 [sic, 1940], and when it was created, it was part of the NAACP--it was like, we made contributions to it, but it was part of the NAACP. They were all one organization.  We had board members who were members of the NAACP board and the on Legal [Defense] Fund board.  Thurgood [Marshall] was Assistant Special Counsel of the NAACP--no, Special Counsel of the NAACP and Direct Counsel of the Legal Fund.  I was Assistant Special Counsel of the NAACP, Assistant Counsel of the Legal Fund, and the rest of the people were on it.
Story_ID: 4826
Speaker 1: Aren't they two separate organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, they were about like that.  After 'Brown [v. Board of Education', 1954], the South went after the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and what they were going after was the tax exemption of the, the NACCP, of course, doesn't pay taxes, but contributions are not tax exempt, tax exempt contributions are to the Legal Fund, so if you make a contribution to the Legal Fund, you can't get it off your income tax.  So, they went after that, and Thurgood [Marshall] was concerned about it so he decided the best thing to do is to separate the two organizations.  And that's how the separation occurred.
Speaker 1: And the lawyering occurs out of the [NAACP] Legal Defense Fund or the Legal Defense Fund is the funding mechanism?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Legal Defense Fund was the one that, was the one that was the fund, and the NAACP was the grounding organization, and the Legal Defense Fund was the fund that, that supplied the money for these things and after 'Brown', of course, it began to get a considerable amount of money.
Story_ID: 4827
Speaker 1: When you're in the law firm [Poletti, Frieden, Prashker and Feldman and Gartner, LLP], as a, when you joined the law firm, because you were there three years, what was that experience like I mean was it, because you had been working at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], this is a relative small firm?
Speaker 2: It was a relatively small firm, I think about thirty lawyers, and what amazed me was that it was a multi-million dollar operation, and I was shocked. And I--my first time that I submitted a bill was--I think I was doing something for TWA--TWA Airlienes. And the bill I submitted was more that the money I made--made for a year at the Assocation. And I think it was something like thirty thousand dollars in terms of time. So it was an eye opener for me. I said, "My God," you know, this kind of money and it--I made, made a lot of money at the point--not a heck of a lot now, but heck of a lot in terms of the time. And it was satisfying to me, it was a small firm and the main partners--two of them--were very close friends of mine which is why I went there. And I got--some interesting experiences, I was--which you don't--you wouldn't now face I was there with going to court representing a corporation and the judge would look around and say, "Who the lawyer--who, what lawyer was representing this corporation." I hope that has passed. They're no longer shocked about that sort of stuff, but it was the three years was, was fine. And it came at a time when I--personally was very good because my, my wife took ill. And so I had a lot--I had sufficient money to keep her comfortable and so forth until she died. And have the best, best care. And then about three years, I guess about three years [Jacob] Javits decided to--that he--to tap me to come here [New York District Court Judge].
Speaker 1: And you've had a long, I mean this has been--you know, this has probably been the place you've been the longest actually.
Speaker 2: Right now, yes because I think I was at the NAACP from '44 [1944] to '68 [1968], what's that twenty-four years?
Speaker 1: Yes--.
Speaker 2: And I've been here since '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Right, almost--it'll be--next year will be thirty years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '72 to--so yeah, I've stayed here longer.
Story_ID: 4828
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of when you look at your, you know, your career here and the things, you've, you know, accomplished. You're very, you know, I was reading some of the articles that have, you know, appear on you and you've continued to be a very outspoken person and that speaks of someone who sort of knows, you know, feels comfortable to do that--that's what I'm saying. I mean it's good to have an outspoken person in your position is what I'm saying (laughs). But you've continued, you know, you've not sort of sat back and--.
Speaker 2: Well I think--it appears--as I look back on the--in the area of civil rights and racial discrimination, I've become--I've probably become more radical in some respects. I'm not sure it's, you know, I'm not sure that's true in other areas. But, I look at the whole issue of race in this country and I'm just--I just think that you just gotta fight, fight, fight because everywhere you--everywhere I look now, I see instances of it. And I just, you know, it just burns me up. I was--I only recently became concerned and involved in the criminal justice system and, that's a big to-do now in terms of how much discrimination is going on right now. Young men are being housed in prison and therefore stunted, their careers and so forth. And I don't think there's enough outcry in the black community about that. You know, we talk about police brutality and profiling, but the whole business of criminal justice is--needs--.
Speaker 1: Do you think--?
Speaker 2: I don't want to get on a soapbox , I'm just---.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no--I think that's important, but do you think that the reason you've become more radical is that you had great hopes given the fights that you, you know, you engaged in and, and maybe that it appeared at one time that things were really sort of moving--do you think that that has something to do with it--?
Speaker 2: You, you, you know, I hadn't thought of it that way. You may be right. I, we all, I think, thought that with the decision from the Supreme Court that things would, you know, we didn't expect all this resistance. And, and so forth. I think, you know--we thought, well, we had been told to obey the law, we were sure these other people were going to obey the law. And, so I think that that came as something of a surprise. But I've got--you knew it to that. You may be right. I hadn't thought of it that way.
Story_ID: 4829
Speaker 1: Would you have done anything different with the Civil Rights Movement than, you know, you think that it's--you know, when you look at what has sort of transpired there. I'm just wondering, you know, I ask this question of some people who have been active and I, you know, and I'm just curious about your, you know, your--.
Speaker 2: I, I, I, you know, I don't--I don't really--I don't really know. I--when we started out segregation was the really thing in the South and it was only after really that segregation was declared unconstitutional in 'Brown [v. Board of Education'], all around that you began to look around and see that it wasn't the South, it was the whole country. And I--I'm not sure we could have, anybody would have seen that other than--got rid of the issue of segregation. And then, you know, you found northern schools segregation--but wasn't all--and this was not by law, this was because people felt that--educators felt that--as my teacher Miss Vogel--felt that black people should not be exposed to rigorous academic and intellectual matters and that they--they weren't capable of that. So they should be taught to be--sweep and do mechanical things. But that's--it's parting all over the country. And you don't--I don't think we would have seen that unless, unless we first had dealt with, with 'Brown'. So I'm not sure that we could have done anything differently.
Story_ID: 4830
Speaker 1: Do you have hopes or concerns for the black community as you see, you know, you're in your elder years but, you know, you look around and you see the state of the black community, and I'm wondering, you know, what are your hopes and your concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, the one thing I think 'Brown [v. Board of Education'] did--it certainly didn't end--we didn't succeed in getting integration in the schools. But I think that what 'Brown'--the side effects were trememdous because the court said that segregation is unconstitutional and that all of us are equal before the law which meant, in terms of how Americans feel--the law being supreme--that blacks now had a claim on equaltiy. And I think that's changed since. And, you know, before, you go into a--I would have a case in, in the North and some good thinking white person would say, "Why are you bothering us," you know, "Things are nice here." As if they're being kind to you out of the goodness of their heart. Well, they, there's no kindness about that--they're required to do it because the law says that. And I think that--the black community has moved from that. I don't think, I don't think--there's not going to be the type of tolerance that has existed before. And 'Brown' has helped to produce a burgeoning middle class which also people aren't going to be able to stand for, so. So I think in that way, that's why I do feel that I made an accomplishment in the 'Brown' case. Not with integration, but with changing the attitudes of blacks in terms of themselves and their place in the society.
Speaker 1: So what do you think is necessary going forward? What are you--what do you, you know if--given, you know,  the issues that face the black community today what front would you fight on?
Speaker 2: Well, the present time, I think what I would really insist on fighting on, I would fight on eliminating discrimination in the criminal justice system. I think that that's critical because, you know, I don't want to give up the schools, but--those two, you know, maybe say. Criminal justice system because they, you know, young blacks and 90 percent of the people that are tried on these various charges--charges like for example crack. 68 percent of the people who smoke crack--the stastics show--whatever you call it, smoke or whatever--are white. 99 percent of the people that are tried and convicted are black. Now, you know there's something wrong with that system. Now, you know, there's something wrong with that. And because of crack, cocaine is tolerated and I get less time for cocaine than I do for crack. I think they get about a year for coke,  but I'm caught with cocaine and I get five years for crack. So, you know, it's--the whole thing is--has to be changed.
Story_ID: 4831
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts yourself about the reparations movement?
Speaker 2: I, I just think it's unrealistic. It's, you know, if it were early on, sure, but this is long, long time ago, all of the--we're entitled to it, but how are you going to do it. And it just seems to me that it's something that causes more irritation and more than anything else. So I don't--that's my view about it, it's unrealistic.
Story_ID: 4832
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be, sir?
Speaker 2: That's difficult. I don't know, I think, I guess that I tried to improve the lot of blacks in the country. I guess, that's it. That's what I've tried to do so. Maybe that's my--that's what I want my legacy to be. I can't articulate it much better.
