Story_ID: 34377
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my full name is Ronald Steven Coleman, that's Ronald, R-O-N-A-L-D Steven, S-T-E-V-E-N Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story behind your name?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (simultaneous)--only story would be there's eight kids in my family and by the time they got--I'm the fourth but what I was told was they didn't know what they were gonna tell--call me--name me, so my father stuck a pen in the phone book and it ended on Ronald so, so I came up with Ronald.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That is a good story (laughter). And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 27 August, 1948 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Occupation now, I'm a retired Lieutenant General in the Marine Corps, and now I do, mostly volunteer work and taking care of wounded--or helping wounded warriors.  I work with the Marine Corps League, which is a foundation of the Marine Corps that supports marines and their families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 16th of February, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Right now we're at the Globe & Laurel Restaurant.  It's in Stafford, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is a historic place too.  Just to say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, it's a very historic place.  It's run by Major Spooner, Major Rick Spooner.  He's a retired Major in the Marine Corps.  This is the place--third restaurant, the Globe & Laurel--the first one was down in Quantico [Virginia] and we're just outside the back gate of Quantico; we're probably a mile from the base, and the first one was there that was burned down.  Second one was up the street a little--a little further, about a mile north of here, and because of road development, they closed that down so he's been here about three years.  But every--everyone that's ever been a Marine has, has certainly been through this--this restaurant.
Speaker 1: It has a big--it doesn't look as big on the outside, but when you get in here, it's kind of rambled, you know, one big room to another.
Speaker 2: And if you--if you could believe it the, the last spot he had was--was much smaller than this.  This is--this is a good one, and there seems to be functions and reunions and all sorts of things such as that almost every day.  But it's a great meeting place of Marines and wannabe Marines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the significance of the name Globe Laurel?
Speaker 2: Well, that, that, that's the Laurel.  He's--I believe, got that from the (unclear) to Globe Laurel, but the Globe actually, you know, Marines fighting everywhere, and that's his motto.  So it's a--it's a great place.  It really is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess it would be sorta honor around the globe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: --the Laurel being the symbol of a--okay.
Story_ID: 34378
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti and meatballs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] spaghetti and meatballs.  My mother's passed away, so--but spaghetti and meatballs short answer.  And funny you should ask that.  We just--I was in--on the west coast, I got back yesterday, and day before, we went to a place in--with a friend and had spaghetti and meatballs and I said, "You know, I'd never eaten any spaghetti and meatballs other than my mother's or my wife's."  And I said I never will because none could be as good, and if they are as good, I wouldn't admit it, so only my mother's spaghetti and meat--but spaghetti and meatballs is my favorite meal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue would be my favorite color.  And no, no reason other (unclear) I think it's a--someone asked me that years ago and as a youngster, I just, you know, you look up in the sky and blue sky serenity and so blue's my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.  Fall, absolutely.  Fall in Northern Virginia is just beautiful, but fall; the changing of the leaves and that, it's just the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No I--no I don't.  No I don't.  That's a good question.  You would think with, with all my traveling it'd be somewhere that I'd say "That's the place of--I wanna be," but no, nowhere favorite.  And there's nowhere that if you said to me, "Okay, where do you wanna go?"  Probably the place I enjoyed, I was most impressed with was Heidelberg; I went to Heidelberg a couple times.  I was impressed with that, but vacation--vacations ought to be at home with your--with your family and your dog, and that vacation spot it would be home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Heidelberg, Germany.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Treat everyone with dignity and respect.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's my--that's my most favorite.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now I'm gonna ask about your family history, your mother's side and your father's side, and they we'll put them together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--let me add to treat everyone with dignity and respect if I could, you know, because that is important and I do--do like that but I, but I guess do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God.  I think that'd be--
Story_ID: 34379
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name, Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can spell Barbara.  B-A-R-B-A-R-A Gretchen, G-R-E-T-C-H-E-N, I believe, and Hill was her maiden name, H-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have that written down for you, but I don't--she grew up in Delaware and I can get that for you, but--
Speaker 1: What do you think, about 1925 or so?
Speaker 2: In the '20's [1920's], '27 [1927], I think, and I have a sheet of paper that has it on it, but I--I think it's '20 [1920] in that time frame.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can they be traced, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family--again I have the--I have the, the history written down but I guess I remember most--I can go back to my grandmother and I remember my great grandmother, but I was just a--just a youngster then, and then my grandmother Nana, her name's May E. Hill, part Cherokee, so we know that--we know that much.  We can go back to Ghana, where they came from originally--her folks, but then--
Speaker 1: Is there a--I mean how was this done?  I mean was it--is it through family stories, or--
Speaker 2: Through family stories.  Through families, family stories.  My brother Charles, my oldest brother, has done a lot of research and my father's brother, Uncle Gregory, has done a lot.  So they--we can go pretty far, we can go pretty far back.  But as far as my knowing, I mean I have--we have it written down.  We did the ancestry to go back as far as you can.  We have pictures of--that go back to my great, great grandmother.  I do know that on my father's side--
Speaker 1: Oh, we're gonna get to him in a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --we just wanna do you mother's now.  Now are there any stories that go all the way back to Ghana?
Speaker 2: No.  I--I don't, I don't know of any--and it's unfortunate, but we didn't start doing even--even, you know, "Roots" comes out and you saw it, and then you get away, and then you go back, and that's one of the things both my brother and I said, that once--he's gonna retire next year.  I hope to be full-time retirement next year and then--and then that would be my hobby is just trace back as far as we, as far as we can--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --study it more.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories about emancipation or slavery, or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, I--no, you're still talking on my--
Speaker 1: Mother's side.
Speaker 2: --my mother's side.  No.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.  (Unclear).  Now, let's see, now what about--did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We called him Uncle Harry.  He died very early.  I guess I must have been about six or seven when he died and my fondest memories of him, he wore what we call an apple--a hat.  And I grew up always, always wearing that, and then my first--everyone asked me, "Why do you always wear that type of hat?" and I said "It reminds me of my grandfather."  But I said he died, I was about six years old so I don't have any stories of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what did your grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: Everything was domestic--domestic work.  They all did domestic work.  I think my grandfather--but he was a boot black.  But I do know my--both my grandmother and my mother all did domestic work.
Story_ID: 34380
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Did your mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] have any--now she grew up in Delaware?
Speaker 2: It started off in Delaware then moved to Media, Pennsylvania.  So her--most of her adult life would have been in Media--Media, Pennsylvania.  It's about nine miles from Darby.  She moved to Darby and went to high school in Darby; Darby, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell--
Speaker 2: Media is M-E-D-I-A, just, just--
Speaker 1: --Just like (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then Darb--so most of her life would have been in Darby, D-A-R-B-Y, and that's where she went to high school.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about what it was like when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, we were--we were a very close family, but it--it's amazing how little we talked about her growing up.  My mother did domestic work, my father [Charles Frederick Coleman]--may be getting ahead of it--my father left us, so my mother--I'd wake up in the morning and my mother would have already went to work, and when I went to bed at night, she'd have been working her second job so, you know, we'll see weekends with her and that sort of thing, so never--I mean she just talked about how hard it was, domestic work, and how--I think one of the things I remember most was she said she remembers her mother telling her, when she was first going to do domestic work, that if you see some money on the floor, just clean around it 'cause it's just a trap to see if you're gonna steal the money.  So she said I would just clean around the, you know, floor.  And it wasn't like it was great deals of money.  It would be pennies and nickels lying on the floor and it was just to see if they were gonna steal the money, so--but she was--she was a hard worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have to work very far from home?
Speaker 2: Yes, she'd have to get on a--at this point, by the time I remember, she'd get on a--get on a bus, and sometimes two busses, to go to work.  And again, she just cleaned houses and that was how she made her living.
Speaker 1: Was it mainly in Phila--in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: In Pennsylvania, yeah, but yeah.  In Delaware County, that was the county but we were in Darby so she would clean mostly in Sharon Hill or Drexel Brook, you know, where the wealthier folks lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: No, she got out--she dropped out at 11th grade; went as far as 11th grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she ever talk about an aspiration that she had that she never was able to fulfill, or did she do anything on the side that was different from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, raising kids and working, but no she never--you know, and maybe my brothers or my older brother would know or sister would know better, but no she never--to me, no.  She loved her--my brother and I talked about this--she loved her boys, she really did.  I know she loved the girls, but she really had--she really loved us and wanted us to do well, so her aspirations were to see us do well.
Story_ID: 34381
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let me go to your father's side then.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S Fredrick, F-R-E-D-R-I-C-K Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Darby, Pennsylvania and I'll get that.  He and my mo--he was one year younger than my mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, so that would have been--I--it's--I think they were--1923 and 1924 is when they were born, but I can get that for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she would have been 23 or 24.  Okay.  And, so what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace his--
Speaker 2: Go way back on his side.  His grandmother, my great-grandmother would have been Nana Standford.  Nana Standford lived to be 113.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Standford.  Nellie, N-E-L-L-I-E Standford, S-T-A-N-D-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: So she lived to be a hundred?
Speaker 2: 113.
Speaker 1: So that would take her back to--
Speaker 2: Past it.  Past--yeah, and I have a photo and it's not as clear, although my brother has one and he said you can get it cleaned up, but I have a picture of her uncle, her husband's--I'm sorry, let me go back.  Her husband's brother, serving in the--was in a Civil War uniform.  So on that side, we can at least go back to Nana Standford and Nana Standford's parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a Civil War-era person herself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --so she was alive during the Civil War and was either a teenager or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She'd tell stories of--this was right around the "Roots" thing, and I went up and I spoke to her and we put it on tape.  And she talked about they lived in Baltimore, in Maryland.  And she got on a ferry to go from--when they were moving from Maryland to Philadelphia and it was an overnight trip from Maryland to Philadelphia.  Her husband was a boot black in Philadelphia, and Nana Standford did domestic work also.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Now I never remember--I remember Nana Standford, but I don't remember her husband or--at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she--when did she pass away?
Speaker 2: She passed away in February of '89 [1989], 1989.  She and my grandmother on my other side passed away within two weeks of each other.  And my grandmother Nana on my mother's side, she was 97.
Story_ID: 34382
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now she was born after the Civil War but she--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and it--it's amazing how little they wanted to talk about stuff like that.  You know, and both wanted to talk about, you know, what was gonna come, not what was--what was back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't have a whole lot of stories about, about--from them.  We were closer, much closer on my mother's side than my father's side.  It was--I don't think that my father's side ever thought my mother's side was good enough for them.  In fact, I was told--one of my aunts said that my mother wasn't good enough for my father, so it was a little bit bad blood in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The two sides didn't get along? (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah, didn't get a--didn't get along.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about your father's parents, your grandmother and grandfather?
Speaker 2: Grandma Coleman, my father's mother, she lived to be 93.  She would have died in the 19 of--I don't know if was Camp Lejeune or-- (unclear)--so I think it would have been in 1990--I think my father had passed away--'97 [1997], '98 [1998], 1998.  Okay, '98 [1998], she passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born about 1905?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: I don't remember him at all.  I don't remember him at all.  He died young.  In the history of the Coleman family, no male has ever made it to 80.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: My father's brother, Uncle Junie, would have been 80 in October, just a couple years ago, and he passed away in August.  So no male has lived to be 80.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what did your grandmother and grandfather do on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't know what my grandfather did.  My grandmother was a seamstress.  She was a--I mean that was--she, she made clothes.  She worked for the government at one point with the Quartermasters who--they were the ones that did the logistic side of it, but she worked down in Philly with the Navy and I know she made uniforms and that sort of stuff, but she was a great, great seamstress.
Speaker 1: So did she like work in a factory?
Speaker 2: She worked in a factory, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Working for the Quartermaster?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 34383
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Let's see here.  Now what do you know about your father [Charles Frederick Coleman] growing up?
Speaker 2: Not a lot (unclear).  My father, he had Gregory, Uncle Junie, and Joey, so it's three, yeah.  So he--it was four boys, three girls, but not a lot about his growing up.  They all grew up in Darby [Pensylvannia] so there were--everyone, once they got there, were in Darby so my father worked for Pittsburgh Steel for the longest time.   Then he worked for Westinghouse, which was in Philadelphia.  And then my father--my father was an alcoholic.  And I guess, unfortunately most of my memories are that.  He was a very good athlete, never graduated, and joined the Army in the Second World War  Heavy, heavy drinker.  Heavy, heavy drinker.  Then in about--let's see, I was in Vietnam so this would have been 1979-ish, he had a real bad bout with--and I guess it was a come to Jesus thing, so he gave up alcohol. So he went to AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] and the whole bit, and reformed.  And I was in Vietnam and I got a letter from my brother at my brother's wedding, and he said that he had Hawaiian Punch at the reception, which was the first time that you'd ever known him not to drink so--but he reformed from there and found religion and ended up being a Deacon in the--Deacon in the Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what denomination was he?
Speaker 2: He ended up being Episcopalian--AME, African Methodist Episcopalian or AME.
Story_ID: 34384
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: High School.  They were at the same--were at the same school; Darby High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say your father's side of the family didn't think she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no.  They--you know it was--even as a kid, you could tell it was, it was, it was tension.  I remember one time there was, you know, Thanksgiving was always big, and my grandmother on my father's side wanted me to come to (laughter) dinner on their side and that was forbidden so I couldn't do that, so they did a big breakfast too, and she said "Well how about you coming to the breakfast?"  So I never told my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] I went to breakfast so I went to breakfast and then, too stuffed at the breakfast to eat Thanksgiving dinner so I heard about that one.  But no, it was great.  They were cordial to each other.  Ended up, you know, afterwards.  After--by the time we--by the time I got to be an adult, I guess they were kind of, okay well we've been through so much, let's try to, try to make peace.  So they were cordial to each other, but there was never any love between them, but respect.  I mean respect, but it was--we all, the kids all knew that there--well, there are eight of us in my family, four boys, four girls.  And there was a four-year, a five-year break between--I was the youngest for five years.  So things were a lot--and maybe we'll get to this, but things were a lot tougher for the first four, then things got to be a little--'cause we helped out so it was a little easier so I don't think my four younger siblings saw the resentment as much as we did.
Story_ID: 34385
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they looked, how they walked, talked, the things they were interested in, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think the walk, the look, the discipline, my father [Charles Frederick Coleman], the kindness, the care in, my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman].  My father was a strict disciplinarian.  Unfortunately, it was do as I say and not as I do, you know.  So you think okay, if I'm gonna be like my fa--my father demanded respect, and I remember my oldest sister saying, "You know, he demands respect but, you know, you gotta--you need to earn respect," and he never--never really earned--well I shouldn't say that never.  It took a long time.  I mean he was quick of yelling, quick of disciplining, this was all early on and I mean back then, you got hit and it wasn't--we didn't call it abuse, we just called it discipline.  But he was a very, very strict disciplinarian.  After I got older, went to Vietnam, came back from Vietnam and that's about the time my father and I started to gel a little bit when I got home from Vietnam, and that would have been in 1970 when I got home.  I was in Vietnam from '69 [1969] to '70 [1970].  So we started to gel a little bit.  He--again now, he's reformed now so that's a little, so that's a little better but still all those years of hurt.  So it--we were, we were cordial, even kind of close.  But I never understood why he was the way he was.  I worked at the Pentagon in 1997 and I got a call from my brother, my youngest brother, saying "Hey you need to come home, they wanna operate on him."  And he said "They're not--I'm not gonna let them operate on him until I get there."  He called me--I was a Colonel but they called me the General.  He said "I'm not letting them operate on me 'til the General comes."  So I got on a train and went up to Philadelphia [Pennsylvannia].  I went right to the hospital and I guess it was like 10:00 at night and got in and the four boys were in there talking to him so we--they let us stay until about midnight.  They were gonna operate at 9:00 the next morning, we went to the hospital a little before that, maybe 8, and the procedure got backed up, so we spent about four hours with him before he went in and got operated on and that was probably the best four hours of my life.  That was, you know.  I made peace, we made peace with each other and that was--that's--that was, that was good.  It was tough, but worth it.  It was probably--that's when I forgave him.
Speaker 1: So you thought he was gonna pass or he might?
Speaker 2: He did.  He did.  He made it through the operation, then about a week later, he passed away.  So that that was the last--made it through the operation, I went up to see him, and he had the tube in his mouth and so couldn't really talk, but I guess the most vivid memory, I was leaving and he motioned for me to come over and I came over and he kissed me; the only time he ever showed me any affection.
Speaker 1: It's good that happened, man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I made, I made peace (sobbing sounds).  And I remember thinking before that 'Well, you know, I don't care what happens to him, it's just been so, so tough' but that was, that was good, that was good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's good that happened then 'cause so many people don't, you know, they don't have a chance like that.
Speaker 2: No, that was--yeah.
Story_ID: 34386
Speaker 1: So--now you have brothers.  You've got a younger brother I know.  How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Seven.  There's--there were four boys and four girls; I was the fourth.  There was--Pete was the oldest--is the oldest, Cassey next, Doreen next.  Doreen was eleven months older than me.  She passed away two years ago; Alzheimer's.  Then there's me, then there's a five-year gap, and my brother Dennis and my brother Arnold, sister Christine and sister Robin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do they comprise the household when you were growing up, pretty much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, yeah.  That was, that was--I mean--now the younger--I mean I guess I remember most--I don't know if that's correct or not, but there were four of us; two boys and two girls.  Pete, Cassey, Doreen and me.  And I said there was a five-year gap.  We had--my earliest memories were living with my grandmother in Darby [Pennsylvania].  We then moved to Darby Township, probably about four or five miles away.  So that was the first time there was a household, you know, mother, father, sisters and brothers and that's all.  When we were at my grandmother's house earlier, before that, there were, there were my--our family and my aunt and her family; we all lived in the same house.  We moved to Darby Township and then--my father [Charles Frederick Coleman] was abusive to my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] and so one time she stood up to him and so then we--they broke up and we went back to Darby and lived in Darby there, but you know, it's amazing what the difference is in the first four and the second four.  We were able--the older four were able to help with the second four growing up, so that was, you know--and it took some of the pressure off our mother so it--but they don't, they don't see life the way we do.  They were spoiled--as spoiled as you could be and still be poor, but they were spoiled, so it's a little gap there.
Story_ID: 34387
Speaker 1: Tell us what you were telling me off-camera about your grandmother's [May E. Hill] house (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, when we moved back from Darby, Township to Darby [Pennsylvania], and--so it was our family.  My father [Charles Frederick Coleman] wasn't there, so it was my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] and her eight kids, it was an aunt and her five kids, and my grandmother.  Now there's great--there's great debate about it; my wife always says there were twenty-one of us living in the house at the same time.  My brother will only admit to eighteen, so he gets mad at her (unclear) what happened to the three people, but we can't figure it out.  But she--by this time I'm in high school and we're sitting there and, and she sits there--it's like a tennis match watching people go by, but there were eighteen of us at least in a three-bedroom house, one bathroom; it was tight.  My brothers and I had the back room; we called it the back room and it had a bunk bed in it.  So two of us were up top, two of us down on the bottom, we had one Chester drawer, so everybody had one drawer.  So not, not one Chest--you had one drawer for all your stuff and we had a--the hangin' thing on the back of the door and whatever hang-up clothes you had, you hung up there.  But the good part about that is you look at the four boys; my oldest brother Pete--Charles is his real name, but Pete; Pete was an all-American--high school all-American basketball player; same year with Lou Alcindor ["Kareem Abdul-Jabbar"].  An all-state football player, graduate of Villanova [University], and he's a Dean of Students with Penn State [University].  There's me, there's my youngest brother Dennis--
Speaker 1: So the brother we just talked about would be Dean Coleman?
Speaker 2: Dennis.  No, that--the one you just said that's Charles Pete.  He was your all-American. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Charles Pete; okay.  Charles Pete.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Okay?  Then there's me, then there's Dennis.  Dennis is a graduate of Brown [University] and Georgetown [University] Law School, is a partner with Robeson Gray, that big law firm.  First black quarterback to play for--to start for Brown.  Then there's Arnold; Arnold's the youngest.  Arnold graduated from Hofstra.  He was drafted by the Oakland Raiders, made it to the final cut, and now he's the big--some big muckey-uckey with Verizon.  So--and he and I were together two weeks ago at my aunt's funeral and talked about, you know, when you look at the humble beginning, we did okay.  The sisters--Cassey's retired; she worked at a hospital--nurse at a hospital.  Doreen passed away, and the other two were--Christine's married, she has three kids and she works as a teacher at a school, and then Robin works at a bank.  So with that, I mean I think we did well from those beginnings.
Story_ID: 34388
Speaker 1: How do you account for that because you got--you got--there's some rocky times in the beginning, especially with your father drinking and we can only imagine, you know, what's going on, I mean this is a pretty common story--
Speaker 2: You know we--when we went back--when Arnold and I were talking, he said this--one of the guys in the town, George Carey who--George is the old--I don't know what word you could do, but he knows everything about the town and everybody and everybody respects him and he talks about how amazing the Coleman family was to be able to come out of--to come out.  I mean you can't hide when your father's an alcoholic, I mean when you see him on the street and the whole bit.  So everybody knew; it wasn't any secret but you know you just pull together and you say "I'm gonna be better than that."  And I think I think the four older ones instilled that in the four younger ones but you look at that and you say that everybody--well Cassey and Doreen didn't go to college; everybody else went to college.  All four of the boys graduated and did well.  Pete and I both served in the military; Pete served in Vietnam in the Army, I served in Vietnam with the Navy.  The draft was done away with and the volunteer came and Dennis and Arnold didn't--never got drafted (unclear) when we went to that number system so they never got it.  I think it's a big difference in us because of the--I think the military does give you some discipline and we just--you know it was one of those ones where--I can remember when Pete went away to school, my mother saying, "Okay, you're the man of the house."  So there's seven of us and I was in tenth grade and you're--so it's--you know, it matures you, it grows you up a little quicker but that's--it was good, it was good.
Speaker 1: Was your grandmother [May E. Hill] a tremendous influence on you?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Nana; everything I say is a Nana-ism; Nana said this, Nana said that.  No, she was, she was a great--she was a religious person, and smart as a--smart as a tack.  Not book smart, but common sense, common sense smart.  I mean just--it always amazed you the things she would say.  You know, you'd say, "How did Nana think of that?"  You know, and she had the old fashioned remedies you know, and when you got the--a cold or chest cold, she'd say, "Okay, take a brick and put in the oven and then put it underneath the bed and then you'll be okay."  And she'd always take that hot wool cloth and rub it on you, put some Vicks on it and rub it on your chest.  One time I stepped on a nail and went home and I said "Nana, I stepped on a nail" and she was in the refrigerator and she got some bacon.  She said, "Put the bacon in your sock and that'll suck the poison out and you'll be okay."  So I put (laughter)--My, my daughter's boyfriend, the other day, he had stepped on (laughter), stepped on a nail and I said (laughter) "Put some bacon in your sock and you'll be okay (laughter)."  It worked for me, but then she always had--you know, and one of her, one of her--to me, one of her best--well she always said--that's where I got the 'treat everybody with dignity and respect;' she always said that so I got that from her.  But Nana always said "It has to get dark in order to see the stars."  And you say "Nana, Nana."  I don't know what type of education she had, but how could she even think that?  You know?  But when you think about it, you know?  Good times come out of bad.  Tremendous impact but I would say she--I mean she raised, she raised us; she really did.  She's a great lady.
Story_ID: 34389
Speaker 1: Now was she home most of the time when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh she--yeah, she would, she was only--you could always depend on that.  There were--I don't think Nana [May E. Hill] ever went out of the--it seemed as though she never went out of the house.  And you--she was always, always there for you.  And always had good advice.  I remember Nana saying, "Son, you're too sensitive.  You're too ni"--a guy went to school with Junie and we'd race almost every day and I was determined that I was gonna beat him.  At this time, I just--he's just fast you know, I'd tie my shoes tighter and I thought that was gonna do something.  So I came home one day and told Nana I had a race and came in second place.  She said, "Son, how many people were running?"  I said "Two."  She said, "Son, you came in last place."  You know?  But you needed that, you know?  She let you know where you stood.  But she said "Son, whenever there's a race with more than one person, somebody's gonna be first and somebody's gonna be last.  Don't ever compare yourself with anyone, just do the best--be the best person you can be; that's all you can do."  You know when you're a kid and you say, "Ahh, what's Nana saying?"  But as you get older--and I try to never compare myself with--I do the best I can in everything I do, and there's gonna be people that are better, people not as good, people equal, but don't judge anybody, don't compare yourself; just do what you can do.
Speaker 1: Now did your great-grandmother live with you too?
Speaker 2: No.  No, my great-grand--well, now she--when--just want to make sure I get them right.  When Nana's mother was alive, I remember when she passed away, so there was a time that--for a short period of time because we lived in in Darby Township [Pennsylvania] while Nana's mother, Grandma, was still alive.  And then we moved in and that's when we got--we, me--my brothers moved in the back room in her room.  So when we--after--my father [Charles Frederick Coleman] came home drunk one night and, and hit my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] and my mother said there was a hammer there, she grabbed the hammer and hit him in the head and there was never any abuse again.  I mean finally she stood up and took him to the hospital and (laughter) never, never touched her again.  Shoulda had that hammer sooner.  But anyway, so then we moved back to Darby and we moved in a house.  The only memory I have of my great-grandmother on my mother's side is her being bedridden in the back room.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the one that lived to be a hundred and--
Speaker 2: No, no, she--I don't, I really know how old she lived.  Nana Standford that's on my father's side.  She's the one that lived to be 113 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I understand--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--different house .  And even, even while she was in her hundreds, she'd walk--it's about a two-block walk to Church.  She'd walk to Church.  She could still get around.
Speaker 1: So did you ever spend--so you never really spent much time with them--with the grandparents (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  On the other side--I mean, I knew them; as I got older I did, but as a child, no.  In fact, as a child, kids were--you know, I was doing whatever--it one of those ones where you were never in the house; I mean you were in the house to eat and to go to bed, and the other times, you were outside.  So it was never--I mean you saw them at Church and things like that, but if you--you'd go by you know, "Is there anything I can do for you?"  But that was just to make some--to make a nickel or a dime, so--never spent much time with them.  But I did spend--I spent 99 percent of the time with my mother's side of the family and one percent with my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was only a one-block difference.  I mean, I could come out the back door and walk through the fence and get to my grandmother's [May E. Hill] house.  In Darby [Pennsylvania], there are probably only five streets, and--there was Ninth Street, 10th Street, Marks Avenue, Summer Street that--you know, it was only about five streets.  So we lived on 10th Street, my father's people lived on Marks Avenue, which was just the next street over so--I mean you saw them, and you were cordial, but there was no great love until we got older and more mature.
Story_ID: 34390
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us a little bit about Darby [Pennsylvania].  What's the demographics of Darby in those days in terms of the racial population?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was--Darby was always integrated but separated.  The--they call it "the Hill"; all the black people lived in the--probably a two mile radius.  And you went from Ninth Street to Marks Avenue, to 10th Street, to MacDade Boulevard.  So there was like four streets east to west.  And then north to south, there were Cedar Avenue, Summit Street, Maple Terrace, Ridge Avenue--so about five streets north-south.  So it was small.  I think someone told me that Darby was twenty-three percent black when we were growing up there.  A great town, though; I mean we went to integrated schools, good relationships, I mean very, very seldom were there fights.  There were just as many fights between black on black fights as black on white fights; so I mean it wasn't anything like that.  Now you went to school together, you played sports together, but after school there was very little mingling together.  It was a school thing but nothing more than that.
Speaker 1: You said the area that the blacks lived in was called--
Speaker 2: It's called "the Hill".  You're up on the hill--it was--because the shopping center was down the hill and people would say, "Okay, I'm going shoppin', I'm going down Darby," which meant you were going down the hill, and we were up the hill.  The hill was--I mean it wasn't like maybe a ten degree or something like that slope, but it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, you--we called it up the hill.
Speaker 1: Well was there a major river running through there?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  A trolley came through there, a bus came through there, everything we did--everything you did was public transportation or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--real close to Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're about ten miles--you could walk to the Philadelphia line.  And so the--then Darby was pretty much the hub of that area but you had the trollies, you had the buses, some people had cars; I'd say most people didn't even have cars.  But a good growing up.  High school was probably one of my most favorite times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was--it was good.
Story_ID: 34391
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sounds were always, always sports.  I mean we went to--the, the field was called the Moose.  And then during the fall, you were playing football or basketball, and then the Spring and Summer, you're playing baseball and it was--the sounds were just kids playing.  I mean there's never any fear of--I don't know that we ever--I know that I never had a key to the house.  I mean you never, never locked the door.  It was, it was just joy, happiness--I don't know of a--you know, you didn't know you were poor 'cause everybody was--everybody's in the same boat.  Now the people up the street may have had a car, but that was it; nobody had two cars.  A lot of people had no cars, or didn't have a car.  Just joy.  If I could--that was probably the happiest time in my life was high school.  High school and growing up.  Again, there may have been fights, but not--I would say myself I probably had more fights, fighting somebody else black than I did fighting somebody--I don't think I ever had a fight with anybody white.  I mean you just--you got along.  You played sports and you went to sporting events and that was it.  It was great, it was a great upbringing.  And part of it was the discipline of the town.  I mean if I did something wrong, you know, Mr. Arthur would see me and he'd hit me and send me home and then he'd tell my father [Charles Frederick Coleman], my father would hit me and--or not, so you knew if you did something wrong, there's no way Fred Coleman wasn't gonna hear about it.  So you knew, as soon as you did something wrong, you were gonna hear about it.  So it was good but--Mr. so-and-so, Mr. Johnson was able to discipline you without your mother or father saying, "Don't you ever discipline my child."
Story_ID: 34392
Speaker 1: Okay.  So sports was the most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sports was everything.  You played three sports, four if you could, and everybody did.  Everybody did; and those that didn't make the team came to the games and cheered you on.  So it was--every one of my brothers and me, we played at least three.  You couldn't play four sports because--when my brother was in high school, you were able to play football, basketball; in the season, baseball and track.  But at one point, he and some of his year group were both on the baseball team and the track team, and there was a meet one day of--a meet and a game.  And the coach said "Okay, okay, you can only do three."  So I played baseball, basketball and football.  I think my two younger--I know my two younger brothers ran track but played football and basketball.
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the local sports heroes I guess?
Speaker 2: My brother was the biggest, my brother--Alonzo Lewis was a great one.  Lonzo was the first black kid to actually get out of Darb--that I know of, get out and go to college and play--he played for LaSalle [University].  Very good, very good.  He probably was the best basketball player to ever come out of Darby.  And arguably either he or my brother.  My brother Pete, his team won sixty-four straight games.  They went to two state championships; they played--won sixty-four straight games without losing, and Pete was the star of that team with a great team.
Speaker 1: Was this a high school team?
Speaker 2: High school.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of games, that's like three seasons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Two-plus seasons.  Now I mean--his junior and senior year, they won every game.
Speaker 1: Did they win a state championship?
Speaker 2: Won state champion two years in a row.
Speaker 1: Well this was Darby?
Speaker 2: Darby High School.  Darby-Colwyn High School, yeah.  But they won, they won 64 straight games.  They were good, they were, they were very good.  The football teams were always good, the team my junior year, I think was only the second undefeated team; we had two ties but we were undefeated.  I played quarterback and safety for that team; I was the starting quarterback and starting safety.  We tied two games but didn't lose any.  But sports was everything.  My ninth grade year--so in junior high, we were undefeated and unscored upon.  Nobody scored a touchdown on us.  Big games.  We were--sports was, sports was everything; and to our detriment sometimes.  For me, school was a place where you went while you waited for practice to start, you know, so if you had a C, you could play sports, and so my goal was to have--anything above a C was wasted.  That was my, my mindset, which really hurt me later on, but school was--but I loved school.  I can remember graduation and, you know, all my buds were just as excited and I though 'Man, what am I gonna do now?'  I mean I didn't want to graduate from high school.
Speaker 1: Hmm, it was too much fun (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Too much fun, too much fun.  It was, it was great.
Story_ID: 34393
Speaker 1: Let's go back to--I didn't ask you about grade--where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Ridge Avenue.  Right there in Darby [Pennsylvania].  Went to Ridge Avenue, that's where I started.  That was the--again, another--it was in the black neighborhood but everybody went to it.  So even though--you know, Darby blacks and whites, but if you went to a public school, you went to Ridge Avenue School.  I mean it was integrated schools for forever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were your teachers mostly--were they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Mostly white, mostly white women, yeah.  Mr. Malone and Mr. Braton, I think, were the only two I remember male teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But mostly white women teachers.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think we had a--I don't remember a black, a black teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hmm.  In all of those schools?
Speaker 2: (Long sigh)--Maybe in senior high school; I remember we had a group of student teachers come in, I--I--we did, we had one--Mr. Woodson I think his name was.  He was a shop teacher.  That was the only black teacher that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it was the same in grade school, the sports kind of dominated then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, and sports was everything.  Sports was the whole--and the town was all about, was all about sports too.  So it was a very good upbringing.  Very good.  I mean from junior high, senior high, elementary school, I mean it was just, just a good--you know, kids outside playing and it was, you know, double dutch and, and hopscotch and all those sorts of things.
Speaker 1: And you said you had a chance to watch Wilt Chamberlain?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  Wilt was from Overbrook [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and we were--Overbrook was probably seven miles from us and in the city, they played--the City Legs were good, so you--but I never saw Wilt play when he was in Overbrook, but I did see him play when he was with the, with the 76ers down in the (unclear) and those sorta things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear)--Warriors--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--the Warrior--I'm sorry, yeah, the Warrior.  The Warrior Absolutely, absolutely, yeah, yeah.  So no, but sports was just a big, big thing and Big Five basketball was--that's some of the best basketball in the, in the country.
Speaker 1: Now who was that?
Speaker 2: That was LaSalle [University], Penn [State University], Villanova [University], St. Joe [St. Joseph's University], I'm forgetting one and whoever it is'll be mad.  Temple [University].
Speaker 1: Temple.  Okay.  Yeah, okay, that makes sense, yeah.
Speaker 2: Very good, very good basketball.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are basketball schools to be sure.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 34394
Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite subject in school at all?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: History.  And I was just saying that for you (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  So what phase of history do you think?
Speaker 2: You know, the period--it's just so interesting to be able to say, "Okay, this happened in this time, and this happened in this time."  I loved reading about the Civil War, the Crusaders, just history in--then I remember reading the first time about Joan of Arc and that sort of stuff.  So anything history.  History and reading were my best--I love to read; sometimes I get away from reading and I may go three weeks, a month without reading and then I get back into it but love to read but--reading and history.  I mean if I would have thought that I could have gotten a job as a history teacher, that's probably the way I would have gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were coming along, we're about the same age.  It was the Civil War Centennial--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and when we were kids.  And they had a lot of stuff on television and in the media about Civil War.
Speaker 2: You loved reading about, but then as I got older and got in the military and got to go to Gettysburg [Pennsylvania] and do that sort of thing, it was really interesting.  You know the courage, and then you think about--no matter what side you're on, you know it isn't like--you got in an airplane and you went from one place to another, I mean it was all horses or walking and mostly walking from wherever you were fighting.  Brutal, brutal wars.  I mean just--a war, but it was interesting.  Very, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a sense at all when you were in school about the black presence in these kinds of places?
Speaker 2: No, my presence; you wonder why you don't--you know, you're looking at a magazine, a book or whatever and you don't see black, you don't hear black whatever, so you wonder why.  But then early on you're told that, you know, they weren't allowed to fight.  And that's why I'm so, I'm so interested and amazed with the Montford Point [Marines] and Buffalo Soldiers and all of them.  And I always say I'm gonna stand on their shoulders, and I am because they were.  And they had to, you know, fight for the right to fight.  And you're just--I mean that's just amazing you know.  I want to serve my country but I can't serve my country.   That's--you know it's hard to believe that folks could be that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there's a--now your father, did he--he didn't serve during the war--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did.  Well he did, but he was--by the time he actually got to the fight, he was in Japan but the fighting in Japan was over by the time he got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he was in the Army (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was in the Army.  Now he said--he said he always wanted to be a Marine, but he went in the Army.  He was impressed with the military; very impressed with the military.  One of the few supporters of mine when I went back in--I did the Vietnam thing, got out, went to college, I taught school for a year, and then went back in and he--probably only about three people--my father, Pigeon a good bud, and my brother-in-law Bernard, were probably about the only ones that supported going back into the military.
Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers in elementary school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Inaudible response--
Speaker 1: Teachers, or counselors or administrators or coaches even.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--Mr. Malone was my sixth grade teacher.  He's passed away since, but Mr. Malone was a great--he's probably the greatest role model teacher that I ever, I ever had.  He's probably my favorite--he took a lot of time with me.  Mr. Malone knew my father was an alcoholic.  You know back then they had father-son dinners and the school would help support them.  And one time Mr. Malone said, "Ronald, if you bring me your permission slip, you can go with me."  And then when we were going on trips, you know, he had to pay, you know, a dollar or whatever if you're going to the zoo or wherever you were going, and you had to have a permission slip.  And one time I came in and Mr. Malone said, "Where is your permission slip?"  And I said "Well, you know, I can't go."  And he said, "Why?"  I said, "Well, you know, my mother didn't have the money."  And he said, "Ronald, from now on, always bring a permission slip and we'll go."  So he was one of those guys that would--he's a great teacher.  He's probably my favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: Mr. Malone.
Speaker 2: And that was in fifth--back then you had the same teacher fourth, fifth and sixth grade.  Well I got to the school in fifth grade, so he was my fifth and sixth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  That's something.  Okay.  All right, we're gonna pause here, Sir.
Story_ID: 36737
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school was Darby-Colwyn Junior High School, so that was same area, just a little further walk and everybody in Darby [Pennsylvania], went to this same--if you went to public school, you went to Ridge Avenue, if you lived over on our side or Walnut Street, and then junior high school, everybody went to Walnut Street Junior High.  Junior High was fifth; I mean sixth, or seventh, eighth and ninth was junior high.  But everybody went to that school.
Speaker 1: So this was about 1961 then, right?
Speaker 2: Inaudible response--
Speaker 1: Seventh grade, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Let's see.  Yep, exactly.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) I'm sorry, I haven't been keeping up with the time here, but '61 [1961], you would have been about twelve.  Now, by this time was television, radio, movies important to you at all?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I mean--we spent all our time outside.  I mean I--the time inside was to watch baseball on Channel 13 or whatever when it--when we finally got that, but very little.  Now when it was just the four of us up in Darby Township, we had--got our first T.V. and it was a Motorola and I remember that.  But we didn't spend a lot of time watching T.V.  I guess by the time you got to high school there was more, you know, more things you could watch, but I can remember thinking one time when I first got to--I guess I came back to Darby Township in fifth grade and the next morning, kids were talking about "Oh, did you see this or see that?"  And I said--it wasn't because we didn't have a T.V., but I just wasn't interested.  I mean I was interested in sports or reading or being outside playing so I didn't do much T.V. watching at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess I got more into T.V. as--about high school was when I started watching T.V. I guess, but elementary, junior high, T.V.--you just didn't sit around the T.V. and watch--well maybe 'cause it was so many kids and everybody wanted something different so you know, when you're the youngest, you can't get what you want anyway so why sit there and watch something you didn't want to watch?
Speaker 1: Now did you have a little league?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Did you play little league (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yes, yeah, absolutely.  Absolutely.  There was no--and disappointing--there was no-- by the time--when I was there, I'm tryin' to think what they called it--the football team.  But there was no, you know, little league football or whatever we called it then, but there was--there were the Colwyn Comets that was, you know, over on the white side but we didn't have that.  But little league, little league you played was one of those ones where--Mr. Hill.  Mr. Hill was the local, and Mr. Hill is still alive.  He's probably as big a mentor for me as anybody.  Mr. Hill was a non-drinker and he was a little league coach and every black kid in Darby wanted to play for Mr. Hill.  Big disciplinarian.  Mr. Hill taught me as much about discipline as my father.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your team?
Speaker 2: The Rams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you play?
Speaker 2: I was a pitcher and third base.
Story_ID: 36738
Speaker 1: Now did you have a Boy Scout troop?
Speaker 2: I wasn't in--I never got into Boy Scouts.  Never got in--and that age group, when you're getting into Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts, we were up in Darby Township [Pennsylvania].  I don't remember there being one there, but I never got into Boy Scouts or--you know, now you say, "Boy, why?"  But I don't remember any of my brothers--and it was a Boy Scout troop, but I was never in a--was never in the Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: What about the Boys' Club or something like that?  Or did you have a recreation center to play ball in, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, we went--everything was the Moose over at the athletic field.  That's where you went, but I wasn't in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What was it called?  The Moose?
Speaker 2: The Moose, M-O--because there was a Moose Lodge there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it was--right next to it was the Seal, so you always said you were going over to the Moose.  But I don't remember anything organized other than Little League.  Again, there was--there were Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts and those sorts of things but I was never involved in them.
Speaker 1: So you got your basketball basically in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, and in--yeah, there was no league.  But every day after school, everybody went over and it was at--and it was over to Moose.  The Moose had a football field, a basketball court, hockey over here, the girls would play, but the basketball--there were two full courts right next to each other.  You know, one like here and one over here (demonstrations).
Speaker 1: Asphalt?
Speaker 2: Asphalt.  Asphalt with the metal ring and the little thing, and as you grow up, you could move to over here--you know, when you're--when you weren't good, you couldn't play on this court.  I mean you had to, you had to earn to get to that court.  But you would--you would be amazed at the number of people that would go over to the Moose just to watch, watch them play.  I mean it was, it was--and you got your five and you played until you lost.  And when you lost, took you a long time to get back to the, get back to the court.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so guys would stand around and talk?
Speaker 2: Stand around and talk, yeah, and you, you learned so much then, and you watched the, you know, the big guys play and all that.  That was--you know and they're talking trash to each other and all that.  But that was--it was, it was fun.  It was fun.  Like I said, it was a great--I think everybody in Darby would say--most people in Darby would say they had a great upbringing, a great childhood, a great time.
Speaker 1: Now did you have to work as a kid, as a teenager?
Speaker 2: If you wanted anything (laughter), if you wanted anything, you did.  I worked with Tony the laundry man.  He was a guy that would come out of Philly, and he had a laundry truck and I would either--you know you go--the person had to sit it on a step and you go get it off the step and bring it to the truck, or he'd say go deliver it.  Never--you never changed hands--or money or anything like that, but you just--so that was, that was my job and of course you couldn't do that during--I never worked during the school year.  So that was just during the summer.  And then I worked with Mr. Ed the ice man.  He would travel all over the place delivering ice, and you get to carry the bags of ice to wherever they needed to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is--now did he--these are bags of ice?
Speaker 2: Bags of ice.  He had bags--sometimes it would be the bags, but other times it's the clip, throw them over your back, and carry them to the--and he was--you know it was only certain places that he let you--I mean he had the big blocks, and if you're delivering a small block, he'd chop it up to a small piece and then let you grab the tongs and carry the ice.
Speaker 1: Now I'm kind of surprised 'cause I--well, we're about the same age, so I'm thinking by the time you were growing up, everybody had a refrigerator pretty much, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you did but you know--all the stores and things like that.  So you were--very seldom did you take it to anybody's house.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --This is, this is carrying it to the, you know to Carmine's Store, and he'd put it in the big Coca Cola machine and put in--you know, you had the big long things that Coca Cola--and put the ice in and chop it up so you had ice like that, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then we'd go to places like that that delivered ice.  Very few places did you deliver the bags to, but he always had some bags.
Story_ID: 36739
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right so now high school.  This is the best time of your life, you say--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you played all three of the sports?
Speaker 2: Played, football, basketball, and baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably, I was best at baseball, but I loved football better.  And now you understand why coaches and--when you go somewhere they make you pick one.  If I had--I always thought I'd be a professional baseball player, and I think if I'd only played baseball.  I mean all kids think that, but I--I got a pretty good shot, if I would have only played baseball.  I think I could have been better.  And I loved it.  I think I could have been better at it.  I loved it, but I loved the contact of football more.  And so that was this way.  But I wasn't as good a football player as I was a--I mean I was a good football player; in my senior year I was voted most athletic in the school.  But--and basketball was good.  I was never a good--I was never a very good--I did play--excuse me, I played on the Varsity.  I played basketball because, because of my brother.  My brother was the star of the team and everybody expected that, you know--I can remember Mr. (unclear) the coach saying, "You're going out for basketball."  "Yes Sir, I'm going"--because you, you know, if a teacher said it, you were doing it.  So I went out for basketball.  But I wasn't as good in basketball as some of the guys here.
Speaker 1: So you were the quarterback on the football team?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now that's a leader of the team--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so yeah, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That was, that was--oh yeah, it was--now, even in truth but some of that was because my brother played quarterback too.  So I guess they thought that, but I liked playing quarterback.  I did.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a--who were your heroes in those days in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, Jim Brown.
Speaker 1: Jim Brown?
Speaker 2: Jim Brown.  He was your only hero.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who did the Eagles have?  Now I'm trying to think of what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--had Ted Dean, had Timmy Brown, Norm Snead, Tommy McDonald.  Jerguson played there for a while.  But there was nobody--probably Timmy Brown was a running back, so you liked him.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I remember Ted Dean.  (Simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Tim Brown was a good, good--number 22, I think.  But uhh--
Speaker 1: There was Ted Dean too, I remember.
Speaker 2: Ted Dean, yeah.  I remember watching Philly beat Green Bay in 1960 for their only championship.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right, right.  Okay.  yeah 1960, right.  So the football team won a lot of games too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  football team won a lot of games.  We were very good--I think most years, you probably lost one or two games and that was it, but I remember my junior year, we tied two games.  I think it was--I know one was Colindale; I can't remember who the other one is, but we didn't win the championship because there was another team--Darby and Shern Hill didn't play each other because one year, this was before me--had been a great big fight so the two teams--Shern Hill was all white and it was a big fight so on our schedule we never played them.  So they won a championship because they were undefeated.  But the two of us never played but most of the schools we played were all white, but it was--we were good.  But it be--you know depending on which team you were playing it was--could get pretty dirty.  Some of them were a little dirtier than others, as you can imagine.
Story_ID: 36740
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So were your high school coaches good role models?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  Mr. House was probably the one I remember the best.  Mr. House was the football coach my years while I was at Darby.  He was a very good coach and a big disciplinarian too.  Mr. House said "If you wanna play football on my team"--now in basketball, you wore a coat and tie the day of the game.  In football, Mr. House said, "You wear a tie every day.  If you don't wear a tie every day, you can't be on the team."  So he just wanted--and you couldn't have any facial hair or anything like that.  And that was--you wanted to play.  So if you wanted to play, you followed the rules and you played, but Mr. House was the best role model in high school.
Speaker 1: So the coach--I mean--so every day you went to high school you wore a shirt and tie?
Speaker 2: A shirt and tie.  Now he started off you wore--you had to dress well.  But then it was a shirt and tie every day.  Every day of the football season you wore a tie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  A shirt and tie.
Speaker 2: So you know, kids trying to, trying to beat the--you know you'd wear the tie but you wouldn't have it tied.  So sometimes you'd just have the two sides hanging down until you saw Mr. House coming down the hall and then you ran in the bathroom and tied--you know, you're just trying to stretch the envelope as far as you could.
Speaker 1: Of course he was always fooled I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) he was, he was--yeah and he knew, so it--but it--you know--it taught--it was discipline.  And I remember, you know I can remember the first time Mr. Swan.  He'd been the--he's a basketball coach and he said, "Ronald, you go home and shave."  And I thought, 'Man, finally.'  You know you kept wanting for hair, for a mustache or whatever, so you had to be clean-shaven, so one day I got sent home to shave, so I thought I was--man I put so much soap and stuff on my face because you wanted to--you wanted to be able to shave (laughter).  I don't--he must have had to get this close (demonstration) to me just to see the hairs on me but I just--I thought 'Okay, I'm growing up now; I got facial hair, so--
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay (laughter).  So did you do anything else in high school?  I mean were you on a--did you run for student council or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was on the student council.  I was a senator on the student council, and then just the sports.  And I was the president of the Varsity Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how were your grades?
Speaker 2: Not good.  Not good.  I--in all honesty, I thought, 'Okay Ronald, if you get, if you get a C, you can play sports.  So get C's.'  And I didn't--and that hurt.  I could have been--I could have done much better.  I think it turned out okay, but it would have been a lot easier on me if I had studied.  I didn't study at all.  I was not a good--now, you know when you had a history class, you were good in that because you really like history, but I wish I could go back and I'd be a--you know if you change one thing, I'd be a much better student.
Story_ID: 36741
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your senior year in high school, did you all win any championships or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  In fact, unfortunately, our senior year--well senior year, we went to the--we went to the state championship but we lost in overtime in basketball.  In football--well, in everything we moved--there were three levels; there's Class A, Class B, Class C, and that was depending on the number of students you had in the school.  So we moved--we were always a Class C school which meant, I think, you had less than 500 people in the high school.  The next year, we changed and went to Class B and that was--our senior year was our, was our worse year; I think we probably won four of nine games that year.  The year before, we were seven and won two.  So my senior year--senior year we weren't very good at all in football.  We were very good in basketball.  Got to the state championships but we lost in overtime.
Speaker 1: Okay, the classes--the way it works, just for those who may be watching this and don't know, the smaller schools will play in the league because they have like less (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Less to choose--
Speaker 1: --to choose from.
Speaker 2: --Less to choose from, yeah.  So it's all on number of students.  (Simultaneous) (unclear).  Not number of athletes, but number of students in the school. So we were one of the smaller schools as a Class C, but I remember the senior year they--so I guess we had more students.  Senior year they moved us to Class B, and that was--you know, so the competition is tougher, you know.  They got more to choose from.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because you could have a great athlete at any level but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a huge school with huge numbers is likely--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to feel a team with more (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.  You could say that, you know, a star on a Class C school might not make the team on a Class A school.  Just 'because you had so many people to choose from.  So it's tough--tougher schedule.  Plus, that year, the number of folks that came out for football was--see, we had the football camp but you had to pay to go to football camp.  And if you didn't go to football camp, you didn't play.  We went to football camp with not a lot of players.  We didn't have a lot of players on the team because you couldn't afford to go to football camp.  So the team--of my three years, that was the worse, you know, the least--we didn't have as many great or good players on that year.
Speaker 1: You had to play two ways--
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I thought you were saying you played safety and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, safety and quarterback.
Speaker 1: --Quarterback.  Yeah.  So your quarterback is hitting people (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: --on the defensive side, so you're gonna be tired, you know, when you--
Speaker 2: And I was just saying--but I--I, you know if you had said to me "Okay what would you rather play?"  I'd rather play safety than quarterback.  I always just want to--and then the junior year when I quarterbacked, I played safety, and we had a great line.  So there would be games when--unless I was running the ball, I'd never get touched.  So I always wanted to play defense first because once you hit or been hit a while, then you know the juices start flowing.  But I would go a quarter and never have any-- because the line is tackling people before I had a chance and on the other side they block, so I never had to--so it was--that 11th grade year was a great year.  That was a great year.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 36742
Speaker 1: Now when you were a senior in high school, did--what kind of counseling did you have--
Speaker 2: On--
Speaker 1: --about what you were gonna do next?
Speaker 2: Oh, none.  None.  None.  We had a guidance counselor, Mr. Scholar--and I'm sure he's gone by now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Mr. Scholar?
Speaker 2: Scholar.  Yeah.  Yeah.  But he was--I don't think he cared for any black student in the school.  That's just my (unclear), so--no, I got--he had an office, and you can go in his office, you can look at the things, but never sat you down and said, you know "Ronald, are you thinking about this?"  Or you know  "How about this grade?"  Or anything like that.  No, he was--and that was part of the problem; he had no drive, no--see there was nothing pushing me to school.  And the football team didn't have a good year so it wasn't like people are coming to watch you play, so it was-I mean I had nobody coming saying "Hey come play for us."
Speaker 1: Okay, so the sports prospects were dim as well as--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  And my academics were, were shot.  So I wasn't getting anywhere on an academic scholarship, and nobody was coming to me for the other, so what ended up was near the end of the year, a friend of my brother's was working at a college northeast from Christian Junior College which was right up by Villanova.  And he came to the school and he said, "Hey, you know, I wanna talk to you."  So he talked to me about going here.  And at that point, that was exactly what I needed because at seventeen, if you'd asked me what I was gonna be, I would have said, "a Minister or a baseball player."  So he came talking about Northeastern Christian Junior College and I thought 'man, this is a great way to go.'  And you know, student loans and a work program and the whole bit.  So I got to go to school that way.  I mean there was no college boards or anything like that; it was just hey, we can get you in school and get you an education.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1966, right, when you graduated from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I graduated in 1966, yes.
Story_ID: 36743
Speaker 1: --So I think you mentioned--I didn't ask you about church and I apologize.  Did your family have a regular church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the family had a regular--we--most of my brothers and sisters--my mother was a member of Union Memorial; that was a Methodist Church.  There were, in a two-block--oh excuse me.  In a two-block radius, three churches--three black churches.  First Baptist, Union Memorial Methodist, and Mt. Zion AME.  So almost all my friends--I started off at Union Memorial.  That's when you join the church and that's where your--my parents, or my mother, went.  By the time I got to high school, most of my friends went to Mt. Zion AME.  So I started going to AME, to Mt. Zion, and they had a Reverend Patterson.  Reverend Patterson was one of thee--the two finest ministers I've ever been associated with are Reverend Patterson--and I was a kid then, and Chaplin King who worked as my Chaplin when I was still on active duty.  But at this point, Reverend Patterson, you know--if Reverend Patterson had said, you know, "jump off the roof," I would have jumped off the roof.  He was a great role model, great preacher; so I wanted to be a--and I was pretty religious.  And I wanted to--I thought okay, you know, I can see me behind a pulpit, I really could.  So I thought I'd be a minister.  So going to Northeastern [University] was--worked right in the deal.  But again, I wasn't a good student, so when I got accepted into Northeastern [University], that first semester I think I took twelve hours, and nine of them were remedial, so you weren't getting any credit for them.  You know, it was how to study, how to do this, you know, just to bring you up to a college level.  So I didn't do well; at the end of the first year, I decided well, I'm done with the school.  And they said, "No, no, come on back, come on back," but I wasn't being fulfilled.  I think I was a better student, I did study, but it just--the calling wasn't there, it wasn't working for me.
Story_ID: 36744
Speaker 1: Were you playing ball then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, played basketball.  That's the only thing I played, played basketball for them, and I was a good basketball player on that team.  I was one of the stars on the team, as a starter.
Speaker 1: You played guard?
Speaker 2: Guard.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That part of it was good but when basketball season was over, it just, you know it didn't work out, so I dropped out and then that's when I got my--I dropped out and I worked as a--I worked at a cemetery digging ditches and cutting grass and all that sort of stuff.  I mean I'd make good money but it was--
Speaker 1: Now why did you--I mean I--it's just like now, if you're in school and they want you to come back and all that, I mean why did you feel so unfulfilled?
Speaker 2: It just--I don't--I expected to be really, really motivated, and it just wasn't--well, part of it was there were probably--I don't know how many students but not a lot--there was a handful of black students.  And it wasn't a racial thing I didn't go back, I just wasn't being--I think I was wasting the--even though I wasn't paying because I had the student loans and I worked.  It just didn't feel like I was getting anything out of it.  And in order--I would have had to go at least three years to a junior college to get an Associate's Degree.  So I said "Na"--and I didn't--but again now, my father's still an alcoholic, my mother's working hard, I had no direction, no guidance so I moved back home, I worked at a cemetery for a while, and then I worked as an exterminator.  So my job was to go around spraying for bugs.
Speaker 1: Those sound like t0o dreary (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--cemetery and sprayin' for bugs, I mean that's a--
Speaker 2: --I mean you're standing there and you're hitting the button and the thing's going down.  Like I said, I had no guidance, I had no direct--I just, I didn't know, I had no clue what I was gonna do with the rest of my life.  So a group of us went up and somebody said "Hey, you know, let's join the Reserves, you know?  We'll join the Navy Reserves and, you know, we won't go anywhere; if we do go, it won't be"--so uhh, probably about five of us, maybe six, drove up to the recruiting office and said "Hey, we wanna enlist in the Navy--in the Navy Reserve."  Because then you know you're gonna do a year before you go anywhere.  So when they said "Step forward and raise your right hand," only three of us did.  And I'm up front, and then when it's all over, I turn around and (laughter) it's like five of 'em that said "Naw, I'm not steppin' forward."  But I had no clue.  So Laney Womack, Blair Trent, who was a cousin, stepped up with me, and the other five guys were still standing there.
Story_ID: 36745
Speaker 1: This is on the same--okay, so this is the same trip--you all drive up there and you end up being sworn in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on the spot.
Speaker 2: Well we had gone up and talked about--I mean it wasn't a one-time let's just go.  We went up, they sat down and talked to us and the whole bit and they said "Okay, come back next Thursday night and raise your right hand and you'll be in."  But we had talked about it, so we knew all of us--it must have been eight--it was somewhere between eight and ten of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the other--but you looked back and the other two guys (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the other two guys with me and the other three, or other five just, just stayed--you know, everybody else stepped forward.  Kind of like they did the thing with Muhammad Ali and they said "Step forward and take the oath," and Muhammad didn't step forward.  I turned around like that and five of them standing back there just smiling (laughter).  And this is not 'step forward;' this is 'step forward, raise your right hand, say the oath.'  But by the time you take the oath and you turn around, and there's two people there--two other people.
Speaker 1: So now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I mean a whole lot of other--you know, a whole lot of white--I mean the crowd that I came up with, there were right of us, but three of us stepped forward and raised our right hand, took the oath, the other five didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now this is 1967, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: The Vietnam War is going on, and what did you know about the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: You know, what you read in the paper and that was it, and you weren't sure.  Now my girlfriend who ended up being my wife, she was all for it.  She said "Well listen, if you're gonna join, join the Navy."  Her brother had been in the Navy.  She said "Join the Navy.  If you join the Navy, then you won't go to Vietnam, but if you go to Vietnam, you'll be on a ship five miles off the coast; so do that."  So I said "Okay."  I joined the Navy in 1968, not only was I--did I go to Vietnam, I was on land in Vietnam.  So none of that (laughter)--none of what I thought was gonna happen--I thought, 'Okay you won't go.  If I go, I'm on a ship.'  So I spent a year in Da Nang, Vietnam.
Story_ID: 36746
Speaker 1: All right.  So 1967 you're enrolled in the Navy, thinking you'd be aboard a ship (laughter) in Vietnam? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- I did that in '67 [1967] but I actually went on active duty in 1968.  So I went to boot camp and all that sort of stuff, got some training (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) Great Lakes [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Went to Great Lakes.  Went to Great Lakes for training and then went to Virginia for some cargo handling school so my--our job in Vietnam was--merchant marine ships would come over with ammunition and we'd get the ammo off of the ships and get it where it had to go.  So we were cargo handlers learning how to operate the forklifts and swings and all that sort of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now was basic training difficult for you?
Speaker 2: No. No.  Navy (laughter)--Navy boot camp was, that was a breeze.  It was nothing, nothing challenged.  I mean it was--I shouldn't say that; I mean it was, it's--intellectually you had to stay awake and that sort of stuff but the physical, the discipline and that sort of thing, that was--and when we get to the Marine Corps side, I'll tell you about training.  That's the--Navy training wasn't much at all.  Not much at all.
Speaker 1: And so--did you have a chance to--I know the recruiters say you have a chance to choose what you're gonna be involved in and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we set down--this is before we left Folsom--that's where I joined up in Folsom [California], and this was not long after we did the (unclear), so you did some drills and he said "Okay what do you wanna do?"  And I was leaning towards the medical side, be a corpsman.  But one of the Sailors at the station said to me, said "Coleman, you sure you wanna do that?"  He said "If you"--because you get Class A school and you know, that's a better school and you get--you go to school for a longer time.  He said "The thing you need to remember if you're gonna come out a corpsman, you're gonna come out, and you're gonna go--be attached to a Marine Corps unit, and you're going right to Vietnam and you're gonna be on the ground in Vietnam."  So he said "Why don't you think about one of these other admin type things where maybe you won't have to do something like that."  So me, you know, thinking Vietnam, thinking of injury, dying and all that sort of stuff, I said "Well yeah, you know, let me try that."  So in retrospect, I wish I had been a Corpsman; I would have--I think I'd have liked that one better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you must have finished your training in '68 [1968].  It must have--in the--what, in the Spring of '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And about--that's about the time that Dr. King was assassinated, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  You got--no, I wasn't--I hadn't left to go--I had a--that was April, as I remember; that was April of '68 [1968]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I got to Vietnam in July of '68 [1968] so I had--this was in between my training and deploying when he--because I remember when he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay. So do you remember what you were doing and how you heard about it?
Speaker 2: I was walking up the street.  We had this store, Garvin Store; it was a mom and pop type store.  And I was walking  up the street, going to the store because, you know you're working and you go and you--even at that point you see guys on the corner and you know you find out what they're doing and that sort of thing.  Out of school and the whole bit.  And Melvin Dupree walked up to me, a friend, and said, "Hey, Dr. King was assassinated."  And it's one of those ones, just disbelief, you see.  And obviously the second time you go through it because I remember before that when still being in high school, President Kennedy was assassinated.  And I remember I had walked out of--had gotten out--was out of class, I was going to the boys' room and Helen Davis, one of our--one of my best friends, was coming down the hall and she was crying and I said "What's wrong?"  And she said "President Kennedy was just shot."  And the same thing when Melvin told me that and I said "No."  He said "Oh yeah."  So of course you run home and you look at it on the T.V.  And you're just amazed; you're just amazed.
Story_ID: 36747
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So any rate, so you were shipped out to Vietnam in July?
Speaker 2: July of '69 [1969].  So I was there from July '69 [1969] to July '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were on land unloading?
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Unclear).  Right in Da Nang.  I mean we're in the heart off Vietnam.  Yeah, Da Nang, Vietnam.  There for a year.
Speaker 1: So Da Nang's a port city?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly.  Ships come in there--it was Da Nang near the air base there.  I mean the air base and a port.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was that tour of duty like?
Speaker 2: You know, my wife and I were talking yesterday, and I don't know how we got on it, but we talked about what you were doing, you know, it was twelve-hour shifts of unloading and doing that, and I remember one time writing to her saying, you know, this assignment--if it were back in Philadelphia, it wouldn't be a bad assignment.  But the fact that it's in a war zone and all that, so it wasn't--you know it was, that was a big time of black power, hippy movement and all that so it was a lot of tension; even--I think there's tension in the rear because it's a rear-end thing as opposed to being out fighting so we weren't out fighting every day; we were all floating the ships, but it was tension and you're thinking even at a young age then, you're thinking 'Man, this is war, and we're fighting in another country and we can't even get along ourselves.'  So even at a young age, you know, 20, you're thinking about that, so it was a lot of tension.  A lot of tension, even though you're at war, but black and white and all that, but it was--I remember I went to--you got R&R and I went to Sydney, Australia for a week and the USOs [United Service Organizations Inc.] were good about that and they'd get the group of you and you'd go to the movies.  I remember one of the Australians said to me--we watched the movie "Easy Rider," and it was talking about the race problems in the United States and that sort of stuff and the person said--the guy said to me he said "Is it really like this in the states?"  And I said "Oh yeah, it's like this and then it's worse."  So it was--it's an eye--opener, you know.  And then the other part is you're there and you're trying to support your country and do what you think you're supposed to do and then you're hearing about Woodstock and all that sort of stuff, so it was a tough time for the United States and a tough time for the military; really a tough time for the military.
Story_ID: 36748
Speaker 1: So it was like a psych--well, military is in the war first of all, and that's got to be tough--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --so the criticism of the war--then it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, unbelievable.  I mean not--you know if you're there, you're figuring okay why am I here?  But you're here so you got to do the best you can to get out of here.  But then you come home and you're just so unappreciated.  I mean that's it.  And we were talking about that the other day.  I was out on the west coast and we were at dinner and a fellow said something about--you know, it's this nice restaurant, Piatti's--and he said "You know you see," he was an older gentleman, older than me, but had been in the Air Force, and he said "You know if, you come to--think about the difference it was for you," meaning me; he said "You know you went to Vietnam, you come home and they tell you to take the uniform off before you go off the base."  He said "If a couple came in here"--it was Valentine's night and he said "If a couple came in here and either one of them were in a uniform, people would stand up and clap and pay their bill."  And he said "You know you think about the difference between that and what you went through coming, home."  So it was a big difference back then; big difference.
Speaker 1: What was it like coming back in those days?  Did you, I mean was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I came home and got out.  I was under the [Richard] Nixon plan.  If you had nine months or less to do when you came back from Vietnam, you could get out.  So my active duty time was cut short.  And I remember a recruiter saying "No, no, no you need to stay in, you're a good sailor, you can make rank and do all that."  And, you know, in all honesty, I wanted nothing do to with the military, I just wanted to get out.  By this time, my mind is made up.  Okay now I can go to school and I can study now.  I'm (laughter) I don't want any more of this type of stuff so let's go study and make a life for yourself.  So it was a little different, but you know, so I came home and we arrived in Long Beach [California] and they said "Before you go off the base, take your clothes off, put on civilian clothes," and came back and I got discharged out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Philadelphia Navy Yard.
Story_ID: 36749
Speaker 1: Now do you remember when you were growing up in Darby black soldiers coming back to town and that sort of thing?  I mean--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  My cousin "Skeeks"--Roland is his name--Roland Guy; we call him "Skeeks"--had been in the Army.  And as soon as you walked in Nana's [May E. Hill] house, our house then, left on the wall is a picture of Skeeks; he's a paratrooper.  I just thought 'Man, if you could do something, that's what you'd wanna do.'  I mean he had his parachute there and he's standing there, so you respected the military; well-respected, well-respected.  But I think, you know--then that Vietnam thing kind of turned the country sour on it.  But I do remember guys coming home and seeing them in uniform and--and I'm sorry, when we were talking about youth and you talked about clubs, I was--Willie G. Childs Post 234 was a VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars].  And they had a drum and bugle corps in it.  And I did play the bugle in it.  So that was the only thing I would--but I remember you get dressed up in your khakis and on Memorial Day and Veterans Day you'd go to the cemetery and that was, you know, people standing on the corner waving flags and all that, that was-- but that was young; I guess I was junior high or--must have been in the junior high time frame or something like that; elementary school, junior high; must have been junior high.  But that was--you liked that, you liked that.
Speaker 1: Now when you came back, was the black community any different in terms of how they, they dealt with returning soldiers in the white community?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No, I think everybody appreciated you because you went and fought and came home.  I don't know that any of them were for war or any of that but you know just--because it such a close-knit community--I mean I came home to signs of hey welcome home, and all that sort of stuff so they were glad you were home.  And it--but I mean it wasn't like anybody spit on you or did anything like that.  It was just "Hey man, what was it like?  How did it go?" and that sort of stuff.  So you were welcomed back in the community.  And if you didn't go to college, almost everybody went to--went in some branch of the service; mostly in the Army.  So it was, you know, they had great respect for the military.
Story_ID: 36750
Speaker 1: And it's amazing that later on when I went back in, it was some of the military guys that had said "Man I wish I'd have never gotten out."  One of my best friends, Jack Dennis, we played football and basketball together, and he was in it, his brother Ricky was in.  We were all in at the same time, I was in the Navy, they were in the Navy; I mean they were in the Army.  I remember he was at Fort Carson, Colorado and Donna his wife was out with him, and he said "I'm getting out."  And I said "Why?"  And he said "Donna doesn't like it."  He's one of the guys most adamant about me that he should have stayed in.  A lot of folks said they should have stayed in.  I remember Laney; Laney Womack was my best friend, and we're staying one summer; it was the summer we were gonna graduate from high school, and his sister Phyllis--and I remember it like it was yesterday--she said "You boys ought to go in the Army."  She said "You're 18"--I was only 17--but she said "You're 18, you go do 20 years and you come out and you're 38 years old, you're retired, you just"--and I'm thinking '38;' I mean you may as well have said you'll be 138.  I mean I just said--and now you stop and you think and you say 20, 20 years.  I mean you could have--but you just don't think about it.  But she was right.  Go in and do your 20-year--and there was this one guy, and I'm in a senior moment, I can't think of his name, but he retired; young guy--well he probably--was 38--7--37--38, who had been in the service, been to Germany and all this stuff, did his time.  And we had a nickname for him but I'm thinking--not that it matters, but he says "Hey, first of every month I get my check, I can work if I want to, not work if I don't want to," and you know 20--20 years went by just like that.  And he did 20 years and got out.  But see, 20 years just seemed like so long, you know.  'Man, I'll be 38.  Wholly smokes, I don't wanna do--I don't wanna do that' (laughter).  Wow.  And then I ended up--it was a total 41 if you count the Navy time and the Marine Corps time.  Yeah, but it was--would have been a smart thing.  But the community was well-appreciative of servicemen and--I don't know of any women that joined, but certainly very proud, very proud of them.
Story_ID: 36751
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the black community has got like a, you know, different kind of track on it.  I think they don't really blame the soldiers for the Vietnam War even though--I don't think a lot of black people were for it.  But you know, they appreciate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They really do, they really do.  And I can remember my mother--I'll tell you this story about my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman].  My brother Pete went to Vietnam and he came home, and then when I was going, my mother went to the airport with me.  She was just a-crying.  Hey, I'm kind of excited, okay I'm going to go do something.  And then I came back and my mother said "Okay, you're back, you're safe.  I will never have anything to do with the military again."  I'm talking about her; she said "I'll never go to another military event.  My boys are home, you're safe, the whole bit."  I remember it was 1997.  By this time, I'm back in and it's 1997 and my mother had only been to one event since I'd been back in the military and every year we would go to my brother's for Christmas.  Right around the 15th that was my father's [Charles Frederick Coleman] birthday and he'd have a Christmas trim tree and party.  This went on for (unclear)--he's Arnold, the youngest brother, and we'd always go there.  And every year, I'd come back and go--I'm in the Marine Corps now; every year I'd come back and go and my mother would introduce me to her friends.  The same friends every year--people I'd grown up knowing, so I know them already.  And she'd say "Ida, this is my son Ronald."  And I'd say "Hi Miss Ida" because I knew Miss Ida from forever but my mother's just--she's so proud of me.  And she'd say "He's in the Army."  I'd been in the Marine Corps and I--but I didn't say anything, I'd say "Hi Miss Ida, how you doin'?"  And she'd say "Son, ain't you ever gonna be a Sergeant?"  And I was in--you know, I was an officer by now but--so in the black community they think Army--back then they think Army and they think Sergeant--every--you wanted--if, if you were a Sergeant, you were, you were somebody.  But my mother had not a lot to do with anything, so in 1997 I'm going to get promoted to Colonel.  So I called my mother and I said "Hey mom, you know you haven't been to anything, can you come to this?"  And she said--I said "I'm going to make Colonel" (unclear), but she did know by now Colonel was something big.  And she said "Yes Sir, son I'm coming, I'll be there."  And this is April when I called her.  But she went in the hospital in May and never came home.  So she never saw me make Colonel.  But she is proud of me.  She was proud.  I think my father was more proud because he understood the military more.  And by this time they are friends.  And I remember the kids, we all hoped that they would get back together.  They never did, but I guess all I'm really saying is you know, well talking about the black community and how much pride there is in being in the military.
Story_ID: 36752
Speaker 1: Now did you bring back any cultural behaviors generated in Vietnam?  I know some brothers brought back "the dap" they were doing and other things that came out of Vietnam.  Did you have any of that?
Speaker 2: I knew the dap--I mean I can remember when they, you know, you get in there and you watch the brothers doing the dap and you're just in amazement.  And I remember--of course I didn't--I--you know you could look or watch and you're trying to learn and I remember I had not been there long and he kind of looked at me and he said "You're not doin' anything."  And I said "I don't know."  So he took my hand and taught me how to dap.  But no--you know all I wanted to do was I wanted to my time, only get back, get out, go to college and cut all that, you know, get away.  I'd never planned on coming back in the military.  I mean I thought that was--
Speaker 1: Well what happened?  You came back and you went to school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Came back--I'm married now, so I come back and my wife and I are talking and I say "I think I wanna go to GE and get a job with GE" because everybody in Darby [Pennsylvania] worked in GE; General Electric.  And so I was gonna go for an interview with that.  The guy that--and go to school at night.  And the guy that owned the bar up on the corner, the local bar, was Nate Mailman, and it was called the Cotton Club.  And Nate was very, very nice to everybody and he said to me, he said "Ronald," he said "If you go to night school, you'll never finish."  He said "That's gonna take you seven, eight, nine, ten years; you'll never-- don't do it.  If you're gonna go to school, go to school."  And I said "Why, I can't;" so--the GI bill was $250.00 a month and I can get in the Reserves and make some money, so I stayed in the Reserves or--yeah, stayed on the--or started drilling with the Reserves so I'd make some money so I'd go to college and work at--as soon as I got home from school, I'd go work as bartender at Nate's Bar.  And that's how I made enough money to feed the family and get through college.  And then I got to get out teaching school in 1973.  So I taught from '73 [1973] to '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: So did you major in education?
Speaker 2: Education.  Majored in education (simultaneous)-- Chaney.  Chaney, Chaney State it was then, but Chaney University.  The first historically black college in the United States.  And--
Speaker 1: I didn't know that they say that too--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --Now when do they claim to be founded?
Speaker 2: If you go look at the--it's in 18 something but it's a big sign there, it's--but I know 'because I'll say something and somebody will say "No, no, no, you weren't the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (unclear) Lincoln [University]--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We were the first or whatever, so I--but that's what we claim.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, Lincoln in Pennsylvania claim to be the first--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so does Wilberforce [University] in Ohio.
Speaker 2: Does it really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's--the year they all give is about 1856.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I just got something because, you know, the alumni and I got a thing and it talked about things and they said "Black education started here."  You know so maybe it's one of those ones where they say it started in the United States right here in whatever, so maybe they're playing' with the words or whatever, but I remember from the time I went to Chaney they said 'We're the first in history'--and I thought 'Man I didn't know that.'  (Simultaneous)--And then the people will come up to me and say "Well no you're not, no you're not, it's this school or it's that school," so--
Speaker 1: Lincoln was founded I think a little bit before Wilberforce but it was founded by white missionaries.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Wilberforce was founded by the AME Church, which is a black organization--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and they say that's why they're the first, even though Lincoln was a year before them.  Now Chaney, I think was founded as another kind of a school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Quakers, Quakers, yeah.  But it was, yeah, absolutely. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--became a college, but they're saying that they're first because they were founded, you know, earlier (laughter) so it's, it's always different.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--But, yeah, went there and wanted to be a teacher and I was a teacher; taught, educa--thought about history but I thought you know if you're history, you're just a history teacher.  If you go Elementary Ed or whatever, you can teach this, this or this or whatever, so Elementary Ed.  But I, but I got a degree in Certified Special Ed Teacher also.  So that's what I did.
Story_ID: 36753
Speaker 1: So where did you teach when you first started?
Speaker 2: Darby Township Junior, Senior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I only taught for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, a year and then what--now how did you make the decision to go back into the military and especially the Marine Corps?
Speaker 2: You know--and everybody always asks that, but it's by now it's 1974, it's August, and the school is supposed to start in September but the teachers--I'm being a teacher--the teachers are talking about going on strike, and I said--and my belief still now is no, school should ever--education shouldn't, shouldn't be allowed to strike.  I just--I mean I think I'll be paid a lot more I'm all about education but I think when a teacher goes on strike, you hurt the kid.  So my first year when they--and they really did try to pressure me into joining the, the union, I said I'm not joining the union.  I don't--so I didn't join the union.  So now I'm thinking okay, we're gonna strike so the school closes because everybody in the school is a member of the union except for me.  I said "You know, you ought to think about what else you might wanna do."  I had a cousin.  They called him Brother--Brother Guy.  He was my grandmother's husband's brother.  Her nephew, I'm sorry, nephew (unclear) Uncle Clarence's son.  And he was a doctor in the town; the only black doctor in the town.  And I went to see Brother about, I guess I had a cold or whatever, but anyway we were talking and he said "What are you gonna do with your life?"  I'm a teacher by now.  And I said "Brother, I'm not sure."  And I was twenty-six.  And he said "You know you need to think about doing something, getting' away from Darby [Pennsylvania]."  He said--and Darby's a good town.  He said "If you're still here when you're 27, you'll never leave.  You have to go do something else and then come back, even though you've been in the military."  And that was the first time I thought about it.  So I went to every branch of the service; I went to the Air Force first, then I went to the Navy, I went to the Army, and I went to the Marine Corps.  And the Air Force said they were drawing down in the--
Story_ID: 36754
Speaker 1: In the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: --The Vietnam War is driving (simultaneous) and the--and I was told by the Chief, I think.  You know I had a college degree, he said--and being black, he said "If you'd come here in February, we'd have taken you without even taking the test.  You know, we're trying to get black officers."  The Navy wanted me to be a pilot and I wasn't interested in being a pilot.  I went to the Army recruiter the next town over and there's a black Sergeant there and he said "You know here's what we can do.  I know you wanna be an officer, but the way to do it is," he said "You enlist, go to boot camp, I'll guarantee you Private First Class out of boot camp, and then you can request to go to Officer Candidate School."  I'm thinking 'I already have a degree, why would I do it that way?'  So I went--I said no thanks, so I went to the Marine Corps and went down to Philadelphia Navy Yard and this Major is there--Major's name is Pierce King.  So I go in and I said "I'm interested in being an officer in the Marine Corps."  He says "Okay," so he sits me down and he starts talking then we start talking and he said the name, he said "Ronald Coleman?"  I said "yeah," he said "From Darby?"  I said "Yes Sir."  He said "You're the football player?"  And I said "Well, I played football."  And he said "Yeah, just fill out this."  And two days later, I'd signed up.  So he--I mean they were really looking for black officers, he knew I was a quality guy, I had a degree and the whole bit, so I went to see him in August--August 19th is when I went to see him, and September 30th I was at Officer Candidate School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have to go through Marine boot camp?
Speaker 2: No, to Officers Candidate School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Toughest thing I've ever done in my life.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: There's 12 weeks, 12 weeks of--the difference is I think the mental abuse--I mean abuse isn't the right word.  The mental challenge for enlisted men is what happens at boot camp.  For us, it was not as much mental, but there was a lot of mental, but the physical was--and that--see, I found that to be a challenge.  I mean they--I went--I don't tell people this, but I--not many--when I signed up on August 19th, I weighed 197 and I had a 38 inch waste.  And when I graduated in December, which was when you figuring I started in September, so after the three-months school, I weighed 162, had a 32 inch waste.  And I remember I went home in December; December 20th we graduated, and I was walking down the street and I had a skull cap on, one of those wool hats, and my sister walked right past me and didn't know who I was.  She walked right past me.  I turned around and said "Christine."  She said "Oh my God; that's you?"  So I had lost a considerable weight, was in great shape.  It was a great challenge, great challenge.  I mean absolutely great, great challenge.  They challenge you physically, mentally, morally, every--everything.  It was--I had joined and I said I'll do 2-1/2 years because I thought--someone had told--I--by this time now you're so much more mature and I thought maybe I wanted to get in the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  Thinking about Secret Service or something like that, and someone told me that "You know, you ought to--places are full of former Marines, why don't you try going in the Marine Corps and that'll help enhance your chances?"  And I said "That sounds reasonable."  So I thought I was gonna stay 2-1/2 years; and stayed 35.
Story_ID: 34413
Speaker 1: Tell us about the toughest part of Officer Candidate School in the Marines.
Speaker 2: Toughest is having a--by the time I got there, which is 1974, so I'm, I'm twenty-seven, and to have, you have a platoon sergeant, it was usually a staff sergeant, and a sergeant (unclear) who is usually a sergeant, and to have, you know--and, and everything, I mean from the time you get there, what the Marine Corps does is strip you of, of everything and then, and then build you the Marine Corps way.  It's just no--you, you're not allowed to say "I" or "me" or "you;" it's "the candidate" this, "the candidate" that, "the platoon sergeant" this, "the platoon sergeant" that.  So, I mean so you, you said "Can I?"  And then you're just, you know you're on your--you don't push up for forever.  So they strip you of that and then you become a team player.  But, we, we had in our, in our, in our unit, we started off with, with sixty-one candidates in our, in our platoon, and twelve weeks later, there were thirty-one of us that graduated.  So you see the, the, the attrition is just, just drastic so it's, a lot of, lot of mental stuff which is, which is good, and, a lot of, lot of physical, that sorta thing, but one of, one of the toughest for me having, having already been, having already served in the, in the, in the Navy, having been a teacher, a father, and kid--having kids and the whole bit, is to have a,, 18, 19, 20 year-old kid in your face saying "Do this, do that."  It took some, you know, I mean it's just--nothing but a--you know we used to say "You got that"--not to him obviously, but "You got that pimple-ass kid in our face," you know yelling and spit's coming out and the whole--I mean it took a lot of--it took a lot to just hold back and not, you know and not--and now he, he's doing his job so it's nothing, it's nothing personal or anything like that but that was, that was, that was a challenge to, to, you know, for, for, you know, have somebody younger, less educated, to say "Get on the face and give me twenty" and, and that sorta stuff, so that was tough.  The physical stuff I enjoy--I honestly enjoyed the physical stuff.  I mean I really thought that was, that was--I, I, I liked the physical challenge.  It was good; probably the toughest thing for me was, was--with all they asked you to do, and the time frame and then, you're, you're getting five hours sleep, and then you, you get up in the morning, you go get something to eat, you go put on your PT gear, and then you go sit in a class.  So it may not seem like much but just, just staying awake, it was all I could do, and this was--you know we're in there in September so you get some of the hot, some of the cold but just, just to stay awake, was, was, was tough for me but--I don't think there was any, anything, physically that you couldn't do; it's, it's--you, you, you have to have the team playing so you have to have--you know if they break you in at groups of 5, 6, 7, everybody has to pull their weight so to get everybody to pull their weight and you're the one that, that has to motivate them enough if they're not motivating themselves to, to pull.  But it was probably the, the best challenge (unclear) that, that was twelve weeks that, that was twelve good weeks that, that made me what I--made me what I am.  I, I think most people come out of it saying it was tough but it was--I enjoyed it and it was, it was well worth it.
Story_ID: 34414
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you get finished, you're commissioned as a first lieutenant?
Speaker 2: You, you, you get, you get, you get done that, and then you get commissioned, as a, as a second lieutenant--
Speaker 1: second lieutenant.
Speaker 2: --Because I went, I went to OCS [Officer Candidate School].  Now there are other ways of doing it but there--so we left that, that was December 20th.  You went home and then came back and, in January and went to the base to school, which is also at Quantico [Virginia] that's a six--that's a six-month course of, really the, the basics of being, an officer in the Marine Corp.  The Marine Corps was good training; hard training but, but good training.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now you trained at Camp Lejeune, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, I, I served at Camp Lejeune.  Yes, em hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now we were talking during the break and I asked you if you ever met Hashmark Johnson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Hashmark Johnson.
Speaker 1: --and you said you met Hough and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Hough and, and John--short, short period of time.  Montford Point [North Carolina] is right there and the Montford Point Marine Association is big down there. Hashmark lived in the, in the area so--I only, only met him only once; by this time, he's, he's not as, as, as good a health and, and that sorta stuff.  But I don't--and so, so imposing but the, the--even more than, than meeting, seeing those, those gentlemen, it's reading about them and what they, and what they did, and what they had to go through.  And we just recently --I'm sure General Williams spoke about it--we just recently, we gave them the medal, medal commendation.  And to see some of these older gents--the Gold Medal--to see some of these old gents, to sit down and listen to them and talk to them, and they tell you what they had to, what they had to go through, what they had to endure and, and you're just so impressed with them because they had to fight for the right to fight.  And to me, that's just, that's just amazing that, that, that--the things they'd have to--Okay, first off, we don't want you but we're gonna take you just because the President is making us take you.  But we so despise you that we're not even gonna let you go to the same camp where Marines go, so rather than go to Paris Island, we're gonna send you to, to Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  And then we're gonna make you, an all-unit and we're gonna put, white people in charge of you, you know, the officers in charge of you.  I mean and--when you think of what they en--what they endured.  I mean it's, it's --I'm glad you got a chance to talk to, Joe Carpenter because he's--I mean the stories he, he tel--and then the other major thing is, when those gentlemen see you and they come up and they say "I never saw a black General, you know?  I never saw a black officer.  I saw that, you know, and you got three stars and thank you, you know?"  And tears were rolling down their eyes and you're saying "Man," I mean no matter what, they said "Oh, what'd you have to do to accomplish that?"  And I'm thinking Well that's not--that's nothing compared to what, to what you had to do.  I mean it's just, it's just, it's just amazing.  I, I heard a story someone told one time was that, recruits were going to, to Camp Lejeune, on a train and--I'm not sure it was Camp Lejeune so I'm gonna mess up the story but the, the point'll be the same.  We'd had some--this was World War II--had some German POWs [Prisoners-of war] and they were on the train too, and the German prisoners of war are getting treated better than the black Montford Pointers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I heard that story--that kind of story too.  Same with the Italians.  Joe Carpenter was talking about the Italians being treated better too.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.  I mean that's just--
Speaker 1: Not only did they get privilege over the blacks (simultaneous)(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --and you're trying to defend your--defend your country.
Story_ID: 34415
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, so you're commissioned as a second lieutenant, and where was your first assignment?
Speaker 2: First assignment was down at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina with the Second Marine Division.  And the, and the great, a great time.  I was --while I was in the basic school, I wasn't sure--I, I was pretty sure I wanted to be an infantry officer, and, and for all the wrong reasons I didn't go there; I went to be a supply officer; very, very short-sighted on my part.  And probably my, my biggest and only--probably be the only one or two regrets that I wasn't an infantry officer.  My reason was--again, you're, you know you're older now and you're brighter, you're 27 years old, and, have a, have a wife and, and three kids, and one of the first, training packages we had out at the, the base school was we went out to Camp Upshur and they're teaching you mapping, about terrain and reading a map and the whole bit so this is, this is like January 8th.  It's already January.  So we got out and they put us on a camp stool and there's snow up as high as the camp stool, and they sit you down in this freezing weather and they say "Now that's a hill, that's a drawl, that's this or that's that."  And I'm thinking boy this is, this is stupid.  I mean they should a, you know, pointed this out the window or, or done something like that but to just go sit you down and, and, and I just, I just, you know my mind wasn't in it and I thought okay, I don't wanna be an infantry officer; I'm gonna do something that's gonna--do my 2-1/2 years and get out and give me some type of background so, so I thought I'd try to be a supply officer and then, get the business background so when I got out I'd be able to do something else because again, my, my plan wasn't to stay in, more than the 2-1/2 years.  So I got to Camp Lejeune and worked for some fabulous people and, and decided that, you know, I wanted to stay in a little--little longer but that was a great, great first tour at, at Camp Lejeune.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked as a supply officer?
Speaker 2: Supply officer was my, my first --first assignment was as supply officer.  Got to, got to deploy a lot, went to Vieques, Puerto Rico, went to Fort Drum, New York, got to go--I guess my first real benny was, they picked an honor platoon to go to England for the, for the Queen's Silver Jubilee, so I got to be the platoon commander in, in charge of platoon that --an honor platoon that, that went to England so that was, it was good.  I've had some good times.
Speaker 1: So when you make these trips, does your family have a chance to go with you?
Speaker 2: No, not, not on--none of those early on.  Family was in North Carolina, even up to and including--I went to Okinawa [Japan] for a year and then came back, and when I got back we, we left North Carolina and came, came to Quantico for my, for our next assignment so they came, they came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're in Okinawa in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: '77 [1977] and '78 [1978], yes.
Speaker 1: '77 [1977] and '78 [1978].  Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there we got, we got up to, got up to Korea, got through,, Taiwan, got to Mainland Japan.  It was a good, it was a good tour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So your two years is up in '78 [1978] I guess, right?  And so you stayed?
Speaker 2: I got a, I had a cha--I came back from --after we finished, in Okinawa, came back to, to Camp Le--or excuse me, to, to Quantico [Virginia], and that's when I was really considering getting out but I got--now go back to Officers--Officers Candidate School where I had gone and spent those, those three months I told you about but now I'm on the other side, I'm a--I'm an instructor now,  So, our, our assignment is to decide who should be an officer in the Marine Corps.  So that was--when you think of the responsibility of, of you make the decision or make the recommendation on who should be an officer.  And that was--I had a, I had a great time in there and, and, probably in some of the best shape in my life because it's, it's so, it's so physical out there and, and everything the candidates do you do too so it--so that they can see, see you doing it so it was, it was a very good, very good tour there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--
Speaker 2: I get there in '77 [1977] or, excuse me '78 [1978], late '78 [1978], November '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And --
Speaker 2: And I stayed there until '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: --'til 1981.  Okay.  So you leave the Officers Candidate School in '81 [1981](simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 34416
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--and I went to, went to school to our, our Amphibious Warfare School.  That's the school that captains go to.  It's a selection process so, so not every captain gets to go, but if you're, selected to go, you go to that.  And that and that's where all the other captains in the Marine Corps go and regardless of what their previous assignment had been, if they, if they, if they meet them, meet the criteria--so you're, so you're there with, with aviators and ground guys and combat arm guys and the whole--you know the, the best of or what you think is the, the, the cream a da crop goes, goes to the school.  So it was a good tour.
Speaker 2: So these are people who are selected for further (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.  If you, if you go to, if you go--by now you, you, you've been selected, you've already--you've come in as a second lieutenant, you've been promoted to, to first lieutenant, you've been promoted to captain, and, and if you go there, there's a good possibility that you're gonna get selected to major so it, it's, it's--it's where you first start picking the, picking the folks that you think are gonna have potential to stick around and do, do other things.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're already a captain when you get there, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  captain. Captain when I go there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So Amphibious Warfare School, this is--I mean, what is the curriculum like?
Speaker 1: , all about, all about war fighting and, and fighting at the, at the, at the--mainly at the company, company level to, to, to go to war, to leave a--lead, lead a, a company into combat and those sorts of--and--our doctrine is amphibious --kind of gotten away from that now but we're starting to get back into the ships because, I mean (unclear) all about --so, so it's all about the amphibious, and now it's called the Expeditionary School instead of amphibious because, it, it's more than just amphibious, it's expeditionary so very good course that  the captains go to and to me, the best part about it is meeting your, your fellow captains and, and learning from them, which I thought is even more important than the curriculum.
Speaker 2: Now the Marine Corps you know, has been, you know, legendary for you know, hitting a beach of a place, landing on you know, land (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you kind of come in a boat and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Force you, emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --but things have changed a little bit now, right, in terms of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think we're gonna, we're still gonna need that.  I mean if you look at the last, 10, 11 years, it hasn't been, coming in from the sea.  We've been, you know, flying in and doing that sorta stuff but still it's still, knocking down doors and getting in places but, but--and that's why we took the amphibious out and it's Expeditionary Warfare School now.  But still, still don't want it and they still--we call it forced--forcible entry and--but we'll still have some a that umm, forcible entries, but our, but our, but our, our history and doctrine was, was predicated on forcible entry so that, and that, that's where we, we came from, but we are, we are changing with the times now and we are doing a lot, lot more expeditionary but we're still, we're still going in and first to, first to fight.
Story_ID: 34417
Speaker 1: So you may be in, in a armored unit or a helicopter or some other type of convenience to get--
Speaker 2: To get, to get ashore.  Exactly.  Exactly.  And, and, and a lot of that.  But you see, we--well actually the last two wars we've been in we, we, we knocked the door down; we went in--, I shouldn't say that; we hadn't knocked the door down coming in from the sea as much as we have been coming in in different, in different ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  Now in '83 [1983], this is, I guess this is--are you in school in '83 [1983], or are you--
Speaker 2: Outta school.  Eighty--if --went to school from '81 [1981] to '82 [1982]--
Speaker 1: Em hmm.
Speaker 2: -- '82 [1982] I go ta, I go ta Headquarters in Marine Corps, and I'm assignment person, which is one of the more challenging assignments.  You decide who goes, who goes where.  So you, so you look at the, the needs of the Corps, where, where do you need captains and who's best qualified to go to that assignment?  So you're, you're an assignment; it's called the Officer Assignment Branch. , it's distinguished, I mean a distinguished, assignment, a very good assignment, very challenging assignment.  I mean you're the one that says to, to Captain Coleman "Okay, now it's time to pick your family up from North Carolina and move them to the other side of the world.  And this is why."  It was a--it was very fulfilling, but a very big, very big job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is where everybody gets assigned in the Marine Corps from this --
Speaker 2: From, from, from there.  Whether, whether you're assigning lieutenants or whether you're assigning captains or majors or--all the way up.  That's where all the assignments are, are made.
Speaker 1: And where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: And that was at the headquarters of the Marine Corps which is in, in Arlington [Virginia], just a half mile from them, the Pentagon.  Right up the hill from where you were for, for, for General Williams; right by the cemetery there.
Story_ID: 34418
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So now in '83 [1983], that's when the Marine Corps headquarters in Beirut were bombed, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think twenty-one, service members were killed.  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, Beirut was, was, devastating.  I was at headquarters Marine Corps and, and you hear on the news about it and they, you know, the unit, 24th Expedi--or Amphibious Unit--comes out of Camp Lejeune and, and goes over there and they're in the barracks and they get, --the bombing that was, that was a tough time for the Marine Corps.  That was, an unbelievable blow. , you're over here, you're wishing you could be there and, and it's just a, it's a bad, bad time.  Bad time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Eventually, the U.S. withdrew from--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  We came, came outta there and that was--then we went in, Grenada right, right after that but, that's one a those ones you still, you, you, you, you remember and it never--I, I absolutely never, never outta your mind of, the Beirut bombing.  And, and, and even closer because you know I, I had, I had left Lejeune not long ago and, and you know it's just--not that that lessens it any, but it's, it's--or, you know you just, you just hate something like that and your brothers in arms are--that's, that's a, that's a tough one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the invasion of Grenada in '83 [1983] was umm, that's when the umm, I guess the government (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well I think it was the, the school down there--there's a nursing school or something like that where we went in and, and rescued the  the, the students outta, outta Grenada.  I mean that, that wasn't as, as, as, as big a fight and we, we didn't lose anybody--lose as many as we did in, in Beirut but it was right on the, right on the hills of that, and I think we were, you know, just getting ourselves back together.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was the Civil War, Grenada War, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.  Exactly.  And we had, we had a school down there, a nursing school where we had American students going to school down there and we went in and brought them, brought them home.
Story_ID: 34419
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and now if I'm skipping something let me know, but I've got a outline so I don't wanna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay, no, no, it's fine, just fine.
Speaker 1: --In '85 [1985]--I don't know what happened in '84 [1984], but in '85 [1985], you were --I guess you're, you're still at Marine Headquarters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, yeah, when, when I went up there in, in '82 [1982], --I was there from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. Then umm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--'85 [1985] I came back--and then that same school that I had attended, I went down to be an instructor at that, at that school from, from '85 [1985] to '87 [1987] so I was an instructor at the school for, for two years teaching,, teaching the logies, the logisticians.  So, so I went, I went from Headquarters to the Marine Corps as, an Assignment Officer to Quantico [Virginia] to be an instructor at the, at the school, and, I did that for two years, then I got selected to go to the Marine Corps Commanding Staff College, which is another, stepping stone, another--you get selected to go to--and now instead of, instead of going to school with captains, you're going to school with, with, with majors.  And again, this is another, another cut because,, you have to get selected to, to go to that; it's not just every, every, every Marine Officer or every Marine major doesn't get a chance to go to that.
Speaker 1: So were you a major in--while at Marine (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--While, while I was up--while I was up in, in Headquarters Marine Corps at the assignment thing,, and I think that would a been about, if I went up there from '82 [1982] to '85 [1985], so it would a been '85 [1985] I got--and that happened in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay, made major in '85 [1985].  So in '87 [1987] you're in command of the staff college.  Is that umm--
Speaker 2: That's in Quantico.  That's in Quantico, Quantico.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Quantico.  Okay.  Now what was that instruction?
Speaker 2: That's just a, a higher level.  So now you're learning company tactics at the then, Amphibious Warfare School and now Expedition Warfare School.  Now you're learning battalion tactics so you're up, up on a higher battalion and regimental tactics so you're, you're a higher level, higher level of learning, because you're, you're increasing rank where, you know, you're going from a captain to a major, so your responsibilities, your duties are gonna be different so, so--majors go to the, Commanding Staff College and, and you also have, international officers and officers from your, from our sister services.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--I was amazed at this too; I didn't realize this that like foreign nationals come over, they send their officers to be trained (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Exactly.  That's, that's (unclear) and we, we send some of our students to, to, to other--to international schools and other service schools but in the--to go to Marine Corps Command Staff College is big; that's a big one.
Speaker 1: I would guess that serves a function too of making, U.S. military personnel familiar with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yeah, the ways and means, and tactics of, one another, yeah, because you're--I think in every school I've gone to,, militarily, I've, I've learned more from, from the classmates than I, than I did from the instructors.
Speaker 1: Now this would build some sort of a bond and--or a familiarity with those other, allies of the United States.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And you'd be, be amazed at the number of, of then--folks that, that may be sometime later when you go to their country, you'll, you'll run into one a the students that you met, that you met here.  So it's a, it's a good, it's a good deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Umm, It's probably hard enough trying to keep international relationships (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, yeah.  (Unclear)--so I think, I think as a, as a, as a military person, it's probably--you know what I think we, we military folks understand each other a little better and get along better than the, than the politicians do, I think.--
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: --but it's real challenging, real, real--I think--I always told people that, of the schools I've gone to, my regret would be that I didn't get to know, more of the, the international officers than I did.
Story_ID: 34420
Speaker 1: Okay. So when school was over, you were assigned to Okinawa [Japan].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Then I, then I go back to the operating forces in, in Okinawa and that's, that's probably the, --one in the--one, one of the more, more meaningful tours in my career because I got to do so many different things in, in Okinawa in the, in the three years, really four different, four dif--four, five different assignments in that, so that was, that was a real--that was really good.  I first go over to (unclear) support battalion, and that's, that's, that's, that's the, the operations officer.  So, you know, you do the planning for all the operations you're going on and that was, that was phenomenal, phenomenal year there. , then the next year, I'm the Executive Officer of a battalion so that's the second in charge of a battalion, and that's maintenance battalion which was the largest battalion on the island of Okinawa, and I was the, I was the executive officer of that.  So that, that's --you know you, you're betting, 100--two for two, you're doing well, and then I get selected to be the commanding officer of, combat service support and Detachment 35.  We go down to the, to the Philippines, there's a earthquake and we, evacuate some people, save some people, so that was, that was the best three-year tour that I could have possibly had to do to be,, the operations officer or an executive officer and a commanding officer.  I mean that would be the three things you'd wanna do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 19, '90 [1990]. , that's the year of the, Gulf War.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, tell us how you found out about it and what, what the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We were in the Philippines and, my XO [Executive Officer] came in to me and he said "Sir, I just heard that, Iraq has invaded Kuwait."  And I said --I hadn't, I hadn't, hadn't heard that one yet so, so we get in tune and, and, and find out about it and you--and --so you think that if you're, if you're in the Philippines, that's a good place to be to get assigned to the, to combat.  So we're all thinking okay, they're gonna tell us to load up and, and go to, and go to war.  But what they do is, out of Okinawa, they, they send a team outta Okinawa and they, they sail in and they stop at the Philippines and we refurbish them with all the things they need so that, so that they can go to war so we, we, we set the war out in the, in the Philippines.
Speaker 1: Emm, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Some people would say that was good, I--well, all my folks would a rather been in the war but, but we're still supporting the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Umm, now strategically it was--I mean umm was it Saddam Hussein said it was gonna be the mother of all wars?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Inaudible response)
Speaker 1: --and he was, you know, did a lot of talking and, you know.  But what was the nature of that conflict? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I, I didn't actually, I didn't actually, go to war but you can tell that that was, that was all talk, all facade.  I mean I, I, I guess he believed it but, for whatever reason, and I don't know the--well understand that he gave us enough time to build up and fight when we were ready to fight. , that's just, that's just ludicrous.  I mean he should a, he should a taken initiative and done something, or either just said "We're going back home" but to stand there and, and give us months to, to, to get ready to go to war was, was absolutely ludicrous, you know.  So, so we move our, our equipment from Okinawa to the Philippines, to Kuwait, we move our, we move our, our, our items from the, from the states over so, so what he did was he allowed us to get our forces forward and then, and then stand there and, and think he could, could, withhold that.  That was just--you know, we went in there with overwhelming, overwhelming force.
Story_ID: 36755
Speaker 1: All right, so what did you do during the Gulf--so you supplied the ships as they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, we were protecting the Philippines while--but we did assist the troops going through en route to Kuwait; so we did, so we did Saudi Arabia and Kuwait.  So that was--it was, it was a good job but you would have rather--all, all of the Marines (unclear) with us would have rather been in the fight than there.  But there was always the threat of a coup in the, in the Philippines so we were protecting that--that was our main mission was to protect any possibility of a coup in the Philippines.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, the Philippines now--they, they had just--was umm--
Speaker 2: Well, Manoo--I'll screw up the name but the husband has left, the lady was there (unclear) him and (simultaneous) I apologize but I wanna say Malinda or something there but whatever it is, the lady with all the shoes--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --But they expected a coup anytime; so we were there for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now so you were in the Philippines how long?
Speaker 2: Until '90 [1990]--'91 [1991].  I left the Philippines and I came back to the states and went to a job in our insulation and logistics side of the house.  So that was more office stuff for the two years there so that was-- nothing exciting or adventurous or anything like, like that in those two years but I'd had all the, had a great deal of excitement before that and then the next assignment, when I went back to Camp Lejeune in '93 [1993], that's when it picked up again.
Speaker 1: Now that was Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I keep wanting to say Mahilda but I know her name is not Mahilda but it's something like that but yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's Ferdinand Marcos and his wife yeah, right.  That was shaky, really shaky situation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so now did you have anything to do with Somalia?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I Had nothing to do--I was back in the states.  I had no impact, no anything on--in Somalia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the, that's the time period of the famous Black Hawk Down.
Speaker 2: Right, Black Hawk Down.  Exactly.  Yeah.  (Simultaneous)--We had no, no play in that one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you're back in Los--you're in Los Angeles I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I'm back, I'm back in back in D.C. at that point.  And then in '93 [1993], I go back to Camp Lejeune and I'm the commanding officer of, of maintenance battalion.
Speaker 1: Okay now you were promoted to lieutenant colonel in '92 [1992]?
Speaker 2: '92 [1992], that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In '92 [1992], right.  And then I went down there in '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay so maintenance battalion in Camp Lejeune in '93 [1993].  In '94 [1994], you're re-assigned as a group deputy operations officer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was commanding officer of maintenance battalion, which was the largest battalion at the time in Camp Lejeune and every deployment that went anywhere, some of our Marines went with it because we were in charge of maintaining all the equipment at Camp Lejeune.  So that was, that was a big job, that was, that was a good job, a big job--great Marines.  It was the largest battalion in the, in the group, so that was a very, challenging excitement--assignment, but a good assignment to make sure that everything was ready to go if we were, if we were to go to war.
Speaker 1: So what kind of equipment were you maintaining?  Is that everything?
Speaker 2: Everything.  Every piece of non-aviation equipment that the Marine Corps has, we had people to repair it.  Whether you're talking about--anything from a, from a pistol to a tank, to a howitzer, we had the folks that could repair it.  And anytime anyone left Camp Lejeune going anywhere, some of our Marines went with it to support them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this included munitions, radios--
Speaker 2: Everything.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so we--whether they're cars, trucks, communication equipment, ordinance, you know, the weapons, the whole, the whole bit, the whole bit.  That was a very, very good assignment, a challenging and exciting assignment, and a very interesting one for me.
Story_ID: 36756
Speaker 1: Okay now what did you have to do as a Group Deputy Operations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Deputy Operations Off--well the, the operations officer is control all the combat and non-combat operations that go on in the unit so I was, I was his second in command so I assisted him in running the G3 or the operations side of it.  So if someone were gonna deploy, say from the ground combat element, we decided who was gonna support them and how they were gonna support them.  So it was a high-level job but by this time, I'm a, I'm a quote-unquote seasoned lieutenant colonel and that's why I'm there.  So it was a very good job also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And '95 [1995] you reported to the Industrial College of the Armed Forces--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for National Defense--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--National Defense University is in D.C. and so National Defense University has the National War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces under it so the--when you, when you--now you're--that's--you had to be selected to go to school so that's another quote-unquote hurdle you go through or widget--however you wanna call it.  A very, very good time.  Now, now you're at a school where all the other schools I went to were Marine High.  This was probably--of all the services and civilians, it was probably the less Marines in it; I think we had eleven Marines in that school  and all the rest were sister services and, and civilians.  So that was, that's the only time I was in a small--where the Marine Corps was in the, was in the minority.  But you, we got a Master's Degree in--so it, so it was good and you got to learn how does education system in Germany work.  How does, how does all these other things work, so it was a very, very good year.  I mean if you're not, if you're not in, if you're not in command, that would, that would be, that's a great place, great place to be.  And, and again, now you're dealing with international officers, you're dealing with USAID [U.S. Agency for International Development] secret--or, Secret Service, the whole, the whole bit.  The State Department--there are students there from all over the Department of Defense and the whole bit.
Story_ID: 36757
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in '96 [1996], you were Deputy Division Chief of the Logistics Readiness Center, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Inaudible response--
Speaker 1: '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: '96 [1996], yes.  But that was, that was--oh, in the Pentagon; I'm sorry, yeah.  Yes, I'm sorry; I'm sorry.  Yeah, I left--when I left school, I went to the Pentagon and did, and did two years at the Pentagon; Logistics Readiness  Center.  Now that's where every ship that's underway, every airplane that's underway on the Logis--non-combat, we know about--has to, has to go through--that's probably one of the, one of the more interesting tours you could have.  So everything that happens in the United States Department of Defense logistics-wise, someone in there would know what was going on and, and give guidance or recommendations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you made full colonel there too?
Speaker 2: I made full--I got promoted to full colonel there and that was the one we spoke about that my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] was gonna make but didn't make it so I got promoted there in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mom passed that year?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now in--but then you were stationed at yeah, Camp Lejeune, right?
Speaker 2: Right, I went, I went down in--after that, I went down to Camp Lejeune, got to Camp Lejeune in '98 [1998], and I was the the G4; so that means I was--that meant I was in charge of all logistics for the division; another, very challenging, challenging job.   And while I was there, that was the, the next big deployment; that's when we went to Albania; this was Milosevic and, and the whole, the whole bit going on over there.  So we were attached to a joint task for Shining Hope, which was to assist the refugees in in Albania.  And that was an Air Force led unit but with Marines in it.
Speaker 1: Emm.  So that was a, really a--
Speaker 2: Aww, that was, that was big.  I mean we went from--they went from nothing to building a camp up in Albania because you know--remember the people are leaving  Macedonia with nothing so we're putting up camps and built camps so they could live in and you'd actually watch them pulling their wagons with all their belongings, a family with all their belongings pulling them in and we, we got them health and comfort and the whole bit so that was, that was a very reassuring one and, and one you felt, you felt good about.  And, the thing I--the stand-out in that, I had, I had this--a Monday afternoon, I had just done some working out and came back to the office and they said, "You need to go up to see the Chief of Staff" so I went up to see the Chief of Staff and he said, "Hey Ron, you know we have that task force over in Albania; you're gonna go join it.  You're gonna go this week and I don't know how long you're gonna be there."  So I, so I go home and my wife says, "How was your day?" and I said, "Well"--or I said, "How was your day?"  And she said "Good."  She said "How was yours?"  And I said "Well, let's go get some ice cream."  Well, that was key word.  If you, you know, if you said ice cream then, then you're going somewhere.  So she just looks at me and then--so we go out and get ice cream and she said, "Where're you going?" and I said, "Well, I'm going to Germany and then down to Albania."  "How long you gonna be gone?"  I said, "I don't have a, I don't have a clue."  So then we go home and tell the kids and the--but the thing that's so good about it is that my youngest is now in third grade and so I tell her I'm gonna go away and you know she's crying why and the whole bit.  So I tell her, so the next day--and I tell her we're going to help the poor people--they can't, they can't you know, they need help.  So the next day I'm leaving and she comes up and she gives me a ten-dollar bill and she says "Give this to the poor people to help them.--
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: --Can you imagine that?  I mean that's, that's, that's big; that's big.
Story_ID: 36758
Speaker 1: Now how many children do you have by this time?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Five daughters.
Speaker 1: Five daughters.  Emm.
Speaker 2: And four granddaughters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hmm.  Okay.  So the Marines were basically trying to help the refugees in Albania?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all were.  It, it was a joint--and the Air Force was in charge, but yeah it was, but you also had folks fighting and--but on our side, we were doing the humanitarian side.  Shining Hope was a humanitarian effort but there was a lot of fighting going on also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, did the international force actually have to skirmish with anybody?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  It was a lot of fighting going on.  Ken Gluck, a good buddy of mine had a Marine adversary unit over there so there's fighting going on, flying going on, the whole bit, some evacuation going on but again, that was--and that was everybody; that wasn't just the Marine Corps, that was all branches of the service.  But our, our side of it was--then they had the no fly zone going; but our side of it was just to assist the refugees.
Speaker 1: I heard there are so many landmines over there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yeah.  Now--but you know you could fly over and it would say 'okay this is where they all are' all the landmines that they'd put up there but that was--you know you felt good about helping those folks out.  Again, I wasn't in on any of the fighting but to help folks out there's a--you know doing something humane is good also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was this a NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Military Alliance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So 2001 you reported back to the headquarters of the Marines as the assistant deputy commandant for Installations and Logistics Facilities, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Emm, was that '01 [2001]?  It was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.   I did '01 [2001], I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  Because I went from--I'm sorry, I came back from Albania and I still had a year to do.  So when I came back I was the, the commanding officer of Supply Battalion.  So in there from '91 [1991] to '92 [1992].  So I went back up to headquarters in--and I'm screwing that one up.  I'm screwing that one up.
Speaker 1: Was it like--
Speaker 2: No, we're past that now, aren't we?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're in '99 [1999] in the Balkans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay, yeah, okay '99 [1999].  Right, okay.
Speaker 1: This would be '99 [1999], 2000 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.  Okay; 2000, I was in the--I had the, had the command; right.  Okay, and then I went up in the--in 2001; you're correct.  In '01 [2001] I went up to I and L, Installation and Logistics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The facilities assignment, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's basically--well tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--This, this is where--I came back from Albania, took command of Supply Battalion, commanded Supply Battalion for a year and a-half which was still at Camp Lejeune.  While I was at Supply Battalion, I got selected for general officer and then, so in '01 [2001], I went up to the Facilities job--Installation and Facilities at Headquarters of the Marine Corps, so I went up there and that's where I got promoted to general.  So I left down there in '01 [2001].  I left--excuse me, I left Camp Lejeune in '01 [2001] going back up north.  So I went up, I went up--I was in I and L--the facilities guy from, from '01 [2001] to '03 [2003], facilities guy.  Ninety, or excuse me seventy-six percent of all money in the Marine Corps, non-pay, goes through facilities so we were in charge of making sure we had the money to maintain all facilities and on all bases in the Marine Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it would be like being in charge of the finances or other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Ex, exact--it--well, the finance--that side of it, but more, more the, more the buildings and grounds than the, than the oper--than the money; I mean we still had to go to the money guy to get the money, but we had to plead our case that, you know we got these buildings that are falling down,  and that you know, so the--it's more like the folks that were working for us, our city managers, so they're--in order to maintain the base and stations, that was, that was the job to have.
Story_ID: 36759
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you made brigadier general in 2002, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  I got, I got pro--I got selected and I got promoted in, in 2000-- 2003 I actually got promoted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry Larry, you're right.  I got (laughter)--I'm thinking of the command; I got promoted in October of '02 [2002], and I took command in '03 [2003].
Speaker 1: All right now this--this had to be a big moment.  So your father [Charles Frederick Coleman] had been calling you general when you were a colonel--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and now you're a general.
Speaker 2: And this was, this was big.  And the story I didn't tell, Larry, was that at their ceremony that I--well my father came when I made colonel--that we, we talked about in '07 [2007].  My father was sitting there, and I had said, "Well, you know, this is it.  You know this is my last promotion."  That sort of thing; and my father came up to me afterwards and he said he asked me, he said, "Who was that general back in the corner?"  It was a one-star general by the name of James Conway who ended up being the, the commandant of the Marine Corps.  But my father said, "Son, when you said 'okay this is my last promotion,' that general said 'well I wouldn't be so sure of that.'"  So you know, it's just one of those ones that you feel good about.  But the other part was as I told you, my father became very, very religious after the alcoholism.  So once I got promoted in '97 [1997] to colonel, my father said to me--my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] had passed away and my wife had been in the hospital, she had colon cancer at the same time my mother was in the hospital.  But I get promoted and my father says, "Okay, I don't know how much longer I'm gonna be here."  And I said, "What do you mean?"  And he said "Well, I told God to hold on to me; I'd like to see you make general, and after that, he can take me anytime he wants."  So almost a year to the day, he passed away.  So he passed away in '98 [1998], in May of '98 [1998].  So he never saw me make general, which I would have loved for both he and my mother to see me make general but he didn't.  So that summer of '97 [1997], I'm sorry, summer of '98 [1998], between '97 [1997] and '98 [1998], that one year--summer of both years, May of May, my mother passed away, my wife was diagnosed with colon cancer, my mother-in-law passed away, and my father passed away.  So that was a point where I thought I was gonna get out and just say "Okay, I'm, you know I got my--they got my time, I got my--third year, coming up on my third year, I'll get out."  But I went to my father's funeral; we buried my father a year to the day that my mother passed away.  So went to the father's, father's funeral and after everybody left, I stood there and I promised him that I wouldn't quit, I'd stay as long as they, as long as they let me stay.  So that's--I made General and then that--just throw that out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But yeah, then I got promoted in--great ceremony.  My Reverend came; Reverend Patterson had passed away but Reverend Lee came down, a lot of the folks from the--from Darby [Pennsylvania] came down too so that was a great, great thing.  But I got promoted in November '02 [2002], and then in June of '03 [2003], I took command of the Second For Service Group in Kuwait.  They had already deployed so our change of command was in, was in Kuwait so I did finally get to go to the war.
Story_ID: 36760
Speaker 1: How did your wife do with colon cancer?
Speaker 2: She did alright with the--I shouldn't say she did alright; she's still alive.  She had, she had, she was diagnosed in '97 [1997].  She, yeah, she's one of those ones that folks used to laugh--she, she was in the gym more than me.  I mean she was--she worked out all the time.   Big walker, jogger in the beginning and then big walker, but she always, she always worked out.  But anyway, she made, she made out okay with that but then--now you know getting a little ahead of ourselves, but in '93 [1993], I become the Commanding General of Second For Service Support Group.  We stationed in Camp Lejeune but at this point we had deployed to the war, so we're in, we're in Kuwait.  So I was in charge of that from '93 [1993] to '95 [1995].  We came back from Kuwait but I was still in command.  So we came up here in '95 [1995] when they changed my, changed my assignment, and I was on a selection board; that's a board you select colonels in the Marine Corps, the one I was on.  And my wife had gotten sick.  She was just tired; when she'd go home, she was tired all the time.  My daughter was--daughter is a nurse and she looked at her one day and she had some bruises, and she said "Ma, bruises aren't good; there's something wrong."  So-- this is a Friday.  So they go to the doctor's and the doctor said he thinks she has a virus.  So I'm on the promotion board on Saturday and we finish for the day.  My daughter called and said "Dad, you need to come to Walter Reed [National Military Medical Center];" that's the hospital.  She said "Mommy has leukemia."  So I immediately dash up to the hospital and they're wheeling her and they say, "Okay, I can't believe her--she, she doesn't present herself as having leukemia but I think that's what it is."  So they, they go through all that and they find out she does have, does have leukemia and they're saying there's only about a twenty-three percent chance that she'll survive.  And she said--I'm very proud of her, she said "Don't talk percentages to me.  My name is James Coleman and I'm gonna, and I'm gonna beat that."  So she's still alive now, but she had a complete bone marrow transplant.  So she's still, she's still fighting the good fight; still with us but you know, you think okay, you had it, had it once, then twice, let's spread the wealth around a little bit you know, but  but she's, she's still, still hanging in there so we're, we're doing okay.
Story_ID: 36761
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear) to see what happens.  But now in 2003, this is after you're promoted to brigadier general while the Iraq War, 2003 like--well, I didn't ask you about 9-1-1.  Now you were back in the states when 9-1-1 happened.
Speaker 2: 9-1-1--Danny, Danny Halikan, another brigadier general and I are--the night before, were talking and he's stationed in the Pentagon and I'm stationed about a quarter a mile away at the--at Headquarters Marine Corps and you can see each other, and we're trying to decide, you know, we--even though we're that close together, we hadn't gotten together in a while so we're gonna get together for lunch or breakfast so we're trying to decide and it's breakfast up the hill with me or lunch down the hill with him and we decide we'll do lunch, lunch at the Pentagon and we're sitting in my office at Headquarters Marine Corps just up the hill from the, from the Pentagon.  You have your T.V. on and you see the--you're, you're showing the planes going into the towers.  And I was on the phone with my old XO [Executive Officer] and I hear this noise, this low flying plane that just comes right over the building and I said "Why I think they're coming after us;"  You know, just kidding.  And  Larry, not ten seconds later, you hear this thoomp; and my office is a  door--ten feet, with no exaggeration, so I open it--open the door, I mean go out of my office, walk, you know, ten feet, open the door and I, I look outside and all you can see is smoke coming up out of the, come up out of the Pentagon.  So--Danny, Danny wasn't in the building, thank goodness, and obviously, we didn't get down there for lunch but--so that's where we were, or it's where I was for nine--for 911.
Speaker 1: What went through your mind when you saw that?  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well we're under, we're under attack.  What--now I mean--what was going overhead, you know I said "Oh, they're coming after"--but I just--we're not far from the airport; so I mean so there's, there's always planes there but you'd never heard anything like that.  So I, I did say in jest "I think they're coming here."  But I mean it went right over, went right into the, right into the building.  So I was just you know, what do, what do you, what do you do?  So you know, how do I help?  So, you know, so we, we get out of the building and you try to get down and never made it down that far to try to help.  So, so it was a tough one.
Speaker 1: Emm.  Yeah.  So when the U.S. invades Afghanistan, that's still in 2000, or the beginning of 2002, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  We're back--we--I'm, I'm still here at Headquarters Marine Corps.  But one of my, one of my closest friends was going in there as a logistician but--you know, it's not, it's not a whole lot you can do from back here but give support and wish you were there but Marines, Marines--Tom Waldhauser was in charge of the unit that actually--he and General Madison went in there and they did a superb job going to Afghanistan but it's tough to fight the fight from back here but you do the best job you can to support the folks that are out there.
Story_ID: 36762
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 2003, you went Iraq, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to Kuwait--well we supported Iraq.  Oh, we were actually stationed in--at Camp Fox in, in Kuwait but supporting the effort.  Our job--I was in charge of a special purpose MAGTF or Marine Air Ground Task Force and that was--by this time, the, the ground war, the fighting war is over so we're--for the most part, so we're getting our equipment out of Kuwait--or excuse me, out of Iraq; so you, you go up and the equipment is coming down from Iraq into Kuwait, we're fixing the equipment to make sure it's good enough to go to war for the next time and General Madison, who had been the commanding general over there, said "Okay, let's get this gear fixed because we're gonna have to go back," which--I don't, I don't know, many people thought we were actually gonna go back in, but we didn't.  So that was, that was what we were doing was taking care, so we left there in November and came back came back in November '03 [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Any stories from that tour?
Speaker 2: You know it was a joint effort.  Nothing, nothing significant here; it's, it's one of those ones when you're--for me it--personally, I'm in Kuwait, not in Iraq, you wanna be in Iraq, you wanna be where everything is going on.  But you know the important thing is, so I guess the only story would be I told General Madison I would be sure--I would ensure him that this gear would be like new when he needed it the next time to go back and, and he said he would need it.  And the thing was, we did have him all new or, or repaired gear so that he could go back when it was time for them to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now 2004, you were deployed to Haiti, right?--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the disaster relief after the Hurricane.
Speaker 2: That was that was probably my most satisfying tour in all the time I'd been in the Marine Corps.  it was a good one; we went in because Mr. Haristee had left the country and we went in to provide security.
Story_ID: 36763
Speaker 1: Tell us about Haiti.  How soon did the Marines get there after the disaster?
Speaker 2: We, we got there before the earthquake.
Speaker 1: Oh, the earthquake?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I think you're thinking of the later one.  What, what happened when we went in there, Mr. Haristee--I guess it was fear of a, of a coup or, or whatever--Mr. Haristee, so Mr. Haristee took part of the country.  Just before he did--or as the folks in the State Department and the Pentagon knew he was going, they knew there would be some unrest down there so we were doing a training exercise at Camp Lejeune and a war exercise, and the war was supposed to kick off at 8:00 on Sunday morning.  So at 7:45--I was a one star at the time, at the--at 7:45 the, the three star, General Eisman comes by and he pulls up in his, in his jeep; we're in the field and you figure okay he's coming just check to make sure we're good to go.  So he asks me to come in or he--we went in my tent and he said, "You know, how's everything going?" and I said, "Fine."  He said, "Well you know there's some trouble brewing down in Haiti."  I said, "Yes Sir, I'd heard about that" and he said, "Well, Mr. Aristee is gonna leave the country.  The State Department and the U.N. [United Nations] have decided they're gonna put a combined joint task force in there."  Combined means all the, all the combi--different countries and joint means the U.S. countries so there were French, Canadian and Chileans and U.S. forces going out and the U.S. forces were from all the services to include the, the Coast Guard.  So he said, "We're gonna have a joint task force go in there."  And, then-Colonel Mark Regainis had the fighting side of it and that was the unit, the fighting side of it and--but they were gonna put something over top of that and joint task--combined joint task force.  He said, "So we're gonna do that and the commandant has decided you're gonna lead that force."  And I--you know you--I'm, I'm thrilled with that you know, but we're working a war and, and I'm figuring okay when are we gonna go and I said, "Okay Sir, got it.  Thanks for your confidence.  When do I depart?"  And he said, "Well you're gonna leave the field now, you're gonna be in Miami [Florida] on Monday and you're gonna be in Haiti on Tuesday."  So my Chief of Staff took over the, the planning of the war exercise and I left and we went down to Haiti.  And it was--I'd never been to--I'd never been to Haiti but it was--I mean the country was devastated.
Story_ID: 36764
Speaker 1: As soon as I found out I was going, I called back up to National Defense University where I'd gone to ICAF [Industrial College of the Armed Forces] to a professor up there and asked about some, some books that could bone me up on Haiti and that sort of thing so I delved into the, into, to reading all about Haiti.  One of the things--I may be off on the numbers, but at the time of the 44 Presidents of Haiti, 43 of them had either been killed in office or run outta office.  One had died of natural causes; I mean one left on his--on his own.  So you know what you're, what you're getting into.  So, so we go to Haiti and, and as we're down there, then there's the earthquake and we help out with that too.  But this was, this was, this was a very, very satisfying assignment because you were helping, you were helping people out and you were, you, you, you knew every day that you were, that you were making a difference.  So I was, I was very, very pleased with, that that one.  Haiti, Haiti needs a lot of help and more than just six months of help.  Haiti, Haiti needs six, six years, 16 years, 60 years of, of help.  But it, it was very, very fulfilling.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So how long were you deployed there?
Speaker 1: We--I went down in February and came out in July.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Right around six months--five, six months.  And, and only, only because that was the time frame the U.N. [United Nations] gave us; Secretary of State Powell came down and talked to us about it and the great thing was I had never met General Powell before, had never even seen him in person.  But I met him in--he got off the plane and I said, "Sir, welcome to Haiti; it's Brigadier General Ron Coleman."  And he said, "You know, when I found out a Marine was gonna be in charge, I figured everything would be in good shape, good hands."  I thought that was a great, great compliment for an, for an Army four star to say.  I saw him later, years later, and I reminded him of that and he said, "And you know what Ron?  I meant it."  So that was--made you feel good, made you feel good.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Do you still maintain any kind of connection with the Haitian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I Still, still do and, and then on this last effort, I, I got a call--I had retired, and I received a call from General Conway who was still commandant of the Marine Corps, and he said, "Ron, were you expecting this call?"  And I said "No Sir, but I was hoping for it."  And he said "Well, I'm gonna recommend that you go--that you go down, that you know, we pull you back and send you down you know, whether in uniform or outta uniform."  But there was another General, three star General Rusty Blackman, who knew the--well anyway he got, he got selected to go down there, but I would have, I would have loved to go on back to--I loved the Haitians, I really wanna see them do well and I would have, would have loved to have gone back down there.
Story_ID: 36765
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now 2005, you were assigned as Director of Personnel Management--oh--of the Personal Management Division (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Division, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--of the Marine Corps.
Speaker 2: Right.  I left--that was my last--thing was the Haiti thing.  Left there and, and came up here to [Washington D.C.], and that's where--or to Quantico, to be the manpower guy.  So just like I had, I had been in that when I was a Captain and now I was, now I went back as the Director as a one star.  Very good assignment, you're in charge of all the things that happen in the Marine Corps when it, when it comes to, to personnel.  So it was a good, good job, one I was very, very excited about taking and, and, and having.  Again, I, I got up there and in the summer of '04 [2004] and that's when my wife got sick.  Summer '05 [2005], excuse me, and then my wife got sick and so I stayed there.  But the interesting part about that was while I was there, I got selected for a second star.  And in May, I believe of '06 [2006], I got promoted to a second star.
Speaker 1: So you're a major general then?
Speaker 2: Major general now, yeah; second star.  And there were some--couple of personnel concerns in the general officer field so--and this is '06 [2006] and we had someone in mind that was gonna become the three star and run all the manpower things but you know some--something happened there.  I had gone to dinner at the French Embassy and received their--an award from them and the Ambassador said "You know we only give this out on special occasions and you know, I remember giving one to General--General Pace got one and he got a fourth star."  He said "So this means you'll probably at least get a third star" and we laughed it away.  And I left that day, and the next day I was driving off base at the end of work and just as I got outside the gate, my cell phone rang and I pulled over and it was the commandant's executive officer and he said--executive assistant, excuse me--he said, "Stand by for the commandant."  So, you know, then I really turned the car off and got my pad out, sure he wanted me to do something, and he said, "Ron, I just wanted you to know that I just nominated you for a third star and be the--takeover manpower" and--he was about to retire, General Conway was gonna take over, he said "I discussed this with General Conway and he supports it and is all on board with it, so you're gonna get a third star."
Story_ID: 36766
Speaker 1: Now the phenomenal part about that is I had only been a two star since May; when he called me, it was June.  So by the time I got promoted, it was, it was October so I was only, I was only a two star for a short period a time.  But, more importantly to me, or more amazing to me, back--right here in 1986, General Frank Peterson, who had been the first black general in the Marine Corps and obviously the first black three star general in the Marine Corps, got promoted in 1988 and the first three star general--black general.  And 20 years later, I became the second.  So I'm only the second; now we've had General Willie Williams and General Walt Gaston since.  But to be the--only the second--first off, to be a general, to be a three star general and to be only the second black general in the Marine Corps, that's way--you know, that's one you really wish your father was still here for.
Speaker 2: Now that's making history.  Now this must have been--must have gotten some press around this and everything.  Was the ceremony (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, big, big, big ceremony here at Quantico.  It was, it was big; I was--you know, in the paper, in Jet, in Ebony, I mean it was one of those ones where--you know you're so preju--I guess now you stop and think about it and you say "Wow, that was really something," but you know you're just doing your job and you don't--you know, you're not stopping to think about it but you know, now like when you all called and I said, "Wow, that must be--you know, that's, that's something.  But I never really, I never really thought about it; I, I really, I really--you know just--you know people would say "Do you realize this is what you've done?"  And I'd say "Well, I've been blessed by God and that's what does it."  But you don't, you don't stop to, you don't stop to think about it.  But it, it's--we're getting there.  The only, the only sad part is that, you know your parents and those folks aren't here for it but other than that, it's, it's--so that's why I say it's--I've had one, one heck of a ride.  Now you could not ask for, you know--some guy that thinks he's gonna do 2-1/2 years and then 35 years later he retires and so it's been, it's been a good ride.
Story_ID: 36767
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now in 2007 as Manpower and as Commandant, you were like Deputy Commandant of Manpower and Reserve (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(unclear) Affairs.  Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the Marine Corps was going through some transition and actually needed--you made some presentations about what the future projection manpower needs were for the Marine Corps, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And again--and in retrospect Larry, it went by so fast, you think about--you know your, the country's at war, and this is all true facts.  We're, we're in a meeting with the three stars in the Marine Corps; there's 13 of us and we've got two four stars at this time.  And we're around the table and the Commandant, the Commandant says, "Okay, Secretary Rumsfeld wants us to stand up another RCT, Regimental Combat Team.  Can we do that?"  "Yes Sir, we can do it.  And how many more folks do we need?  How would we do it?"  All that sort of stuff.  And then--then he comes back in and he says, "You know maybe we need two Regimental Combat Teams."  So by now, while we're doing this--this starts in November and we're saying okay, let's figure out what is the right size that the Marine Corps needs to do to make all this happen.  So we get the really, really smart people together, this is late in the year, early the next year, and we figure out okay, the Marine Corps needs to be at 202,000.  That should be our number; and at this time, we're at 86 I think.  So we're gonna, we're gonna grow the Marine Corps and--by 20,000 and how we're gonna do it, when can we do it, the whole bit.  So it's February when we say we're gonna do it.  This is what we need to get to 202.  And we're gonna get there--I get my dates all mixed up now but we're gonna get there by '11 [2011], I think is what we said we can get there by--by 2011.  We get there in two years instead of four years.  And the manpower folks, the recruiting folks, the retention specialists just did a phenomenal job.  So I was, I was able to see us get those folks before I retired.  It was phenomenal.
Speaker 1: So you had to bring in 5,000 new Marines each year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Each year--
Speaker 1: --in order to reach that--
Speaker 2: --Right.
Speaker 1: --desired goal by 2011.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you do it?  We've all seen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We never, we never--the first thing you love to say is we never lowered standards.  We allowed more Marines to--we encouraged more Marines to stay on active duty, we encouraged more folks to come in--you've got to remember now, the Marine Corps, at least while I was still on active duty and I believe is still the case now, the Marine Corps--every year, 30,000 Marines come in the front door and 30,000 Marines go out the back door.  And that's because of their time's up, their retired, somebody gets in trouble, whatever that.  So, so it's a, it's a relatively young force.  I think and I may be off, excuse me, but I think the numbers are something like seventy-five percent of the Marine Corps, or the Marines in the Marine Corps, are between seventeen and twenty-three years old.  So it's, it's a, it's a young force.  It's a very, very young force.  But the recruiters did a, did a phenomenal job and folks, folk, folks in the Marine Corps wanted to stay.  Now granted we had, we had we had bonuses, but the bonuses were, were, the bonuses were not to bring people in; the bonuses were to stay in.  So you--so it wasn't like we're throwing money out saying "Come be a Marine and we'll give you more money."  It's be a Marine, make the cut, do a good job, and we'll pay you when you say you wanna re-enlist a second time.  So it was, it was a phenomenal job.  And there's great, great Marines out there.  Great Marines came in and great Marines brought them in.  So it's, it's, it was good.  But, but to make that, that was, that was phenomenal, that was phenomenal.
Story_ID: 36768
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  In I guess 2009, okay, you left the Deputy Command--Commandant Manpower Reserve Affairs for-and you worked with Africa, I guess.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No.  No.  I retired, I retired in--I retired--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, you retired.
Speaker 2: --I retired in--I retired, effective 01 January of 10 [2010].  By my--the end of--December 31st '09 [2009], I was--that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So was that--what was that ceremony like?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was fantastic.  It was--I keep calling it my graduation but it was fantastic.  It was in the (coughing)--it was in the same theater where I started off 30 years earlier.  I had, I had, I got commissioned at Quantico [Virginia] on December 20th, 1974 and I retired October 30th, 2000--2009.  And everything happened right there, so it was just a great, great, great ceremony had--General Peterson was there, there were some Buffalo Soldiers there, it was some Montford Point Marines there, there were some Tuskegee Airmen there, so it was, it was a great, great time.  I mean I was very, very proud.  The assistant commandant of the Marine Corps retired me.  General Lloyd Austin who is now the--getting ready to take over Central Command, he's the vice chief of the Army; he was there, it was a lot of friends and family there; it was a phenomenal time.  And, and I went out--you know when I should--okay, to the commandant "Sir, it's time for me to retire."  And he accepted it so it wasn't like I was pushed out or I went kicking and screaming.  It was, it was time go and, and it's, it's, it's been one, one heck of a ride.  And the, the Assistant Commandant General Amos was the one that retired me; we--he and I had gotten real close when he was my MEFT [Ministry of Economy and Foreign Trade] Commander while I was down in Camp Lejeune so it was a great, great--I have no regrets about that.  No regrets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a plan for retirement, for what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: You know, I wasn't sure.  I knew that what I wanted to do was maybe do some, some, some board work.  I knew I wanted to do some volunteer work, I knew I wanted to work with wounded warriors and those sorts of things.  You know, and again, God blessed me, allowed me to do the things I, things I wanted to do, so I mean I didn't--I didn't wanna go do something every day; I wanted to, wanted to spend time with the family, you know I retired on a, retired on a Friday, I went to Camp Lejeune on Sunday for--or Saturday for, for a ceremony, came back on Monday, took my wife to an eye appointment on Tuesday, and Friday she came home from the hospital and she had a spot on her pancreas so, so we've been going through some, some battles but, you know, I, I take care of my wife and that's, that's the biggest thing, most important thing I do.  So it's, it's good, it's good, it's good.  Oh life, life has been grand to me.
Story_ID: 36769
Speaker 1: Are all your daughters grown now?
Speaker 2: All my daughters are grown; the youngest is, is 26, they all live within 6-1/2 miles which is great sometime and not so great sometime, but they're all doing, they're all doing well.  I have a five month old--coming up on six month old grandbaby so--five daughters and four granddaughters.  So it's all good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now when you look back at everything you did in the Marine Corps and otherwise in life, what would you consider to be your legacy today?
Speaker 2: Caring for people.  Caring for people and, and Nana saying treat everybody with dignity and respect.  That's, that's, that's it.  Regard--you know my kids, my kids laugh at me 'cause, you know they're going away, they're going away to college.  The twins were going on a--I have Susan and she's the oldest, she's a nurse; the twins are high school teachers--
Speaker 1: What are their names?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm sorry; Christina and Jennifer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --You better name them because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, you're right, you're right.  Christina and Jennifer (laughter).  And Katie's, Katie's a school teacher.  Katie, Katie's married to Kevin and, and Kennedy's their, their, their daughter.  And Stephanie--Stephanie is the youngest and she's a, she's a social worker; works for the exceptionally family member so all of them are public servants.  And they're just, they're just great kids; wouldn't have it any other way but when, when Krissie and Jennie were going to college, and I'm sitting there with them and you know you're giving them words of wisdom and the whole bit.  And I said "Well you know one of the things I learned" this is before you know, computers are so big and cell phones, the whole bit--I said "Be especially nice to the food guy, the money guy, and the mail guy."  And, and, and that's what, that's what I learned in the Marine Corps of the United--paymaster, the food guy and the mail guy 'cause those, those are the three things that'll sustain you.  Well some problem happened and, so they're in school and the new semester starts and they're there, and there's something going on and they said, "Hey, you know you don't have a meal card.  You can't, you can't eat."  You know; so I said, "And what did I teach you?"  That year when I took them, I introduced them to a guy named Clarence that runs a, runs a dining facility.  So not only did Clarence let them in the dining facility, Clarence gave them food to take back to the room so they wouldn't have to come back so it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's important to--important to, to treat everybody with dignity and respect, you know?  I mean people, people don't realize it but you know, you can, you can make it without some things but you know, people wanna, you know, laugh and do things--silly things with the trash man.  Trash man is an important guy, you know?  You've got to treat the trash man, the bus driver, the mail man just like you treat everybody, everybody else.  And that's, that's, that's me.  I--everybody's, everybody's a child a God and they're an important person and--you know when, when my, when my wife got sick the first time, my sister was telling my young sister Christine who has a, a couple kids that have a couple, a couple problems, and she said, "Don't you get mad when you know when, you know when Jane"--that's my wife--"when Janey gets sick?"  And I said, "Yeah, I did."  You know and I sat down with her--this is the first time--and I said "You know, why couldn't it been, you know, a bag man or a bum or somebody else that this happened to?"  And she said, "We're all children of God and He loves us all."  And she's the one that's, that's, that's sick.  So I just think I--my legacy I'd like to be I treat everyone with dignity and respect.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Do justly, love mercy, walk humbly with thy God.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could, if you could change something?
Speaker 2: I'd a been a better student.  I really would.  I think knowledge is so, so important.  I really do.  I just, I just think--you know I love to read, I think I should a, I should a read more, I should a, I should a studied more.  I mean I, I think I turned alright, but, but you know I think--I wish I would a been a better, I wish I'd a been a better student.  Marine Corps-wise I really wish I'd gone in combat arms and be an infantryman.  But, but it turned out okay.  But I think it's not a whole lot I would, I would change.  I think I, I did my, you know I did, I did my best.  I--and I had fun along the way; you know I really did.  I think right now if God said, "Okay Coleman it's your turn," I could say "Okay."  I did what I wanted to do, I had a good time, I didn't, I didn't purposely hurt anybody.  If I did, I'm sorry.  But I would say I had a hell of a ride, a great, great ride and I'm still here.  So I can't really think of anything--you know when you lose someone--someone sent me a card when my mother passed away that said "You never have time with--enough time with someone you love when they pass away."  Well, I wish I had, you know, gone to see my mother [Barbara Gretchen Hill Coleman] more, see my grandmother [May E. Hill] more but you think--you always say, you know, I got time for that.  You say "I'll do that next week, next month."  I wish I, I wish I spent more time with my, with my mother.  But other than that, it's just been good.  Been good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36770
Speaker 1: This is a question we always ask too is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Education.  Education.  I, I--you know, if you had one--if you said "Give me, give me one thing that you wish you could change."  Our wish our males would man up and do a better job.  I wish our males would--my father [Charles Frederick Hill Coleman] said--my father had kids out of wedlock but my father said, you know "If they're good enough to lay with, they're good enough to marry."  You know, we, we, we need to do something for our--I mean they're our future.  And we just, we just, we just don't do a good job; some of us don't, and we've got to, we've got to educate them.  I mean there's, people--there's people that are gonna hate you for no reason at all.  Never give anyone a reason to hate.  I gave--I was doing some mentorship and I was--mentored some guys and I said "If--when the Selection Board meets, make it hard for them to say no to you.  Give them every reason"--when I was in Navy boot camp and they taught me about inspection, they said "The inspector is looking for something wrong.  Give him something right.  And if all he sees is right, then he won't see anything wrong; so do the right thing."  And that would be the best thing we could do is, is, is, is be better fathers, be better educators, and mentor, mentor our kids.  I, I--you know we were able to do it.  My, my father was, was sometimes a, a horrible person; a horrible person.  But he, but he taught discipline and he taught you right from wrong.  And regardless of what--or irregardless--I even wanna say of what he did, he made his kids do right.  And that's what you need to do.  Now, you need to be a good example I mean, but to, to say "Okay do this and I'm doing that" that's one thing, but we need to--and I'm not saying you know, beat them and that sort of thing but we've got to--our education system is--could work so much, so much better.  (Unclear) my father would say, "You may be the dumbest kid in this room and your grades may not be that high, but where it says 'cooperation,' there better be a plus.  So if you sit in the class and you fold your hands and you say 'yes sir, no sir, yes ma'am, no ma'am,' and you don't put anything on your paper, at least you're, you're, you, you've done the right thing; you're a, you're a good citizen."  And I, I think that's what we, that's what we need.
Speaker 1: Now the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a caring person that put service before self.  I think my, my family has, has--you don't wanna say suffered, but I mean--in, in every military, I mean there's, there's military folks that have deployed way more than me but I'd like to think that I put service before self.  And sometimes at the detriment of my family but I think it was, it was needed.  I wouldn't take back what I've done.  And my family, I think, I think understands that and they're good, they're good people.  So I--service before self and trying to make the world a better place.
