Story_ID: 37126
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Thomas Jefferson.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Ovie Carter, O-V-I-E, C-A-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now, you don't have a middle name?
Speaker 2: I have a middle name, but I rarely use it, it's Calvin, C-A-L-V-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  And now what--is there a story behind the name Ovie?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.  If you were to look at my birth certificate, it would say O. C. Carter.  I had initials as my first name.  And my uncle, I, I think I overheard him tell my mother [Mary Collins], "You can't let that boy go around in life with initials for a name," you know.  So--and he came up with the name, the name Ovie.  And where he got it from, I have no idea.  Ovie Calvin, you know, just gives a name to the initials.  And that's how I got my name.  I must have been about seven or eight years old when I--when I got the name Ovie.
Speaker 1: So they officially changed it from your birth certificate?
Speaker 2: No, I just started using Ovie Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, nothing was changed on my birth certificate.  You know, this was in a little small town in Mississippi.  You didn't have to do that, you know, you just picked up another name and started using it, you know.  So it took a long time for my friends and family started calling me Ovie, you know.  But that's how that got started.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, well, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March 11, 1946, about nine months after my father came home from World War II, in Indianola, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's in Sunflower County.
Speaker 1: That's the famous Indianola, Mississippi, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--the civil rights days--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I think B.B. King [blues singer]--
Speaker 2: B.B. King--
Speaker 1: --is from there.
Speaker 2: --from the South--from there, yeah.  As a matter of fact, you drive into town now you'd see a big poster of B.B. King, yeah.  The hometown of B.B. King, that's what it says, catfish capital of the world, you know, Sunflower County--Fannie Lou Hamer, in the general--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --area there, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Back to the days of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC]--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and the organizing of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a photojournalist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Let's see, it's May 25th, 2010.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of The HistoryMakers in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37127
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depths, there are five lightweight 'People' magazine-ish type questions that are kind of a warm-up, and they don't require anything but a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I can't say that I have a favorite food.  I like Southern cooking, generally.
Speaker 1: Okay, that would qualify.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Muted tones.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think, well, living in Chicago [Illinois], I think my favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because following those cold winters, you know, it's so nice to experience springtime.  But, when I lived in the South, my favorite time of the year was fall (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm not passionate about it.  I like so many places that I've been, but I like visiting California, so much to see and do out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, probably something that has to do with faith.  Probably "With God, all things are possible."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37128
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mary Collins, M-A-R-Y C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, as close as I can remember, her date of birth is May the 8th, 1920, in Indianola, Mississippi,--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is her place of birth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Not as far back as I'd like to.  I know her mother, and I knew her mother and father, Agnes and Dave Collins.  There used to be a photograph, and I have a photograph painting--picture.  I don't even know what it's called.  It's so realistic looking that it looks like a photograph when it might have been a very detailed painting of my grandfather's mother.  I never knew her name.  She looked white.  But I was always intrigued by it, but I didn't ask my grandparents about it at the time because I was too young when they passed away, but I just always wanted to know more about her.  So that's about as far back as I can go with my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories about--that were passed down about the origins of the family, what the family was doing during the slavery days or if they were, they were involved in the [American] Civil War, any of that?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's parents were slaves she told us.
Speaker 1: Now that is very close.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, and sometimes people, I think are surprised at how close that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Two generations in my case.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  And my grandmother was from Natchez, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about them or about any stories about the end of the war or freedom or--
Speaker 2: You know (laughter), my, my grandmother used to have a, a, a rocking chair in her house there, and I used to go and visit her, and I used to love for her to, you know, start telling me about when she was a kid and what they used to do and that type of thing, but nothing really stands out that I can recall.  I guess the general tone was that she had a, a pleasant, happy childhood, but the details I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had a fairly happy (unclear).  That's significant--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not that easy in that part of the country to have a happy childhood in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did she own her own land or, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her mentioning anything about that.  My, what I'd give to be able to talk to her now and have her to tell me those stories again, you know, but that opportunity is, is, is gone.  She passed away when she was 105 years old.  As a matter of fact, the newspaper in town did a little, little obit [obituary] on it.  I'll have to get that information to you, the obit--take a look at it there.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Agnes.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, okay, that's right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Agnes, Agnes Collins.
Speaker 2: Agnes, Agnes Collins.  I don't even know her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she lived to be a 105.  About what year did she pass away?
Speaker 2: Probably in the '70s [1970s], I'd say early '70s [1970s], like '73 [1973], maybe something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Because I attended the funeral and I made photographs.  I photographed the funeral.  As a matter of fact, I was printing up some of those negatives just recently and added them actually to my portfolio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was born not long after the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 37129
Speaker 1: Well, did your mother [Mary Collins] talk about what it was like growing up in--now did she grow up in Indianola [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: She did.  She was the youngest child of a very large family, lots of siblings.  I think that my grandmother [Agnes Collins] must have had at least a dozen.  Just remembering the details of the, of the obituary that I saw of her.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she get a chance to go to school in Indianola?
Speaker 2: Indianola?
Speaker 1: She did, but in those days--well in, in the community that she lived in, and the circumstances of her life at the time, school was not a very practical thing, you know, to--an education I should say was not a very practical thing to pursue.  So, I think she went as far as the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: She got pregnant and married at a very young age.  I think she was about fifteen [years old], yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  So--but she was a very intelligent woman, very good person and dignified, who often would say later on in her life, you know, had she been able to go to school, she'd like to have been a teacher or something like that, you know.  But back then, you know, little small towns and--I say town but they didn't even live in towns, they lived out in the countryside.  So, in, in, in rural communities, you know, just a general store and neighbors getting together on the weekend playing baseball and visiting each other's homes, you know, that type of environment.  Maybe a one-room school where all the kids in the area would come if they could, you know, if they weren't working or if they were able to, you know, bad shoes, you know, clothes, food.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's was a pretty tough--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --environment--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --you grew up in.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Did she have any particular stories she passed down to you about it?
Speaker 1: No.  Even growing up in that environment for a, a little girl, in her case, her father [Dave Collins], you know, and mother were, you know, together and they--she came from a generally happy home.  And as the youngest child, you know, pretty sure she got the best treatment, you know, from all of her siblings and, you know, she grew up as the youngest kid, you know what I mean basically.  So she only had, I'd say, good stories.  I, I don't recall ever her saying anything tragic about what happened, you know, in that time in her life, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, I think she, you know, she's--I think she was like a pet, you know what I mean, of the family, you know.  I kind of think, you know, as the youngest child again, you know, who, who gave the impression that she was loved, I'll put it like that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 37130
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is April the 15th, 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How, you know, how far back can they trace themselves?
Speaker 2: Not very far, you know.  I never met his father.  His father's name was Henry, and he and my grandmother [Liza Forman] were not married.  Henry Carter, he didn't, he--when I was coming up, he didn't live in the community of Indianola [Mississippi].  He lived in Woodman (ph.), Mississippi.  And that's--I think it was either Woodman (ph.) or Woodburn (ph.) or Woodmond (ph.).  It's near the Louisiana border, the far Southern end of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  Now, what was a tradition in his family, in terms of what they were--could he trace his ancestors back to slavery days too, or did he--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But was there an assumption that they were slaves (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You could probably make that assumption.  You know, they were of that general age where one could assume that a grandparent of my parents were probably slaves.
Speaker 1: They didn't discuss it though?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37131
Speaker 1: Now, did he, did he [Carter's father, Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: He did, but he had less schooling than my mother [Mary Collins] had.  I think he quit school in the third grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that uncommon down there, to quit in the third grade?
Speaker 2: No, I guess not at the time.  You know, he was not an unintelligent man, so he probably had the same general opportunities that most kids had, you know, in that community.  So, I didn't think it was odd that a person would just stop and start working, if you don't see any far horizons for yourself beyond maybe getting a wife and starting a family and getting a job in the local community, you know, as a farmhand.  And, and, you know, you got a lot of sociological reasons for that, you know.  But, you know, he was the kind of person who went on to work every day of his life, from what I can recall, and provided for his family.  And he was someone who I always felt who, if, if they had the opportunity, he could have done--been a very successful man in many other areas of his life, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, is there a--so he was a--he did basically agricultural work--
Speaker 2: Farmer.
Speaker 1: --farmer.
Speaker 2: Farm work, agricultural work, field hand type work, you know.  Earlier--early in his life, you know, most of the people he knew were sharecroppers, and that was the basic economy there, you know, sharecropping.
Speaker 1: So, did he own land?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Of course, as a sharecropper you don't own land, you know, you're leasing the land basically and working the land for the landowner and for a portion of the profits.  That was the general framework of that system.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember the name of the person that was the landlord?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, I would hear my father mention a number of landowners--plantation owners in that area, but at the moment, I--Bubba Fletcher, I think, was one name that, that, you know, that I can recall hearing.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 37132
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Well, as close as I can, you know, approximate them meeting was that they lived, of course, in the same vicinity [Indianola, Mississippi]--same community there, same rural area, perhaps even on two different farms, you know what I mean, two different plantations.  I think my father might have known her brothers.  He was the youngest and, you know, he liked to play ball and baseball, that type of thing.  So I think he just, you know--I mean it's only so many people living in the general area down there in the rural area like that.  You pretty much know everybody.  And I think they met when she was like fourteen years old, you know, and he was I think sixteen, maybe fifteen or sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they met, and my mother became pregnant and they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days they were both working at that point, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And they weren't in school or anything, so they didn't have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother might have still been in school.  I don't think she would have been--she wouldn't have quit school, you know.  She wouldn't have had any reason to have to quit school because she did not--she was not a real major contributor to the family's economy, you know.  I mean she had lots of older brothers and sisters, you know, so--.  I don't--never talked to her about that, why she quit, but I think she probably quit school--she might have quit school before she became pregnant, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37133
Speaker 1: Now, how many siblings do you have and where do you fall in the order?  Can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can, there were--I had, as my mother [Mary Collins] would say--as the folks down South would say, I had--my mother had eleven living children, you know (laughter), because there were several pregnancies where she lost the children, you know, but there were eleven of us.  And my first two siblings were two, two brothers, who were twins.  So there names are Arthur, Arthur Lee Carter, and James Lee Carter, twins, fraternal twins.  The next two would be Ernest and Ernestine, they were twins.
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, two sets of twins?
Speaker 2: Well, there's more (laughter).  The next siblings were another set of twins.  My sister's name is Annie Perl Carter, and her twin, another girl, died at birth.  And it was due to complications, you know, birthing complications.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's three sets of twins--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then we haven't got to you yet?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're a ways down the road.  Then there's my brother, Grover Cleveland [Carter], Jr.
Speaker 1: Now is there a reason why your father had that Grover Cleveland name--I know it's a president, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was there any reason why they liked that president's name better than any other one?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I thought about that.  I have given it a great deal of thought over the years.  It's a very odd name and--but you'd find that a lot in the South, you know, especially during that period of time, people with unusual names like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You heard of the famous pitcher Dizzy Dean, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was Grover Cleveland, I think, something.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was Grover Cleveland Alexander, I think was his name.
Speaker 2: I think you're right about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I just thought about that just now.  I said, well, Grover (unclear) I've heard that--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was--
Speaker 1: He was a white guy.
Speaker 2: Right.  And, well, it's not that uncommon for a parent, a mother, to name their child after someone they--who's--they either, they admire or they think is famous, you know.  It happens all the time; it happens now.  You know, I mean, when Osama Bin Laden was, you know, many people in the Arab world, I think, named their children after him when he was--but, I mean, that, that happens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And exactly why my [paternal] grandmother [Liza Forman] gave him that name, I'm not certain.  I don't know if being a Democrat--I don't know if Grover Cleveland was a friend of black people, you know, necessarily during that time or if she would have even known (laughter), you know what I mean.  My grandmother, my father's mother, you know, probably was not the kind of person who kept up with the news, you know, that type of thing, so the name might have been suggested to her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean.
Story_ID: 37134
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] personalities and their habits, their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to think I got the best of both of them, you know.  And I'd say this, I think they were, they were--I'd say that they're both above average in terms of just general intelligence, in that sense.  They had a good sense of self, you know, and, and, and just self-esteem, you know, that type of thing.  And people generally respected them, you know.  They were well thought of by folks who knew them, and so I'd say that by--hopefully I got a little of the good stuff from both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37135
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, like most kids, hopefully my earliest memories were happy memories, you know.  I remember--growing up in the South [Indianola, Mississippi] you're close to nature and everything, and as a kid, I mean, where you remember playing, you know, and having fun, and I always felt, you know, I guess loved and protected.  So I never felt like I, you know, would be abandoned.  I never felt like I was in hostile surroundings or anything like that.  So I guess I came from a family that was from a loving environment, you know what I mean.  So, you know, just lots of going to the back door and listening to the roosters crow, and the sun come up and thinking it was gonna be another great day, you know, to run around and have fun, you know what I mean, that type of thing.  So, you know, there were many hard times later on, but my earliest memories probably were along those lines.
Speaker 1: Okay, not a specific incident.  I mean, do you have a specific thing that you, you know--what's the first thing that you remember that you remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow, well I remember Christmas.  I remember waking up early in the morning, like you did probably, you know, you know, in anticipation of, you know, the toys and all that.  But, you wake up, and I remember the smell of fruit, apples, 'cause my parents [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] would put that out for, for us also.  And I knew when I smelled the apples that Santa Claus had come.  And if he had come, you could get up out of the bed and go and play with the toys.  So that's one of my earliest memories, you know, that I can recall from a sensory kind of experience back then.
Story_ID: 37136
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your home like--can you describe your home in Indianola [Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I'll have you do some describing of some other places too.  But you moved around--
Speaker 2: Moved around, yeah, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --quite a bit.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you were born in Indianola, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You all moved to--
Speaker 2: Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Memphis.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Back to Indianola.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then from there back to Memphis and then from Memphis to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37137
Speaker 1: So, all right, so tell me--
Speaker 2: Did I, did I give you the names of all of my siblings?
Speaker 1: Yeah and I was asking--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you the first questions and then we went into all the places, which is good so we have some scope of where we're going.  But describe where you lived and your first home [in Indianola, Mississippi], and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  And they can be from any of these places.  You just let us know which place.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Well I guess the first place would be a good place to start.  I, I was born, actually, not too far from where I spent what I used to call my Wonder Bread years, you know, my--you know, my years where the only thing that I wanted to do is get up and go outside and run around and play.  And I have a photograph of that--that I'll get to you.  Also, I went down there to the old hometown and someone pointed out when they say, "You were born over there," and I'd say, "Where"?--"Way over there behind that field over there."  I saw a little roof sticking out over there, you know, so I guess that's where I was born.  But I grew up in a little--at the time, three rooms was the--was the number of rooms in the house that my father [Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] built--had built when he came back from the military--came back from the service.  And this was within the--right in--within the confines of the Indianola proper but on the edges.  So a lot of the streets were not paved.  They still had dirt roads and things like that.  So--
Speaker 1: Now is this--before I ask this--I, I don't always ask, but it reminds me of my dad's hometown and other towns it seems in the South.  Was the black community the most unpaved part or was it all unpaved or was it just the black neighbors unpaved?
Speaker 2: I'd say that you would find more streets in the black community that were unpaved.  Of course, in Indianola there were a number of streets in the black community, you know, that were paved and had streetlights, you know, things like that.  But the area where we lived had been the, the outer edges of the city, so they didn't have all of the city services and streetlights, you know--.
Speaker 1: Well was there a name for that part of town (unclear).
Speaker 2: I think I recall the, the name Bates (ph.) Addition, Bates Addition.  Of course now, you know, driving down there, you know--the streets are paved and streetlights are up and, you know, there are subdivisions and everything, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37138
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Okay sounds--crickets, frogs, rain, tin roofs--just the sounds of nature.  Smells--smell of the earth when the rain falls--would fall.  I remember the sour smell of rotting potatoes during the winter.  Well, during the fall my father [Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] would harvest sweet potatoes, and he would store them on the side of the house and put a tarp on, on top to keep the rain from coming.  And throughout the winter we would eat from that pile, you know.  And as, as the winter passed, the fruit would--I mean the, you know, the vegetables would, would start to, to rot a little bit.  But I mean, you could eat, eat them--I mean, they were fresh enough--I mean they were only roots, you know what I mean.  But at certain points, you know--the dampness of the water--so you begin to--it wasn't--it wasn't a foul smell, it was just the smell of rotting fruit, you know what I mean.  Sights--sights, lots of cotton fields, you know--looking out over the cotton fields, seeing the cotton--white, the layer across the field there, cornfields, bean fields, long dirt roads I remember--I remember seeing places on dirt roads where snakes had crossed.  You could see them, the trail of snakes--lots of animal tracks, that type of thing.  I remember laying down or sitting down by a stream or a little pool of water there--we used to call them bayous down South there--and watching, and the snakes swim, moccasins, cottonmouth moccasins, tadpoles, and small fish, minnows, swimming, you know, near the shoreline of the water there. Lots of sunshine, lots of bright Southern sunshine, hot, sweat, you know, that type of thing.  I remember the smell of cottonseed--being tired, a lot, yeah.
Story_ID: 37139
Speaker 1: You were gonna describe another place for us.  Now this is Indianola [Mississippi] you just described for us, in Sunflower County, right?
Speaker 2: Indianola.
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Bates Addition.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 411 Spruce Street, I think, is the name--is the address of the house that I lived in.  At the mailbox out front. My mother [Mary Collins] had a little flower garden in the front, and the--every--because it was a dirt road, the road would--we'd get these big grooves in them, you know, so when it rained, I mean, you could hardly drive a car down through them, you know what I mean.  And these ruts in the road there, you know, so deep, you know, that the bottom of the car would hit them.  But in the summertime, the city would send out plows and they were road graders, and they would grade the road in front of the house and the area there.  And I remember walking around with bare feet on the newly graded road.  Before they graded them it was hot, you know, and ruddy and you'd want to go out there right after the, the street was graded because it was flat and cool, you know.  I remember--I remember that.  I also remember in the summertime it was hot--lots of mosquitoes, and the city would send out this truck with some type of chemical spray that would spray the area.  They'd go up on the street down the next, you know.  And the kids would follow along, you know, because it was a white fume-like substance, and it was in the evening around dusk time, you know.  That's when they would put it out.  And I would have fun doing that, not realizing that, you know, we were harming ourselves by inhaling all of those chemicals and everything and--but, you know, anything for a kid, you know--for fun, you know that type of thing.  I remember walking barefoot on hot roads.  Some of the roads had gravel on them, and if you didn't have shoes walking on, on--in the middle of the day on gravel, that's like walking on fire, you know.  So I remember that.  So, I mean, I've just a host of good memories and memories from, from my childhood.
Speaker 1: How far did you all live from the Mississippi River?
Speaker 2: Not far.  Mississippi River was, was right next to Greenville, Mississippi.  Indianola was located almost directly between Greenwood and Greenville, Mississippi--Route 80, I believe.  So, the Mississippi River was--the levee was right there at Indianola, which was about thirty miles away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never saw the Mississippi River from Greenville.
Story_ID: 37140
Speaker 1: My parents [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] would go to Greenville [Mississippi] occasionally, you know, to shop for--you know.  As a matter of fact, it was in Greenville where I first saw a--remember seeing a sign that said, you know, "white" and "colored" water fountain.  I was in a 'Sears and Roebuck' store, and we were over there buying school clothes and I remember seeing that--.
Speaker 2: Now did your parents give you any special instructions for how to conduct yourself in--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in town with white people?
Speaker 1: You know, nothing that I can recall, since we lived in Mississippi during the--I wouldn't say the height of Jim Crow, but during the Jim Crow period, you just kind of grow up knowing certain things.  I guess you hear or overhear just about everything.  Just like with anything, you know, whether it was a, another human being or an animal or anything like that, you know what to be fearful of, you know what to be careful around, you know, that type of thing.  You know, you knew who held the power in the community, you know, that type of thing.  You kind of sense that, you know.  You know my father didn't work for another black man, he worked for a white man, you know, you know that type of thing.
Speaker 2: So, so was, so was it a situation where you interacted with white people a lot or they lived around you, or, or was it--some communities they say were there in the community and they never saw white people around, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I had no interaction with white people directly myself.  I went to a segregated school, and there were no white people living in our little community there.  The only time that I would see white people would be if--when I would, like we say, "go to town," you know, go up town.  And if you went to the, the picture show, they're probably somebody taking the money there.  Most of my upbringing down there and most of my contact was with black people.  So, if I--I never at that age needed anything from, you know,--I didn't do any purchasing on my own of clothes or anything like that, but sometimes I would go with my parents.  You know, we'd go to a department store, Woolworth, or something like that.  The contact would be, I wouldn't say hospitable, but cordial.  And it was a community and, and, and boundaries were acknowledged and had already been set.  So, you know, you know, there would be something like, if I was with my mother, a white woman might say, or a clerk in the store, "Well, hello Mary, how are you doing today?" you know what I mean.  And my mother would say, "Well, Ms. Sally," you know what I mean, this, this, that, the other, you know what I mean.  That's sort of the way it went.  And as a kid you kind of pick that up, you know what I mean.  You know, so I would make--I would see my father making the same deference to white people in that sense.  But, but, but because it was sort of the standard procedure down there, everybody kind of went along with that, you know.  It's live and let live, just kind of like this is the order, and everybody kind of knew their place.  And whether you liked it or not, that's the way it was until a time close to when the civil rights era kind of came--well, I should say this last--that particular phase of the civil rights--
Speaker 2: Last, last wave.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because we know--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that it's something that has been ongoing for always, you know.
Speaker 2: This really doesn't kick in really into gear until you're a teenager really, right? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, at that particular phase, yeah, exactly, exactly.  And, you know, I'm reminded of it because it was, it was during that period when you would hear white people saying, you know, why are they coming down here upsetting our niggras, you know what I mean, and upsetting things, because everybody kind of went along, you know what I mean, with the program because you, I guess, felt more or less powerless.
Story_ID: 37141
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know if you are aware of this or not, but two very, probably, I don't know, significant sociological studies, you know, were done on Indianola [Mississippi].  But Indianola was not mentioned as the name of the town that this race study was done on, two of them I think.  Both of them were Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professors, sociology professors, and they called it 'Race and Class in a Southern Town'.  So, and then there was one study that was done in the same period.  It just so happened that this other sociologist had also used Indianola, and it wasn't revealed until sometime later.  Of course, people in, in the academic community, of course, knew that it was Indianola, but generally, most folks did not it until years later because many of the conversations were very candid, you know.  And a lot of the black people were convinced to be, you know, forthcoming, and they would put their lives in danger, you know, by speaking, so--.  That's, that's my hometown.
Story_ID: 37142
Speaker 1: Now, did you start school in Indianola [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Is that your first school--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --experience?  Now, do you remember the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Well, I do.  Of course, the names of most black schools in the South then--the vast majority were named for either Booker T. Washington or George Washington Carver, you know, or--I don't think too many were named Lincoln because [President Abraham] Lincoln was not a very admired person by whites in the South.  But anyway, it was George--it was Carver Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Carver Elementary School.  And it was very--I imagine it was small.  I mean, we imagine this thing, but I don't know.  I know--
Speaker 2: Well it was initially.  It was just a, a--I remember--first thing I remember was a, like a, like a, a field, like a, like a level ground there with white buildings.  And it must have been maybe, maybe six or seven classrooms in the building.  It was just one little building there and two entrances.  And I have just a vague--and I remember the building sitting up on a--sort of elevated off the ground.  And I think there was a fire at some point there.  And I remember for a very brief time going to another location for classes.  As it turned out, it was in a local church.  We were having classes because the school had burned down.  Well they built a new school after that, and it was a modern, you know, school, you know, with a--it was a sizeable school, you know, one level, but it looked like a regular elementary school which you'd see anywhere.
Speaker 1: Now did you like school?
Speaker 2: Not then, not then.  I didn't like school because I didn't, I didn't, I didn't feel like I, I was learning, that I was able to do the work.  I'll put it that way.  And I always felt like the other kids knew more than I did, or I didn't know as much as I needed to know, and it left me with a bad feeling.  I'm just remembering back on that now.  That's how I remember school, you know, just maybe being in class and, like, you don't have your homework or it isn't done properly and that type of thing, you know.  That's the feeling that I get.  Now this is up until I was, like, in the, I'd say fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know how to study.
Speaker 1: Were your brothers and sisters in school at the same time, at the same school?
Speaker 2: Since there were so many of us and such a, you know, a vast age difference, some of them were like in high school at the time maybe, you know.  But I don't remember--there was school, but I don't remember like school and education being a part of my family discussion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37143
Speaker 1: So what was more--most of the concern in the family about?
Speaker 2: Oh, putting food on the table.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Working.  We worked--we all worked.  I, I worked from the very-from as far back as I can remember--worked in, in the fields picking cotton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Walking along the, you know, the side of my mother [Mary Collins] there, picking little bowls of cotton and putting it into her sack.  I remember that.  I was small enough so that she could pull me along on her sack (unclear), you know, something like that, if we got tired (unclear).  But I remember that.  So we all had to work.  We all would go to the fields and work.  And you probably know, from reading and history of that part of the country, how their school year was constructed to coincide with the harvest time, you know.  I mean, you started school maybe two or three times a year, you know.  You'd go to school for a couple of months, you were out for the harvest, and you'd go back for a couple of months and you're out for the chopping [ph.] period, and you'd go back and you'd come in, you know, I mean that type of thing.  And, you know, a lot of my friends from school did not, you know--their lives were not sort of centered around farm work, you know, so.  But, sometimes I would have to--my family, my brothers, myself, my sisters, we would have to be taken out of school, you know, to go to the fields and work, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37144
Speaker 1: Now, so you were in Indianola [Mississippi] until about what, what year?  Or how old were you when you moved to--
Speaker 2: I think we were--I was about eleven years old.  I might have been in the fifth grade maybe entering the sixth [greade], but something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's about--I think that's about 1956 or so, you know?
Speaker 2: It might have been, it might have been--
Speaker 1: I have to ask about this 'cause this affected so many people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you were living near there at the time.  Do you remember the Emmett Till [African American boy who was murdered in Mississippi at the age of fourteen]--
Speaker 2: Oh, I do.
Speaker 1: --case when you were little boy?
Speaker 2: As a child I do, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you, you pick up little bits of information as a child.  Your little senses go out and you try to, you know, try to figure out what's this mood that, that everybody seems to be in.  You hear the name Till, Emmett Till, and you, you know, the name, you know, and folks are fearing, foreboding, you know what I mean.  And you heard--you would hear how he was murdered and how brutally he was murdered.  And as a child, of course, that just scares you to death, you know what I mean.  You know, and say, oh he was beaten so badly, his mother didn't recognize him, and all that kind of stuff.  And I think I was still in the South when I saw the, the picture that was in 'Ebony' magazine, you know, that was published--not 'Ebony'--
Speaker 1: 'Jet', yeah.
Speaker 2: --published by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Jet'.
Speaker 2: --yeah, that was published, yeah.  I remember seeing that picture, you know, as a child, so yeah.  And so I was, I was there at the time.
Speaker 1: And where there any special instructions for you, as a young black male in those days, as a result of that?
Speaker 2: Well, the--I'd say, no, no special instructions because I lived there in Mississippi.  So, this young man, Emmett Till, he was visiting there [from Chicago, Illinois], you know what I mean.  Had he grown up there, he might have--he might not have been so bold.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37145
Speaker 1: So you moved to Memphis [Tennessee] and now you're about eleven [years old]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Eleven or twelve [years old].
Speaker 1: --about 1957, I guess?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, what was Memphis like?  Was that exciting?
Speaker 2: It was.  It was very exciting.  I mean, I didn't like living--leaving [Indianola] Mississippi.  You know, we left there because, you know, the agricultural business had become more mechanized and they didn't--there weren't--there wasn't a need for--as much of a need for farm workers or labor.  And, of course, the, the entire South pretty much sort of emptied itself into the North.  You know, and we were part of that group that came out of there.  It was sort of like the, the Okies, you know, moving up to California from Oklahoma.  You know, we were all packed down and everything in cars.  I think there were two cars of us leaving there and all packed down, suitcases and different things and (unclear) brothers and sisters and all that, and we drove up to Memphis.  My father [Grover Cleveland Carter] had a brother who lived there, Leonard, and then an older brother.  And we moved back there.  I just remember leaving a dog that I had just found, a little puppy, and I hated leaving my little puppy.  But, Indianola was in the rearview mirror.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, you know I was a little sad about you know, leaving.  But there we were, you know, in Memphis.  We moved into a, a, a little two-bedroom--nice little place.  It was--it looked like one of the, you know, the little CH--CHA Housing, Chicago Housing.  It wasn't, it was privately owned, but it was a nice place, it was a very nice place, you know, you know, green grass and sidewalks and, you know, and all that.
Story_ID: 37146
Speaker 1: I would imagine you were exposed to more newspapers and magazines in Memphis [Tennessee] than you were in Indianola [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  And did you take particular interest in those days--I know you became a photojournalist.  As a pre-photojournalist were you impressed by the photos in the 'Tri-State Defender' or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The 'Commercial Appeal'--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and all that.
Speaker 1: 'Commercial Appeal'
Speaker 2: I didn't know the first thing about newspapers.  I don't know if I could recall ever seeing a newspaper in my life up at that point.  We had a television down South.  As a matter of fact, in Indianola we were the first family in that little Bates [ph.] Addition area [neighborhood where Carter lived] to get a TV, and everyone would come around and, you know, there and watch TV in our house.  You know, we'd have a house full of people there watching TV, you know, all that rumble of the jungle and all that, you know.  But--and a radio, I recall a radio, you know, WDIA [R&B station] from Memphis, you know, great station there--
Speaker 1: That's where B.B. King [blues singer] got his start, right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a lot of other great blues musicians from the [Mississippi] delta region there, you know, came through Memphis there.
Speaker 1: Now where there--when you were coming up in Indianola and--were, were, there, there a lot of musicians in town?  It just seems like the delta produced so many--
Speaker 2: Oh, it did.
Speaker 1: --blues musicians.
Speaker 2: Oh, it did.  It was, it was like a fountainhead at that point.
Speaker 1: Can you name some others for us and maybe how you'd encounter, you know, the musicians?  Would they play, you know, at barbecues or were there venues for them to play?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I like blues coming up because that's basically what I listened to, gospel music, you know, quartet music.  Rhythm and blues was becoming pretty popular then, you know, at that time, like good rhythm and blues.  But, blues, you know, Saturday night blues, you know, that kind of thing, you know, where the women would get up and, you know, dance by themselves, you know what I mean, that kind of thing.  I remember being uptown on Saturday night.  You know, this would be like after everyone had worked all week, and everyone would come to town on a Saturday night.  And, and we didn't live too far from uptown, you know, so I could walk up there, but my father [Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] would take us all up there and give us a little money and we could go and buy ice cream, you know, that type of thing.  And we'd walk around in, in, the, the town, you know, that kind of thing, and meet our friends maybe meet a little girlfriend or something like that, you know.  Of course, I didn't have a girlfriend at the time, but that's what a lot of the guys and girls would do, meet.  So it was-Saturday night--if I could go back and photograph that, oh my God, you know, it would be quite a, quite a scene.
Speaker 1: Was there a special place that everybody would meet up at and is there a name of the place?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, one of the, one of the, the places that's on the historical registry is Club Ebony.  Club Ebony, I mean, that was like the hottest spot in, in town, you know.
Speaker 1: This is in Indianola?
Speaker 2: In Indianola.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Club Ebony, it was operated by a lady named Ruby.  I forget her last name, but B.B. King married Ruby's daughter, you know, and--who was a good friend of my, my sister [Annie] Perl.  And I remember coming home one day and I saw this big red Cadillac parked in front of our house.  Man, wow, what a--
Speaker 1: Now who married--
Speaker 2: --beautiful car!
Speaker 1: Who, who, who married--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: The lady, they used to call her Red Ruby, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, who married Ruby?
Speaker 2: It was Red Ruby's daughter.
Speaker 1: Oh Red Ruby's daughter, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was a light-skinned girl, pretty, you know, that type of thing.  And she married B.B. King, and--but, but, but the girl was a friend of my sister's.
Story_ID: 37147
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about the Saturday night scene [Indianola, Mississippi]--
Speaker 2: Saturday night scene, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and the blues and, and B.B. King being married to Ruby's [club owner in Indianola] daughter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, big red Cadillac in front of my house with long fins on it.  It was an Eldorado.
Speaker 1: Now did you--did you ever meet him and talk to him?  Did he talk--
Speaker 2: No, I, I--
Speaker 1: --to the kids?
Speaker 2: --didn't, but my parents [Maty Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter] grew up with him.  Riley, Riley King is his name--
Speaker 1: And the B.B. stood for just a record, huh?
Speaker 2: Blues Boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Blues Boy, that's what he called himself, and when he was with the radio station, you know.  But my parents knew him when he was growing up because it was--she knew everybody, you know what I mean, down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about, now, now what about some of the--Club Ebony was a big Saturday night club everybody would go to, and--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 37148
Speaker 1: What about church, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was a deacon in church--Saint John Baptist Church, and I only recall going to church myself about twice--about two times.
Speaker 1: Okay, was that unusual for a young man in those days?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say so.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, I think there's a lot of mythology, you know--you know with the black people in the church and all that kind of stuff, you know what I mean.  You know, just like now, you know, some people are believers some aren't, some people go, some don't, you know what I mean.  But the church was regarded as a--it has its place in the community.  It has its place.  And those who went to church in the, you know, the societal echelons of, of, of the--of the community and the pastor in a small community was usually someone who, you know, was very highly regarded, you know, that type of thing.  My mother [Mary Collins] and father [Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.], you know, believed in God, you know.  They were not unbelievers, it's just not--it was not a part--going to church was not a part of their experience at that time.  I think my mother probably went to church quite a bit when she was coming up.  But I recall her singing in the kitchen when she was preparing meals a lot of times, and that's a sound that I--that I look back on fondly.  She had a nice little voice and she--I, I, I enjoyed her--listening to her sing spiritual songs, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37149
Speaker 1: But I do recall one time on a Saturday night where--when I heard a little blues band.  It was on Saturday night, and, and, the, the, the little wood-framed stores and restaurants and clubs were, like, all joined together, and half the wood holding them together was rotted.  And I remember passing by this, this club where this music was coming out of, you know what I mean.  (Singing) Dah, dah, dah--And man they were, like, having a great time up in there.  And the, and the boards on the, on the steps was just--I could see them moving, you know.  And I remember just being a little kid with my little--probably with an ice cream cone (laughter), walking inside there.  And it was a scene, man, from like out of a movie, you know--guys, you know, playing the guitar and the drums, you know and everything, you know.  Another guy is singing and men and women are dancing and, you know, and things kinda low-lit and folks just--the sounds of happy voices, you know, loud voices.  I remember that whole scene coming at me, you know.  That's probably the most vivid memory that I have of--with music, except for just hearing it all the time on the--in the background of our lives, you know, in Mississippi, because the radio would always be on, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, so WDAI [R&B/blues station in Memphis] played the blues and a lot of  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Blues, blues and rhythm and blues.
Speaker 2: And rhythm?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Blues and rhythm and blues.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Great disc jockeys--Rufus Thomas, you know.  And it was rhythm and blues during the weeks, and on Sundays it was gospel and, you know, quartet music, you know.
Speaker 2: Now they played all down in the, in the North, you know, you got more Motown and that sort of thing in the early '60s [1960s] and you did the blues kind of thing, and I don't know, was it the same way down there or did you get more of the blues than you got Motown stuff?
Speaker 1: Well, this was prior to Motown.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was prior to Motown.  This was probably like you say, in '54 [1954] or '55 [1955], the years that I--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --can recall.
Speaker 2: --we certainly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --up, up to '56 [1956], so it was strictly--and that's why I say rhythm and blues, you know--LaVern Baker, you know, Charles Brown, you know, people like that--
Speaker 2: Lloyd Price, I guess, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yes and folks in that era--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in that stratum.
Speaker 2: Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: Great, yeah, great musicians, great singers, beautiful music, you know, but it was at that point in the evolution of our music, you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah and then came Motown and, you know, and the Philly [Philadelphia] sound and all that--
Speaker 2: Okay, in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 1: --you know, and love, right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --especially in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 37150
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Memphis [Tennessee] when you all moved, before you moved back to Indianola [Mississippi] again?
Speaker 2: Only a couple of years.  It seemed longer, but it was only a couple of years.  I graduated from high school there and I--I mean from elementary school there, and I started high school there, but I--we moved from there to--
Speaker 1: So what was the high school there you started at?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you grade school; the grade school was Hyde Park Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Carver [Elementary School] wasn't in the--
Speaker 2: Carver was in Indianola.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Hyde Park in Memphis.
Speaker 2: Hyde Park in Memphis.  I remember Hyde Park.  It was just a turning point in my life, you know, Hyde Park--going to Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: How so? What happened?
Speaker 2: In Hyde Park, I discovered that I was not--I wouldn't--I discovered that I was a good student.  I just--I, I've experienced what it was like to feel like a good student and to experience excellence for the first time and would be regarded as someone who could do excellent work; I remember that.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened?  Was there a particular teacher that took an interest in you or (unclear) person?
Speaker 2: I've given a lot of thought to that, and I cannot for the life of me put, put my finger on exactly what the difference was.  I can't remem--I just don't.  I don't know what it was.  But, my grades were good and--were very good.  I, I responded in school, you know, to the teachers.  I knew answers to questions, and I felt like I was intelligent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not just someone who, you know, could get by and do the work.  I felt like, boy, you know, I, I can do this pretty well, you know what I mean.  I was making As and Bs, you know, that type of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--you started thinking about a goal, you know, or a vocation or aspiration, you know?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time.  But that was such an important--thinking back on it--that was such a significant turning point for me, just to realize that I had some ability.  And probably those were the seeds that made--probably made me believe that I could do just about anything that I set my mind to.  You know, one has to learn their, their strengths and weaknesses, you know what I mean, as far as, you know, what their passions are, what their--you know, what their talents are, you know, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Were you encouraged by your parents [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] at this point?
Speaker 2: There was never a time when I was--that I can ever recall talking to my parents about schoolwork at all.  You know, I don't know why this was the case exactly, it's just that--if you--you'd have to kinda get a better profile of who they were and who they--and, and, and the society that produced them, you know what I mean.  Of course, they would want the best for their children, just like any other parent would, you know what I mean, but instilling in them a--the knowledge that education is, is a primary factor in, you know, one's success and quality of life, I don't think that they, they experienced it coming up because education wouldn't have made any difference at all to, to their lives, not at all.  I mean, their horizon was not--had nothing to do with education, and I don't mean in just their particular case.  In the community where they grew up, these were uneducated people, you know--good people with good values, with personal self-esteem, you know what I mean.  But they had--they did not know the value of an education.  I'll put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you kind of--you had to get recognized at school, I guess, or not at all, I guess, I suppose.
Story_ID: 37151
Speaker 1: Now did you participate in sports or anything too?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I didn't participate in any kind of organized sports, you know, at school or anything.  I had injured my knees when I was in the--early on in life, both of my knees.  And it made me very cautious about sports because I, I would reinjure them from time to time.
Speaker 1: How did you injure your knee?
Speaker 2: I remember--well, what happened was that I, I had a situation where I had a torn cartilage and torn ligaments, you know what I mean, in my knee.  And I was just--we were, you know, doing some playing around, and I think we had a string up, you know, at lunchtime.  And you know boys, you know, we were jumping and then they'd raise the string high, and we'd jump higher, you know, that type of thing.  And I think at, at one point, I tripped.
Story_ID: 37152
Speaker 1: Now you were telling us about your knee.  We're rolling again.  Tell us about your knee--
Speaker 2: My knee injury.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You were practicing high jumping, yeah?
Speaker 2: Well, just playing, you know, just lunchtime play with my friends, you know, outside of the school on a bright sunny day, you know; everybody's out, you know, playing, and girls are jumping rope and talking and all that kind of stuff.  And we were running and jumping, and I fell and I twisted my knee.  And turns out that I, you know, messed it up pretty badly.  And so with that injury--and it wasn't repaired.  I didn't go to the doctor or anything like that, you know.  It was just--it was excruciating pain, yeah, as you can imagine.  I mean, it was mine and it was the kind of pain that would cause you to faint probably, you know.  But anyway, you know, it's full of fluid and--you've seen these in an injury like that, you know.  So it was just a nagging injury that stayed with me for years and years and years, and it kept recurring, you know.  And so, you know, I'd love to play basketball and run, and just do all the things that, you know, a boy would do, and I had to restrict myself.  I had to be so careful when I would play.  So I never, like, played any organized sports because I feared injury, you know--injuring my leg again and then happening to the same-- the other knee, you know, also, so.  And again--oh, that happened when I started working for the newspaper.  But it was with this knee.  So, I had to kind of--I was a--it was a constant presence, you know, in my life.
Story_ID: 37153
Speaker 1: So, in Memphis [Tennessee] you started getting--you were turned on to academics before that?
Speaker 2: Academics, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you went back to Indianola [Mississippi].  Were they behind with--you have--the level that you were at when you went back?
Speaker 2: Well, we went back after we came to--this was the second time that we had moved to Memphis.  The first time I can barely remember, you know what I mean.  But this was the second time--the last time that we were there.  I started high school there.
Speaker 1: So you were about fourteen [years old]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about thirteen maybe, maybe fourteen--thirteen maybe.  And, you know, my father [Grover Cleveland Carter] had a job in a factory, but he barely made enough money to feed us, you know what I mean.  It was, it was very, very difficult.  I mean, I was constantly--I could, you know, I could remember being hungry a lot, you know what I mean, you know, that type of thing--going to school that way, you know, going to bed that way, you know, that type of thing.  Then we moved to Chicago [Illinois].  I had an older brother who, who lived here.  And I don't know how my father got the notion to, you know, move to Chicago, you know, for someone who had lived in the South all of his life.  But, everyone else was doing it, you know, moving up North to different cities.  Half of the folks we knew in Indianola had moved to various places.  I remember a friend of mine (unclear) from Ohio.  Toledo, Ohio was another place where a lot of folks in my hometown--. But here we were in Chicago, you know.  We moved here in--
Speaker 1: It was 1960?
Speaker 2: 1959.
Speaker 1: '59 [1959], okay.
Speaker 2: Think, think it was in '59 [1959]--'59 [1959], '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Put it that way.  And we came here and stayed with my brother and sister-in-law for a short time.  And I didn't even start school--it was in the wintertime and, and on the West Side of Chicago where you often bump into people who you knew from down home, you know.  It's like the Okies [immigrants from Oklahoma] like there in California--walking through one of those labor camps and bumping into folks you knew back in Oklahoma, back home.  So you'd, you'd see that a lot, you know, you know.  But I was out of school.  I didn't, I didn't--it was about a month after I got here maybe longer.  'Course I would help--I was helping my father wash cars at a, at a gas station, you know.
Story_ID: 37154
Speaker 1: But I eventually enrolled in school [in Chicago, Illinois] before it was too late.  Another one of those situations where I could have just as easily slipped out of going back to school at all, you know.  But at that point, I think that I never saw myself, you know, out of school or--you know.  I think I had already began to realize that an education was a valuable thing to have, you know--or education I should say--and that I didn't want to stop where I was, you know.  It would be nothing for me to do.  So, I started school.
Speaker 2: Where did you go?
Speaker 1: John Marshall High School on the West Side.  Enrolled in there, and Lord, it was, you know--it's like a cultural shock.
Speaker 2: And Marshall is one of the largest public schools--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the city.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  At the time it was very diverse.  And it was the first time that I went to school with, you know, white kids, Puerto Ricans, black kids, so it was very different.  Like I said, it was--the school was huge--huge school.  And I was--felt lost up in there, you know.  And it was not a pleasant experience.  You moving to Chicago--it was har-harsh--winter, snow, cold, hungry.  So, I continued there for my freshman year and continued to live here in Chicago throughout my--the next year, my sophomore year in school.  And I went to St. Louis [Missouri] during the summer between my sophomore and junior year in high school to visit another one of my older brothers who lived there, and I liked St. Louis.  It was--the pace was a little slower than Chicago.  It was a little different, a lot different.  It was more to my sensibilities, you know.  You know, it's just everything--not everything, but it was better than Chicago, you know.  I felt--it felt better.  And got a job there, and decided to stay in St. Louis.  And I enrolled in school there, and I finished my junior and senior year there.
Speaker 2: Now what high school did you go to there?
Speaker 1: Soldan, S-O-L-D-A-N, Frank Soldan, Soldan School.
Speaker 2: Frank Soldan.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's an architect who designed all of the schools in St. Louis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was on the school board for years, you know.  But I worked there in St. Louis.  I worked during school.  I had a job.  I had a brother who was a food buyer for a country club there, Norwood Hills Country Club.  He was just a young cat, you know, but a little something on the ball.  So--enough that, you know--it's just buying food for the country club, but he got me a job washing dishes in the evening after school.  So I had money, and for the first time, my own.  And I was doing well in school.  I had new friends.  I had a cousin about my age.  We became best friends, you know, that type of thing--you know, girlfriends, you know, and I liked it a lot.  So, St. Louis was a good positive experience for me.
Story_ID: 37155
Speaker 1: What did you concentrate on in high school, I mean vocationally--
Speaker 2: Studying.
Speaker 1: --or aspirationally?
Speaker 2: Just general studies at the time.  There was never yet any focus on anything professionally.  I had no professional aspiration.  I had--I didn't feel like I had--I didn't feel particular passion about anything in particular.  Again, I felt like I was--I had some abilities.  You know, I felt like I was able, you know what I mean, you know.
Speaker 1: So had you--had you had a camera in the hands yet at this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not yet, no camera; no interest for photography. Didn't read newspapers, you know, didn't read books, really, outside of just--so when I say that I was a good student, I mean that's--you know, given--I'd say that I could've--I was no scholar, you know, and I was no intellectual, you know.  I just had work to do and I did it, you know, that type of thing.  And I did it well enough to get good grades, you know.  But I worked.  Had I--had I been more focused--had I had maybe someone who emphasized to me the importance of education and gave me a book to read--you know, told me this was important, sat down and talk to me, discussed the issues with me, things like that, then all these things would have made a difference, you know.  But I never had an opportunity to do anything like that, you know.  So, I never had a mentor, you know, or anything.  So I was just--I was just moving along in the right direction, sort of that kind of thing, you know, with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Were there any other students that were notable when you were--you know, that you think we might know about now, were there at [John] Marshall High School [Chicago, Illinois] in 19--in the 19--I guess, '60 [1960], '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.  In St. Louis [Missouri; Frank Soldan Schoo], you know, there might be some but I don't know of anyone.  But I guess what I got out of there was just a, you know, fair education--you know, high school education--but again, most importantly, a sense that, that I, that I could aspire to do other things.  I had no idea what it would--what they would be necessarily, but I think--you know I was--I think I was a bit of a dreamer, you know.  And, of course, with my experience back then and everything I felt--my aspirations, whatever they might have been, were influenced by race also.  I mean, I knew that there were areas that I couldn't even begin to think about working in, you know.  I kinda knew what--I thought I knew what my limitations were, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37156
Speaker 1: So did you--when you graduated--now when did you graduate from high school [Frank Solden School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: 1964.
Speaker 1: '64 [1964], okay.  Did you join the [U.S.] Air Force immediately after graduation?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  Again, I had a, a, a sense that I should go to college.  I had a sense that I should do that because this is where positive-minded people were going, you know what I mean.  I had a lot of guys, friends of mine, who went to work in factories, you know, because that's where their fathers worked, you know what I mean, that kind of thing.  And at the time, these were very, very good jobs, you know, as we know.  And this happened all over the country.  I mean, it wasn't anything peculiar to the black community.  And--but then, you know, college--the idea of going to college was sort of planted in my head, and I was a good enough student where I kinda thought that I could do that.  And I think--I don't--back during that time, a lot of the schools back East were giving opportunities--scholarships to black kids all over the country, you know, bringing them in on special programs, you know, things like that.  And I think--I think I'm just sort of recalling, I think I had an opportunity to go to one of those schools.  And I think it might have been even Dartmouth [College, New Hampshire], if I'm not--if I'm not mistaken, that my counselor maybe talked to me about, you know what I mean.  But, I, I had--really didn't have much counseling at that time about college or anything like that, just some, some general counseling.  I think I decided to go to a school up in Minnesota called Bemidji, you know.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-I-M-I-J-I, I believe, Bemidji, Minnesota.  I didn't attend there, but that's what I--
Speaker 1: Oh, you--okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't go there.  I worked three jobs the summer that I graduated from high school because I wanted to make enough money for my tuition and all that.  I remember doing that.  And I got accepted into a couple of schools.  I got accepted to--I do recall what the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] scores were, but I applied to NYU [New York University, New York] and I applied to St. Louis University.  And--
Speaker 1: Did they accept you?
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.  But I still even then, I wanted to go to college but I wasn't, you know, like--and I had a--had a brother (unclear)--I had a brother kinda pushing me, yeah--the one who was right under me, Grover, Jr.  This is what I needed to do; this is what I should do; you should go to college--and I heard a voice, you know.  But anyway, to make a long story short, after all that, all those good intentions and work and all that, I ended up--St. Louis.  I mean, University of Missouri had just opened up a branch in St. Louis, you know.  And I started school there in the fall, and I took a couple of courses there.  And--
Speaker 1: This is in the fall of '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so you took a couple of courses that fall--
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: --and, and worked?
Speaker 2: I would continue to work; I was working.  And I left there, and I went to a junior college in, in the area there.  It was called--I think it was Roosevelt Junior College, which was later named Forest Park Community College.  I never was--I wasn't there as a full-time student, I was just a part-time student there.  As well, I was still working, you know, a regular, you know, eight-hour a day job.
Speaker 1: Then why'd you leave the, the University of Missouri to go to the small--I mean the junior college?  Was the tuition cheaper at a junior college--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that.
Speaker 1: --or was it the work, or?
Speaker 2: It might have been.  I only had two courses, one was a philosophy course, and the other was a course--a French course.  And I really didn't know how to study, you know.  I didn't know how to study, and I--if I had, you know, stayed with it I probably could have, you know, gotten a pretty fair grade out of it, but I dropped out.  And I took those courses only because, you know, they were the only thing left open when I enrolled and--I'm doing this by the seat of my pants just by myself, you know what I mean.
Story_ID: 37157
Speaker 1: Yeah, it doesn't--there's no evidence of counseling here with this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the choices you're making (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in school.
Speaker 2: No, no.  But I found it interesting, you know, reading about the, you know, great philosophers, you know, Descartes and all those folks, you know.  And I still remember a few of the, you know, phrases and, you know, French that I, that I, that I learned, and if I had to--. Again, these were things that I probably would have enjoyed studying, you know, if--had it been different, I should say.  And when I went to the junior college there, I had no idea about what, what I, what I wanted to do.  I took a course in accounting, you know.  Did the whole thing, you know.  Found a penny that was missing and went all the way back through my, you know, calculations there and finds--and find--and found it.  And, and I could always work hard enough to, to, to get a good grade.  I could--nobody would out work me; I'd work hard.  I didn't mind, you know, staying--hanging in, in, in there with a tough assignment, you know.  But, it was during the Vietnam War, and my friends were getting drafted and volunteering in the military.  Then that became sort of like an option, either to volunteer for the military or wait around and get drafted.  So I knew that I wasn't going to school full time, so I would have been drafted because I wasn't going full time.  So, I, I started--one of my friends became--went to the [U.S.] Air Force.  He was talking to me about that.  And, and I went to see a recruiting officer.  And, 'course, they told me I could go in the service there and, and continue my education there and, you know, they say--they, they make it--and they weren't, you know--you know--you know, telling me something wasn't true, you know, but, you know, it--it's--it's a bit more involved than that--then they were--than they made it sound.
Speaker 1: So is this about 1965 (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Sixty-'66 [1966], '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: Vietnam [war] is really starting to heat up then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, that Tet Offensive and all that sort of thing, I believe it happened in '67' [1967]--
Speaker 2: Oh, this was right during the--it wasn't the height of--it was not the height of the anti-war movement but the big buildup of the war.
Story_ID: 37158
Speaker 1: So we were talking about--we were right at the point that you were getting ready to go to the [U.S.] Air Force--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Vietnam [War].
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were getting ready to go into the Air Force, yeah.  I eventually volunteered to go.  The choice being that I could, you know, continue on, you know, going to school part time or wait around to get drafted.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION BY VIDEOGRAPHER):  (Unclear)--would you just start that over again, your statement about volunteering?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Well, I was at a point where military service was--became a factor because of the Vietnam War, you know.  If I was a full-time student, I think, at the time, I could've avoided the draft, at that particular time.  But I was a part-time student so I decided to volunteer for the service.  And, actually, I had some trepidations about volunteering for the military because I thought, "Wow, if I go into the military, supposing I'm out there on the battlefield or something like that, and I have a problem with my knee."  And that was a serious consideration, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think if they could make you (unclear), you wouldn't have to--did you ever think that in those days?
Speaker 2: You mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's the designation where you don't have to serve 'cause something's wrong with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I didn't think that a knee would keep me out of the, you know, the service.  I might have--I could have been wrong, but it, it, it--yeah, it could've kept--oh really, okay.  Well, I, I didn't know that because at the time I, I, I didn't know that.  And there was one other thing that could've kept me out also, and that was the fact that I had extremely poor vision in my right eye.  I had an eye injury when I was a kid.  We lived in a--you know, in a house where we had a, a wooden stove in the kitchen where you'd put wood in, you know, make the fire.  And I think this was at my grandmother's house out in the country.  And I was just--I only have just the vaguest memory of it.  But anyway, I knocked the piece of wood down that was holding the door shut, and when I did that the hot iron door, you know, caught me right there on this side of my face.  And it burned my skin and caused some eye damage there, you know, torn scar tissue of my retina.  So, since I was such a, you know, small kid, I can barely remember it.  And I just compensated for it with my good eye, you know, for the rest of my life.  So when I joined the military--anyway, get back to that--that somehow got past the screeners, and I got into the military.  Well, I was in there for a while, and it turned out that I went through basic training and everything.  And turns out that they had a difficult time giving--fitting me into a job profile, the physical profile that each job must have, you know, each job in the service.  And I asked for a, a discharge, you know, because--for that reason.  And, and low and behold, I was, I was--got a letter from the Surgeon General in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] granting me a discharge for medical reasons.  And I should have never been allowed in the military in the first place.
Story_ID: 37159
Speaker 1: What, at that juncture did they--you might not be ready to answer this already, but did you still get any benefits, as a result of service?
Speaker 2: Well, you get a--you get, you get one month worth of benefit for each month that you're in the military;  that's how it worked then, you know.  So I was in there for maybe nine months--maybe a year.  So I got one year's worth of benefits.  A lot of things happened to me when I was in the service.  I got my knees--I had some surgery on both my knees, you know, so I got that--I got some help there.  As a matter of fact, I was in the hospital when I got the letter that I still have at home now from the Surgeon General because I wanted to leave at that point, you know, the military.  And I met a friend there who introduced me to, you know, books and enjoyment of just reading books, you know, and things like that.  He suggested a few books to me that I read and enjoyed it.  So I--I don't know, it sort of opened up my eyes to all sorts of things, and oh my, you know, learning and a new world out there and an artistic world and a world of writing and read and art, and, and New York City, and, and the theater, you know, things like that.
Speaker 1: What was this friend's name?  What was his name?
Speaker 2: Titus Cross.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Titus Cross.
Speaker 1: T-I-T-U-S?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a guy who had the kind of mind that would just love, you know, words and, you know, stories and things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so I even, you know, would go to the library right there on the base and get books out.
Story_ID: 37160
Speaker 1: So anyway, I was out, and I began to think then, you know.  You know, I'd always sort of had in the back of my mind, you know, that I would--I would kinda like be in the theater, you know.  Like, I would, like, maybe enjoy being an actor, you know, that kind of thing.  And, and I don't know why, maybe it's because television was one of the outlets that I had, you know, as a kid.  And I would like watching the movies--the old movies and all that.  And, and I could--I could see the way people talk, where they lived, and, of course, these were white people, you know what I mean.  But still, I saw people who were doing things that I never did, you know, different stories, you know.  And so, so--the, the world really sort of opened up to me through television when I was a kid coming up.  It was television that opened up the world to me.  And I wanted to--I felt that I had a sense of adventure, and I wanted to experience that.  So when I got out of the--so I sort of had in the back of my mind that I would eventually end up in New York maybe.  That appealed to me.  I had read one of James Baldwin's books there at the time, and a black person in Harlem ['Baldwin's Harlem'] and all that, and I'm--but I'm, I'm feeling drawn to all of that, you know what I'm saying.  It's like finally I'm sort of, you know, being drawn to a place and something that I-- that I feel a, a, a sense of passion about, you know.  So, anyway, there you go.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, what did you do about it?  I mean--
Speaker 1: About that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I got out of the service [U.S. Air Force], went through Memphis [Tennessee] to see my sister, came to Chicago [Illinois] to see my family, and I was going to go from there on to New York, but I had younger brothers and sisters here, and my family lived here.  I was gonna do that, but while I was here--and they really, like, needed my help, you know, my younger brothers on the West Side of Chicago.  And I kinda decided to kinda hang around a while, and kinda help them out, you know--you know, with gang problems, school, you know, that kind of thing.  They were very challenged out there, and I knew that I needed to kinda help them get back on the right track, you know, that kinda thing.  So, I thought I'd stay a while longer to do that.
Story_ID: 37161
Speaker 1: So, so did you--then--is that when you enrolled in school here in [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what happened.
Speaker 1: And how did you choose the kind of school you were gonna enroll in?
Speaker 2: One simple reason, I was destined--I felt destined to go to New York.  And everything about it just appealed to me.  And I decided to just take a course in photography so that I wouldn't go there and become one of those starving artists.  I could at least do something to make a living, you know what I mean, while I was pursuing my, my--at the time, a dream at the time, you know.  It was not an overwhelming thing--I got to be in the theater--it was just that whole thing was drawing me, and I thought, well, I'll take a course.  I've got nine months worth of military, you know, G.I. Bill, and the course was a nine-month course at this school.
Speaker 1: Was that the Ray-Vogue?
Speaker 2: The Ray-Vogue School.
Speaker 1: Now, just to--to just bring anybody watching something (unclear), I guess, that time in the '60s [1960s], a lot of our black artists they were from New York, like Sidney Poitier and [Harry] Belafonte and all of them were--Cicely Tyson; they're all starting to hit television and stuff. (Unclear) Diane Carroll, you know, a number of them were starting to hit, and they had been, like, pioneers of theater way back in the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Black Ensemble Theater, you know and all that.  Yeah, it's true.  And again, you know James Baldwin is a very visible person as a writer, you know.  And this is a new world that's opening up to me, you know.  I never really--I didn't know very much about this at all.  But, so with the nine-month course I was gonna do that.  I got a job with the post office in Chicago prior to school--before school.  I worked at--for the post office for a while.  And I started school there.  And I met a young man--a young brother from Panama.  He started school there also.  He had come in from Panama to go that school.  We met in the elevator, you know, the registration day.
Speaker 1: Who was he?
Speaker 2: Ricardo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ricardo De La Espada.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his mother was a photograph, and he wanted to kinda, you know, do that also, so he enrolled in school there.  But he was a pretty cool guy, and we became fast friends.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1968?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1967 I think--'67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 37162
Speaker 1: Okay, at Ray-Vogue School [Chicago, Illinois]. Well, okay, so did you own a camera at this point, yourself?
Speaker 2: No camera, no newspapers, nothing like that at all.  I didn't even know what the news-'[Chicago] Sun-Times' was or what the 'Chicago Tribune' was.  Never really even read newspapers.
Speaker 1: So, did you read the "Defender" at all?
Speaker 2: No "Defender," no pictures, nothing.  So, but I mean, lots of change--I was living in a, in a time when there were a lot of changes going on, you know, the civil rights--the civil rights revolution at that time, the youth and cultural revolution at that time, you know, so that was in the air, you know.  So, news per se was, was, was buzzing, it's just that I didn't get any--I, I didn't get any of my news from newspapers.  But anyway, I started school, met Ricardo [his friend from Panama].  Through him--he asked me if I could help him to locate his, his relative in Chicago here, someone who his mother told him to look up when he got here.  This person was from Jamaica who had, you know, lived in Panama.  I helped him find this person, Lester McClinton (ph.), on the South Side, and he told me that Lester McClinton had a--was married and had a, a, a stepdaughter, you know.  He described and everything.  And so through him I met this young lady and was struck by her, and she became my wife eventually.  But I, I had to make a decision, you know, whether I was going to continue on with my plans to go to New York or stay here in Chicago because, you know, where my wife--.
Story_ID: 37163
Speaker 1: But, but something else happened at that same time and that was--then this person is a dear friend of mine and someone who had a significant part at this--in my life, and his name was Ernie Cox.  Ernie was a student at that school [Ray-Vogue School, Chicago, Illinois, where Carter was taking a photography course] also.  He started several months after I arrived there, but Ernie also worked for the 'Chicago American' newspaper.
Speaker 2: Was this another African American?
Speaker 1: Yes, Ernie Cox.  He worked for the 'Chicago American'. He used to work in the reference room or the morgue, they call it, where all the pictures would be, which was close to the editorial department and close to the photo studio at the 'Chicago American'.  And so he used to hang around the studio there, and he got to know all the photographers and all that and would even go out with them on assignments and things like that.  So when the 'Chicago American' decided to hire a black photographer, they hired Ernie.  So he needed to go back to school and take a few courses in photography, color photography, things like that.  He was working hard, scrambling, trying to, you know, develop his skills and that's when we met.  And he told me I was a very good student at the school.  I took to photography very quickly and I liked it, and I was a very good student.  And Ernie told me about a job opening at the 'Chicago Tribune'.  So I'm thinking, my God, you know, you know, what's that all about?  I thought when I got a job as a photographer I'd be taking baby pictures and things like that, that's what I thought, you know--just enough to make a little money to, you know, to feed myself.  The idea that I could, you know, would be a, a newspaper photographer, a photojournalist, was never occurred to me because it was something that I had never seen before.  Black people did not do those kinds of jobs, not for a white newspaper.  And, and it was never any--I, I did have an experience in St. Louis [Missouri] once.  I have to tell you this.  I was riding down the street there in St. Louis one day after I got out the military [U.S. Air Force], and, and, and I saw this photographer coming out of the building; turned out to be the 'Post Dispatch'.  And, you know, he had his cameras on and he was rushing and I thought, Wow!  It kinda sparked my imagination.  I thought, well he was going toward a, you know--an interesting assignment, you know.  I saw the cameras and I thought the 'Post Dispatch', and I made the connection.  And that image sort of stuck with me, you know.  I thought that would be an interesting thing to do.  At one time, I had thought about joining the Coast Guard Academy.  At one time I wanted to become an optometrist, you know what I mean.  But anyway, I met Ernie and he said, "You know, you should apply for a job at the 'Tribune,' they looking for a brother," that's what he said.  And, my Lord, I still didn't--I hadn't--I didn't own a camera.  I'd only been using studio cameras at the school.  I didn't own a 35 millimeter camera or anything like that.  I never even took a picture outside of school.  I had a little portfolio-- =photos that I had made in school, you know, products, portraits, things like that.  They set up an interview with me--with the folks at the 'Tribune'.  I went down there and showed them my stuff.  I met with--there were about four editors.  I remember those guys 'cause they were older guys, and this was a very serious time, and, and they wanted to make sure that I wasn't a radical, you know.  They didn't ask me that, they were very nice.  But I'm like four people interviewing me, you know what I mean.  Like, this was a first for them hiring a black photographer, you know.
Story_ID: 37164
Speaker 1: Now what, is this '68 [1968] by now?
Speaker 2: '68 [1968], yeah.
Speaker 1: About what time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: '68 [1968]--'69 [1969].
Speaker 1: About what time of the year--
Speaker 2: I got hired in April of '68 [1968], I think.
Speaker 1: Get out of here!  Well, were you hired [pas the first black photographer at the 'Chicago Tribune'] after--it's a good chance you were hired right after Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: I was, because I was on the West Side--living on the West Side the night that, that he was--you know, the day that he was killed.  I remember--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Was he killed before you were hired or after?
Speaker 2: Yes, after--he was killed before.
Speaker 1: Before you were hired, okay.  Do you think that his killing and the subsequent riots and unrest in the community had anything to do with them hiring you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, not--well, nothing directly related to his life--his killing, you know, his death.  But that whole period of unrest with all of the riots and demonstrations and what was happening on the college campuses and all that, it was a part of the whole thing.  And what had happen is that the other newspapers had started hiring blacks, you know what I mean, in editorial.
Speaker 1: Well, I know some of the reporters have told me that they were hired during the riot period because white reporters couldn't get a story--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --in the black community.
Speaker 2: That's exactly--well, that's what happened.  But, also, it's sort of like when Jackie Robinson [first African American in major league baseball], you know, broke the color line, or, or when that, when that whole thing sort of--when, when it happens like that, or, or, or when the first company here decides to seek out labor markets in, in, in Asia, the rest of the companies are gonna follow because they don't want to be beat out, you know what I mean, in, in, in marketing, you know, and all that.  It's all the same thing in newspaper business, you know, the, the curtain had come--had opened--it come up and it was, you know--you know, there were, there were holdouts, but eventually, you know--just like Arizona out there, with Dr. King--with the birthday, eventually you have to come around.  So the 'Tribune' came around.  They hired me and they were very nice people, you know what I mean.  They were very gracious, you know, to me.  And they interviewed me and everything.  They looked at my little pictures, you know what I mean, that I had.  They must have seen potential there.
Story_ID: 37165
Speaker 1: Were you the first [black photographer at the 'Chicago Tribune']?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The first and only the third person at the time working--there were only three of us working in the whole editorial department--one writer--
Speaker 1: Who, who--
Speaker 2: --two writers.
Speaker 1: Who are the other two in there?
Speaker 2: Joe Boyce [also a HistoryMaker] was the writer, and I don't know if you've ever talked to Joe Boyce, but you might wanna look him up.  Joe was a--worked for--in the communications department at the police department, and he was a police officer, put it that way.  And he met one of the reporters or editors during some type of demonstration, and he told the editor, you know, "I mean, I sure would like to work as a reporter," you know what I mean.  And they remembered him as a police officer--came to work for the 'Tribune' as a reporter, went on to become bureau chief for 'Time' magazine in San Francisco [California] and Atlanta [Georgia], you know.  Great reporter, Joe Boyce; check him out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was one.  And another sister who went on to work for NBC as a writer--her name escapes me at the moment.  But it was just the three of us.
Story_ID: 37166
Speaker 1: So, I got the job with the '[Chicago] Tribune' [in 1968].
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: And for the first time I got a camera.
Speaker 2: So was it a pretty decent salary?  Were you impressed with the--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --money they were paying you?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  Because when I was going to school [Ray-Vogue School; for a photography course], I, I didn't have a job, you know, and I was just barely making it.  And I was, again, hungry. And this new girlfriend of mine was helping me.  I didn't like taking things from her, but she would put a little something in my pocket, you know, while I wasn't looking, you know, that type of thing, you know, or--you know, but--or, you know, when I'd come to visit she'd always make sure that she would feed me.  But I got a job working there and made more money than I'd ever made, you know, before.  And so things looked up and I sort of--again, between this young lady who I had just met and been smitten by and this new opportunity with the newspaper, you know, it made me readjust my plans for the future.
Speaker 2: This was a big time in life--
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.
Speaker 2: --to say the least.
Speaker 1: It was very much so.
Story_ID: 37167
Speaker 1: But just a question about the riots [following Dr. Martin Luther King's assassination], to go back to it. You were living on the West Side when the riots broke out, right?
Speaker 2: The day that the riots took place, I was visiting a brother of mine, Ernest, at the Cook County Hospital.  And we looked out the window there and could see smoke, you know, billowing up out there, and turns out that the riot had started.  This was in the late after--in the early evening.  And that was the night of the riots, and that was a long night, long night.  Went back home because I had younger brothers and a little sister, but she wouldn't be involved in anything like that, but my younger brothers, you know, I had to make sure that they would be safe, you know.
Speaker 1: Were they intending to go out and join in--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the destruction?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and they were, you know.  It was a--it was a night--I remember the, the fires and the, you know, the gunshots and all of that.  I wasn't working for the paper or anything at that time.  So yes, I remember all of that.  I remember that night clearly, yeah.
Story_ID: 37168
Speaker 1: All right, well, tell me, what was your first assignment with the '[Chicago] Tribune?'  Do you remember the first assignment you had?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what happened, since I had no experience in, in journalism--in photojournalism, I wasn't sent directly, you know, out on assignments on the street, as we would say.  I worked inside for about six months, 'cause I had to learn so much, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I'll say this, the white photographers and lab technicians were very kind to me as a whole, they were.  There were a few exceptions but nothing significant.  Most, most of the guys were very helpful and taught me a lot.  I would go out with them on assignments, you know, that type of thing, taught me how to make prints, how to work in a darkroom.  When I worked in the darkroom I could see--the negatives would come in.  The photographers would come in and they would tell me, you know, why they made this picture, where they made this, and where they stood, how they lit it.  And the lab people would show me how to develop prints, you know, and all that kind of stuff.  So they were very nice to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and I never felt uncomfortable there in the department.  And it was about six months later when I first got my equipment, and I started to go out on my--by myself as a photographer, solo, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was just minor stuff, you know, a little stuff here, a little stuff--the little small things, you know, and we sort of escalated from there.
Speaker 1: Were you shooting, like, human interest stuff at first, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --things like that.
Speaker 2: You know, just something--what they call no-brainers, you know what I mean, that kind of thing.  And eventually, I mean, you know, it, it was next man up, is what we used to call it.  You know, you're, you're in rotation, and I took my rotation on the--on the shift.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see, so you were working for the 'Tribune' when they--when Fred Hampton's house was shot up on the West Side apartment.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: Did you take part in the coverage of that at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think that happened--no.  Either I was off work that day or most--after it was all over with, you know, it mostly occurred--the news surrounding it took place during the day, and I worked in the evening--nights at that point, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't, I didn't cover anything.  You know, and then from that point on, I, I worked in a regular rotation and just took my turn.  What I did do was take some initiative myself, and I started to develop story ideas, and I would submit them to the picture editor.  And they began to use my, my ideas and my photographs.  Many--a lot of my--I did on my days off, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37169
Speaker 1: All right, so you're starting to suggest topics to your editor [at the 'Chicago Tribune'].
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: What kind of ideas did you have?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say my concerns at the time were, you know, social conditions that we were experiencing as a nation.  And, of course, the, the social environment that I came out of, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] in particular.  And the drug culture was a huge problem out there even then, you know, with the people I knew, you know, relatives who had gotten caught up in it, destroyed by it and all that.
Speaker 1: And what was the nature of the drug problem then, was it heroin?
Speaker 2: Heroin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: The, the heroin addiction, and the young men wanted to be pimps at the time.  You know, this was when those movies were popular, blaxsploitation [film genre] and all that.  So that was--that was very--a popular pursuit and ambition for a lot of young men, pimping and, and--and drug abuse was.  And I could see how it was destroying the lives of the young people.  So I thought, well, you know I'll take some photographs and I'll sort of, at least, bring this to the attention of our readers, you know.  And I had no experience in, you know--what it meant to, to, to document a thing, you know.  So I basically constructed the photographs, you know what I mean--illustrated it more than I did document it, you know what I mean.  They were illustrations, but I did it in a--at the time, at least the newspaper thought so--thought that it was artfully done and, and, and well enough conceived that they decided to--and they were impressed enough that they wanted to run the pictures in the paper.  And they decided to run them as an editorial, which was a first for the newspaper.  They ran--they, they, they took all of the written material off the editorial page that day and just ran the photographs as the editorial. And, you know, subsequently, you know, the story was picked up by other newspapers and was featured in 'Editor & Publisher' magazine and all that.  And, so that sort of began the type of, of work that I would continue to do for the newspaper.
Story_ID: 37170
Speaker 1: One question occurs to me is, like, how did that affect--were you still living on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] at that time?
Speaker 2: I think maybe I might have been still living there at that particular time, yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wondered how you approach shooting a drug--did they know they were being photographed [for an illustrative piece in the 'Chicago Tribune'], the drug dealers and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: As I said, this was more or less as a--as an illustration as oppose to a document.  I would find--I would ask someone, "Do you know who takes drugs?" you know what I mean, and they would say, "Yeah, you know I can--you know he--this person does."  So they would arrange to--for me to be there when the person did it, you know what I mean, that type of thing.  You know, it was a simple concept.  You know, it was like an illustration of where drugs--illegal abuse would do--would, would, would tell you how, how, you would end up with it and that would be, like, at the cemetery, that type of thing--just, just a--an elementary type--
Speaker 1: Did you get any feedback--what kind of feedback did you get about that from the community--
Speaker 2: Oh, none, none.
Speaker 1: --and we know the 'Tribune' syndicated it, so they--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--been pleased, but did the people in the community say anything about it?
Speaker 2: I had no--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --knowledge of that.  There--that might have been some letters to the editor or some feedback, but I don't recall hearing about it.  No one ever mentioned anything to me.  And now that you mention it, I would have been curious to see what, what, what some of our readers thought of it.  But (laughter) if, if, if there was any negative feedback, it didn't--the editors wouldn't have continued to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --use it.
Speaker 1: It's been said in this community that we live in in Chicago that very few black folks read the 'Tribune'; they read the '[Chicago] Sun-Times'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the '[Chicago] Defender' sometimes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They hardly ever read the 'Tribune'.  So if--you think that people that are in the photos actually saw, saw themselves at any point?
Speaker 2: Yes because I knew most of them.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so they got copies of them, or.
Speaker 2: Yes, they saw them.
Speaker 1: I was wondering about their feedback, what they thought.
Speaker 2: They didn't think anything of it.  You know if you--if you use drugs, you use drugs.  I mean--and I sort of tried to conceal their appearance also.  I said it wasn't--you know, it wouldn't be something that I would do today, but back then, you know, as a novice photographer without any real journalistic background, I, I didn't know how to really do these things.  But when I jumped into this, you know, I jumped into it with both feet, you know what I mean.  You know and I started teaching myself, you know, different things.  But anyway, I did, no feedback.
Story_ID: 37171
Speaker 1: The '[Chicago] Tribune', though--I wouldn't have worked for a newspaper that was racist, you know--that was obviously and blatantly racist.  And I was very quickly learning a lot about newspapers and journalism and everything because I was working, you know, with a lot of interesting people, you know, reporters.  And then the subjects that we, you know, photographed and interviewed, you know, so I was learning a lot.  But the newspaper had sort of shed its more racist identity--the Colonel McCormick and all that, you know, the type of stories that they used to run, you know.  And you remember how they were illustrated or featured in one of Richard Wright's books, you know, how they sort of--the 'Tribune' was highlighted in the book as writing very racist stories about, you know, this young man and they--cops were pursuing, you know what I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: But that image--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, that'd have been the one.  But the 'Tribune' had began to modify its--it remained a conservative paper, I should say, a Republican paper.  But it became more or less of a moderate type of paper with very, you know--it wasn't as irrational as it was before.  It was the type of newspaper that, that, that attempted to be very, very, very fair, you know.  And as you know how the paper started out, you know, as a Republican paper, that championed the election of [President] Abraham Lincoln, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--what I meant by the, the--I guess the custom of black folks reading the '[Chicago] Sun-Times' more, has more to do with the convenience of it and the lightness of the articles.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: More so than, you know--'cause traditionally the 'Tribune' is harder to read.
Speaker 1: The broadsheet--
Speaker 2: Physically and--
Speaker 1: The broadsheet.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And because it's big.
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, I was sitting in on a lot of focus groups, you know, over the years there, and they talked about it, how difficult it was, you know, on the buses, on the, you know, the trains and all that.  But advertisers like it, you know what I mean.  It made money for the 'Tribune' so, you know, we continued to, to stay with it up until just recently when, when the whole newspaper went tabloid now.  But it's just, you know, a cost-saving feature, you know.  It's a cost-saving factor.  But back then that was, that was the case.  And then the 'Sun-Times' had the reputation with the Marshall Field family, you know, its being more liberal.  And perhaps it was, you know what I mean, more Democratic.  They would endorse Democratic candidates, you know, that kind of thing.  The 'Tribune' would endorse Republican candidates, you know--you know, that type of thing.  But, you know, if there's a Republican fair-minded presentation of conservative views--not, you know extreme conservatisms--the 'Tribune' was able to, you know--to do that, you know.  I read the editorial pages you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I knew the writers on the editorial page, you know.
Speaker 2: And even in those days, to be fair, the Republican politicians in Illinois were fairly moderate, like Dirksen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Dirksen, Ogilvie, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Jim Thompson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: They're not really arch conservatives, you know so.
Speaker 1: And as a whole, the 'Tribune' was probably the single most respected, responsible corporate citizen in, in, in Chicago, and it had that status for years, and years, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 37172
Speaker 1: So what was the name of that piece you wrote, that piece that was--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Wow, the name of it--I don't know if it had a name.  The '[Chicago] Tribune' eventually did a reprint of it and they titled it, 'A Man, a Camera, an Idea'.  And I think they were just featuring the fact that--highlighting the fact that they had an African American photographer who was--they did it as a promotional piece, put it that way, yeah.  But I think I have left you some--.
Speaker 1: Okay, now early on, some of your work was featured at a multimedia exhibit depicting the life of blacks in Chicago [Illinois] entitled, 'I Am Somebody'.  So you remember that?
Speaker 2: Ah yeah.  I think the 'Tribune' did something like that.  I think they might have had it out at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago], if I'm not mistaken.  I don't know if I ever even saw that or not, but it was a--the--they had a very good promotional department and they would, you know, you know, feature, you know, photographs like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me if I'm galloping too fast--
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972], you were named the Illinois Press Photographers Association's 'Photographer of the Year' in '72 [1972].  Now, what, what--this is a short period of time now.  We're moving pretty--from '68 [1968] to '72 [1972], that's just four years.  And you had never been a photojournalist, and all of a sudden you're the 'Photographer of the Year'.
Speaker 2: Right, actually, it was more like two years because I didn't really start work until six months after I, you know--so I'd say it was about two years--right after I first got a 35 millimeter camera (unclear).  I liked photography.  I took to it quickly.  I knew how to communicate with the camera, you know.  And, and I, and I learned how to dramatize my photographs, you know.  Yeah, shoot with drama, you know, and with some passion, some emphasis, you know, that type of thing, where I, I had learned how to give my photographs impact, you know what I mean.  And I started--you know I read a lot.  I looked at what great photographs looked like, you know, that kind of thing.  And I felt like I had something to say, you know.  I felt like, like with the drug abuse piece, you know, there were lots of things that I wanted to say about, you know, housing and, you know, just all kinds of social issues.  And I just, you know, jumped right into it, and I began to associate myself with some very good photographers who, who kinda, you know, helped show me, you know, what a good photograph should look like.
Speaker 1: Okay, well obviously they appreciate it because this award is from the Illinois Press Photographers Association.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: For photographers to choose you as 'Photographer of the Year', you must be doing something.
Speaker 2: I think I got a--I received another one for the next year also, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is pretty impressive stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37173
Speaker 1: So now, I think it was like in--this is '74 [1974].  Now tell me if I'm skipping past anything, but at age twenty-eight, in '74 [1974], you traveled for nearly three months in the summer and fall more than 10,000 miles across Africa and India to report on famine and the famine that threatened the lives of half a billion people ['The Faces of Hunger'].  The Sahel drought [in Africa] was going on--
Speaker 2: Parts of India where there was a drought and--. So, yes, I traveled with a colleague, Bill [William] Mullen, a reporter and writer of the paper ['Chicago Tribune'], good friend.  And we, we traveled together there, and it was quite an adventure.
Speaker 1: Now you had--had you ever been out of the country before?
Speaker 2: At this point, no, not at that point, not at that point.  I don't even think I had made my obligatory trip to the Bahamas.  No, that was my first time.  But I was, you know, ready, ready for that type of assignment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there one experience that stands out on this trip?  I mean, that really--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you, I was gone for three months, as you pointed out there, and we did a lot of traveling in a lot of countries and--in pursuit of the story, you know, which was to, in my case, photograph this--the drought and famine and starvation, you know, and that was my main focus.  When I say it was an adventure, I mean, it was like one continuous interesting experience after another over a period of three months, you know--everything from, you know, being in the most exotic places you could imagine, you know, times of the, you know, and bad weather and, you know.  I remember one night, oh my God, I didn't know what had happened to me.  I had gotten, I guess--as it turned out--I don't know whether it was some type of insect bite or something, but my knee--my leg, you know, swelled up really bad, big.  And there was no doctor around.  We were traveling in a Land Rover, an old Land Rover.  We had hired a, a Dutch voyager, a young man who had just finished law school.  And he just took off with his girlfriend, and they were traveling all over Africa in a Land Rover hiring themselves out, you know--you know, just as an adventure. We hired them, took us around, and they were taking us around.  We were out in the middle of Cameroon [Africa] somewhere.  And--dark and everything, and my leg is swelling up, you know, and we had to drive all night, you know, and--you know--you know and folks trying to tell us where the, the nearest clinic was.  And we finally found someone to help me with my knee and for the rest of the night there, for my leg, you know.  We had no place to stay, and we had to sleep in the Land Rover.  And I'll tell you, you talk about a swarm of mosquitoes, you couldn't even breathe because they were so thick, you know.  You had to put something over--and it was so hot--it was excruciatingly hot.  So all night long, you know, with mosquitoes you could--that you couldn't escape.  You're just getting--you know, being eaten up like that.  You know it's just unbelievable.  So there were similar types of experiences like that throughout the course of the trip.  So that's sort of how it was.  It was not an easy trip, you know, roads being washed out, you know.  You're stuck in the middle of a--of a--of a washed out area there, with water up to, you know, the axle there, and you can't move anywhere.  There you are.  We had to spend the night there, you know, that type of thing.  Lots of experiences like that, you know.  And, of course, for me being back in Africa--or being in Africa, the land of my ancestors, was--was a--was an experience that I won't forget either, you know.
Story_ID: 37174
Speaker 1: Did you make any connections there [on Carter's assignment to Africa in 1974] that, that would last, or?
Speaker 2: Well, it's been such a long time now, whatever initial contacts I've had there, sort of faded over the years, you know.  There were folks who you'd write, keep in touch with--you know, that kind of thing--interpreters, drivers, folks you met on the way, you know, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Did people in Africa remind you of people here?
Speaker 2: Sometimes, yeah, oh yeah.  My [maternal] grandmother is a person who I, I saw a lot, Agnes-Agatha [Collins].  I always knew her as "Big Mama," so I--but, yeah.  Because she was like a lot of the people I would see in South Carolina, you know, folks who had had no mixing, you know, with any other race.  So you would see more of a pure-blooded African, at least they appear to be that way, you know, with the features, the complexion, you know, and all of that.  So I saw a lot of that there.  So her, she was sort of like that, you know.  And my grandfather [Dave Collins], on the other hand, was a little short guy, you know, with--who looked a lot like a Native American, you know what I mean.  And--and my--and my family is sort my own--my, my siblings and I are sort of like that also, we have those sort of two types of features.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even the twins.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 37175
Speaker 1: So now, I guess this occurred when you got back [from assignment in India and Africa in 1974] is when you got together with the other photographers that worked for these major papers for this--the art exhibit at the South Side Community Art Center.  In '74 [1974], is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the time for 'Through the Eyes of Blackness'?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I think that took place before I went on the trip.
Speaker 1: Before you went?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That took place before.
Speaker 1: This is something that was--who--which one of you--it's Howard Simmons, Bob Black, John White, and yourself. Who organized this?  Who initially called you all together?
Speaker 2: I think Howard probably organized that.  Yeah, he probably organized that.  We were colleagues.  We were friends.  We were young, and since there were, like, only the four of us--and actually there were five of us because Ernie Cox worked for the '[Chicago] Tribune', but somehow he never was a part of that little group there.  He was a friend of ours, but he never was a part of that, that little foursome there.  But I would organize it, and it was his concept, and we put our photographs together there and just, you know--and we worked very hard to put the show on.  Worked all night, you know, and did everything.  And Bob would get it all printed up and everything.  And, you know, it was a very--it was a great day, you know, when that happened, you know.  It was just another exhibit.  I mean, it wasn't anything particularly special about the exhibit.  It was a good exhibit by a group of good photographers, you know, that type of thing, but a lot of typical kind of photographs you'd see at a black exhibit, you know what I mean.  So not [unclear] anything particularly outstanding, it was just good, solid photographs, you know, that illustrated the, the lives of black people that also featured black subjects, you know--just good pictures, you know, that type of thing.  But it was a--so it was good pictures, I'd say, maybe exceptional photographs.  But it was a great turnout.  Lots of folks came to see it, you know.  We had a great time, you know.
Speaker 1: What pieces did you have in it?  Do you remember exactly?
Speaker 2: I had probably, probably some of the, the, the layout of the drug abuse thing; I probably had that.  I'd done so many photographs about social issues.  And that's one thing about my work over the years, it's just there's a seriousness about it.  My photographs, you know, reflect a seriousness that I have about these issues and that seems to dominate my, my, my work.  So I had, you know, pictures that--you know, I don't have any, like, more feature-ish type photographs, you know.  Most of my photographs sorta deal with sort of cutting-edge type of issues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That just happened to be how I drifted, you know, into it.
Speaker 1: Now this is--is this your first, like, fine arts exhibit and such?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37176
Speaker 1: At this point, were you starting to become aware of people like Chester Higgins and Gordon Parks and Roy DeCarava and some of the other--Roy Lewis--some of the other black photographers in our country--
Speaker 2: I knew Roy Lewis.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Bobby Sengstacke here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, well, I was aware of all of those folks, you know what I mean.  'Coz we're about--. Since I already, like, had my own vision of what I wanted to photograph, I kinda--kinda of lose sight--lost sight of those individuals, no more than the fact that I respected them all, you know, and appreciated their work, you know, very much, and would often see work that they've done and say, "Boy, I wish I'd made that picture," you know what I mean, that type of thing.  But I had enough focus in myself to pursue my own--I had developed what you would call my own voice, you know, and I wanted to say certain things, you know.  But I was very much aware of these photographs.  Of course, they were, like--except for people like Roy DeCarava, you know, and a few others you mentioned, you know, most of these other photographers were coming along just as I was at the time, you know what I mean.  But I think Roy DeCarava sorta--for me, he is someone who I feel was, was an exceptional talent and a--just an exceptional talent.  I'll leave it like that--a poet, you know what I mean, an inspirational photographer.
Speaker 1: I know for me, the first time I found out about Jamie [James] Vander Zee is that 1974--there--the exhibit--
Speaker 2: Yes, right, oh my.
Speaker 1: --in Harlem [New York], and for the first time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that talent--just a creative person.  Now he was a creative person.  I think someone like DeCarava, who was more like a--was a documentary photographer really, but who had the ability to see and shoot, to see and shoot, to see something and shoot it, to see light, see form.  But Vander Zee, he created, you know--you're a pro photographer, you create a situation, you know what I mean--you bring it together, you light it, you create it and--
Speaker 1: In the studio--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pretty much.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, and a genius at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolute genius--just loved it.
Story_ID: 37177
Speaker 1: Now what were you shooting with in those days and what kind of equipment and what kind of film?
Speaker 2: Nikon cameras.  Now, I have never--Tri-X film, you know.  That was my mainstay, you know--graded at 800, so all my photographs--I look back on them now--they're grainy and everything, you know.  But that's what we did.  And, of course, shooting for a newspaper you don't worry about the grain so much, you know, you--because, you know, the quality of the paper.  But for exhibitions now, you know, they, they, they stand out so I have to make sure that I photograph-I--you know, I print them on paper that will sort of help compensate for that.  But I--I've never been a, a gadgeteer.  I--if I get a camera that worked for me I don't wanna give it up, you know what I me--I don't care what kind of a--new, new cameras come out, or advances--I don't care about that, you know what I mean.  I just want a camera that'll capture the image for me, you know.  So it's always difficult for me to give up what I've gotten use to and learn something else, you know.
Story_ID: 37178
Speaker 1: Okay, now, 1975--let's see--they decide--the 'Faces of Hunger' [Carter's photojournalism] appears in the paper and you win a Pulitzer Prize, how big is that for you, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh huge.  And let me say this while I'm thinking about it.  I won the Pulitzer Prize.  I shared the award with Bill [William] Mullen; we shared the award.  Actually, the award was for international reporting, it wasn't for photography per se.  And I shared it with--our work was submitted as a package, the way it was presented in the newspaper, although I didn't know that until the award came out.  I thought my photographs had been presented separately in the class of photography--photojournalism.  But, I'm very happy, of course, with the outcome, and it was huge.  But, actually, my life and my work had been on the ascendency for such a long time until this was just another st--you know what I mean--elevated experience, you know, you know, another awesome experience.
Speaker 1: Well, then again in '76 [1976], you get another award for 'Faces of Hunger' from the World Press--you would win the World Press Photo Contest in Amsterdam [Holland].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I did, and that was a prize that I really personally enjoyed receiving.  It was one that I take a little pride in, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think you can take a little pride in that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And that one--that was quite an experience.
Speaker 1: And we have the Overseas Press Club of America Award the same year, at thirty years old.
Story_ID: 37179
Speaker 1: So you all worked on another story in '76 [1976], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was that?
Speaker 2: That was the year of the bicentennial. And yeah, editors asked us to travel around the country and do--and re--, and, and, and do stories on Native Americans just to kind of give our readers a little insight into the state of Native Americans at that particular time in the country. That was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did that take you?
Speaker 2: From Bellingham, Washington, you know, on the West Coast to Pennsylvania--probably Far East on the West Coast--on the East Coast--all over the country.  You know in the Southwest Side they're quite a bit, you know, Navajo Nation out there--one of the largest, you know, Native American, you know, communities in the country.  Just all over, you know--all over the country.  We did that for about three months.  And it was, again, an interesting way to see the country and to meet--do things that I never would have done otherwise, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37180
Speaker 1: You continued to shoot and make waves.  In 1992, though, 'Slim's Table' [book by Mitchell Duneier] is published.  Now tell us about 'Slim's Table'.  I don't wanna skip over anything, so if I've skipped too fast (unclear), you know.
Speaker 2: No, no you have not--you skipped over a period in my life that was, was, was a period that--where--make some--you know I had made some drastic changes in my life, but--
Speaker 1: What happened, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I was divorced in that period of time and I had--and I probably--I had to learn a lot more about what it means to be a human being, you know what I mean.  And I disper--I, I pursued a spiritual dimension to my life.  It gave it, you know, some substance--more substance and meaning to me, you know what I mean, that type of thing.  And, and during that period I really didn't enter contests that much, solely because, again, it was an emotional period and, and I was struggling with a lot of things during that time and, and I eventually, by the grace of God, came out of it.  And--just normal things that, that happen to people when they go through that particular type of experience, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you joined a--did you join a church or what?
Speaker 2: Well, I joined the Universal Church, you know what I mean.  And I became a Christian, you know what I mean.  But it wasn't any particular church.  It wasn't any particular, you know--just, you know, that good ole' tie, you know--conditioning, you know what I mean--just personal, personal encounter with God and within myself, you know.  And I--it was a life-changing--it, it made me complete as a human being, I should put it that way, you know, you know--just the (unclear) of my understanding about many things, you know (unclear), so--But it takes sometimes valleys like that before you are forced to learn things you wouldn't have in the normal course of life, you know.  At least that's what happened with me.  But I, you know, came through that period.
Story_ID: 37181
Speaker 1: And I met a young man who was a doctoral student at the University of Chicago, Mitchell Duneier.  And he was pursuing his dissertation on a subject matter that he wanted me to help illustrate with some photographs because 'University of Chicago Press' was going to publish the work eventually in a book.  And so, basically, what I did was just photograph chapter headings--chapter openings for his, you know, book.  But I met him, you know.  He turned out to be, you know, a very good, close friend.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Mitch Duneier.
Speaker 2: Now the book's about the very popular restaurant on the Southside of Chicago [Illinois] in Hyde Park, which is-and it's populated a lot by black men.  And then, even though it's in Hyde Park, which is more of an integrated enclave of the University of Chicago where you don't necessarily find a restaurant populated by black men.  And the restaurant is called--we call it "Valois"--Valois.  What is this really called?
Speaker 1: Well, I call it Valois.  Of course, it's pronounced-it's correct pronunciation of it is, of course, Valois.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: But there is a hotel--I think it's on Harper Street, maybe in the 5300 block on Harper Street.  I don't remember the name of it, but it's a residential hotel where a lot of black men live.  And I think it's from there--that hotel where a lot of black men come from, you know, who patronize Valois.  It has good food, you know--reasonably priced--good atmosphere there, and not only does it attract, you know, this particular clientele but people from all over the, the, the--Chicago go there and a lot of folks from the University of Chicago go there, students, you know, employees, professors, police officers.  Just about anybody you'll find in there.  So it's a diverse, interesting group of people who come there, you know.  As a matter of fact, Spike Lee almost decided to do a television series, yeah.  He came here, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of like it was a place to be, you know, in the city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, just say you wanna go there by yourself--and you know they call it food you can see, you know what I mean.  You see what you want there.  It's just cafeteria food, but it's good and freshly prepared.  And I know, of course, the, the owner there now, you know, so I know he's a good guy--Greek--Spiros (ph.).
Speaker 2: Okay, so 'Slim's Table' now, is Slim a particular person that, that patronizes the place?
Speaker 1: Yes, he did.  He's passed away now, but he and a--and a group of his close friends who dined together there maybe two or three times a day, you know, they would meet there, you know, and--of course, this is where my friend Mitch Duneier, who wrote the book, first took notice of them.  And as a sociologist, he's constantly analyzing situations like, like that and where people congregate and live and socialize.  And he observed something with these individuals that he thought was sociologically significant.  The fact that--I guess the thesis of the book basically is that these were single men by and large, who were not particularly educated people, but they were just good, solid individuals who--and respectful--respectable gentlemen.  And they were sort of like an overlooked class of people in, in, in--perhaps in society and he, with his keen insight, decided to sort of explore this type of individual.  And that's the thesis of the book.  And Slim was in it, but it's 'Slim's Table', you know, and the folks that could get together at his table, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 37182
Speaker 1: You worked on the coverage of the, the church burnings in the South too with Jan Crawford, right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Black churches are being burned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, I remember, clearly.  I mean, I spent the whole summer down South.  You know it's hot down there and--working with a fantastic person, Jan Crawford Greenburg.  You know she's a Southerner and I was too.  She was from Alabama, so we had some interesting rec--recollections about our childhoods in the South and all that.  And our assignments took us to Alabama and near her hometown.  I met her parents, you know, and all that.  And we had one byline from my hometown, Indianola [Mississippi].  We did a story there about catfish farming or about--no, it was about this one particular person who I knew who had retired and had gone back down there to teach school.  He went to--to teach elementary school down there, you know.  I guess that's a way of giving back.  So we did our little byline from down there.  There's a few other stories from around there.  But yeah, that was a--we explored that particular story in-depth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, were you surprised to the extent of what was going on there when you went?
Speaker 2: Actually, I had various opinions.  And I hadn't been down there really in years, and I was really--one of the first things that I was struck by was the fact that the relationship that whites and blacks had down there was much friendlier than I recall as a child.  They didn't feel this hostility in the air, you know, and all of that.
Speaker 1: When you were a child a black man couldn't ride around with a white woman.
Speaker 2: That wouldn't be possible.
Speaker 1: That would be (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that alone.  And of course, you know, we practically work everywhere together.  And I think a lot of people might have even thought that we were married, you know.  I saw things like, you know, black people working on certain jobs and in certain positions and on work crews and, you know, supervising white people and all that.  And I had never seen anything like that down South before, and so I got a--a good surprise there.  I guess, really, when, when in, in, in the story itself we didn't, we didn't reveal anything dire about the, the, you know, the relate--the conditions down there for black people, you know.  These might have been a few isolated incidents, you know, as far as the church fires and all that.  Some of them were just accidents in some cases.  So we didn't prove anything one way or another, you know.  There had been a few cases where something like this might have happened, but there was no real proven rash of these things or this taking place like a phenomenon, you know, around the South.  So we expanded the story basically to just update--give an update of, of, of just a general condition of race relations in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37183
Speaker 1: Now in 2000, you and [Mitchell] Duneier published another book called 'Sidewalk'.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So tell us about 'Sidewalk'.
Speaker 2: Duneier, who was a law student also at the time, and he was a student at NYU [New York University].  And in that area of Greenwich Village, down there in Lower Manhattan, you would see these men--you've seen these guys who sell books on the sidewalks down there.  Well, there was a--there was a C (ph.) Ordinance that made that possible for people to sell printed material as a First Amendment right--print material on the streets there without, you know, being taxed.  They made it a First Amendment issue.  So he would see these guys, you know, all the time there, and again, again.  He's just is a keen observer of human nature.   And as a--with the eye of a sociologist, he began to observe them, talk with them, and felt that he should do some research on them.  And he started, you know, the research and discovered more and more about them and how, how they came to work down there, how they got their books, you know, and magazines, the kind of lifestyle that they, that they live.  Many of them were drug abusers at the time and continued to do that type of work.  And this type of work gave them--provided them the income that they needed to supply their--you know, their drug habits and everything without being a burden on society--without resorting to violence and stealing, you know, robbing people and things like that.  So the story had a lot of rich components to it.  So he had been working on it and he, you know, met some really interesting characters and then sort--then sort of developed along those lines.  And there's a type of journ--sociology called participatory something or other where he has to participate as a researcher.  So he was on the streets with them, you know, and all that for periods of--periods of time.  And he began to talk to me about it when we were doing 'Sidewalk' I think--no, not 'Sidewalk'--but Valois [restaurant in Chicago, Illinois, where Dunieier's other book 'Slim's Table' was based].  Right after that he began to tell me about it.  And so I went there to see for myself and meet some of the guys.  And I hadn't spent a whole lot of time in New York before, so it was--you know, it was quite an experience especially down in, you know, the Village down there (unclear)--oh, the pace, you know, and everything.  But--and I would go there for long weekends and take a little vacation time here and there.  And over a period of a few years, you know, we finished the book--he finished the book and I, you know, supplied him with the photos that I had made.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 37184
Speaker 1: Now this is a--of all the, the work that you've done, do you have a favorite photograph or, or a favorite series?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what's happening right now--I really can't say that I have a favorite photograph.  There's a type of photograph that I have made over the years, from the time I first started taking pictures, and I think I'm drawn to this type of imagery.  I don't know.  I feel, like, symbiotic with this.  I can really empathize with people, you know, and I feel their suffering, you know.  And I've--I have a sense of compassion when I photograph them.  And I have a lot of photographs like that, you know, in, in, in my portfolio.  But I'll tell you what I'm--what I'm doing right now, I'm going back over a lot of my negatives and sort of combing through them because what happens is that in the newspaper a lot of stories don't even get published, you know.  And when they are published a lot of times you might have taken twenty rolls of film for just one picture being used in the paper, so you have all these other images.  And there are photographs that I made along the way that I forgot all about, you know, making maybe a snapshot here or there.  What I'm discovering is images that I had never even seen before I don't re--don't even remember making.  And if I'd looked at them, I wouldn't have--you couldn't have told me that I made the picture, you know what I mean.  So I'm finding a lot of those pictures, and that's what I'm doing now.  I found one recently of a picture that I made in, in Niger in Niamey, the capital there.  And they have a bridge that spans the Niger River, and it's called the John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge.  And--beautiful bridge--beautiful river, and from my hotel I can see the river, beautiful sunset and all that.  And I, I had probably nothing to do that day when I was there in Africa, so I made this picture with a--with a wide-angle lens so it reduced, you know, the size of the picture.  And I inverted the, the lens hood.  I put a lens hood from a telephoto lens on it, which gave it a circular appearance.  And I'll tell you, I just love that picture.  So if I could say that if there's a picture that I like more than any of the others that I've made today--as of last week, it's that picture.  I really like it a lot, I do, yeah.
Story_ID: 37185
Speaker 1: Now do you think--how is--do you think that a good photographer, or in your case, you even--I mean, do you see the world differently than other people.  There's all kind of equipment that people can be, but you never get the--you don't get the same kind of pictures out of everybody.  So, so what are you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I might--I'd say this, I might see it the same as some others, but I have developed the skills to know how to capture the image, you know what I mean.  So there are a lot of people who don't take pictures, that I have discovered, who really can, can see something--can see a moment, you know what I mean; that happens a lot.  I think most people are able to do that.  They don't know, though, that you can stand too far from the subject, you know what I mean--that you got to place your subject here, things about lighting, you know what I mean, and all these kind of things.  So if they were to learn all these kinds of things, their photographs would improve immensely.  And so you would have a--see more and more people--but I'd say they're-things like-it's sort of like playing a musical instrument.  And Howard Simmons, a friend of mind, you know, told me about this.  I say, "Well, you know, a lot of people play instruments, I mean you were in the [U.S.] Army band and everything and all that."  He'd say, "Yeah, but some of them play with soul," you know.  And, of course, at the time, we used to use that word back then, "soul," a lot, you know, to mean, I guess, with feeling and with emotion.  So that's the factor I think that would make the biggest difference aside from everything else being equal, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37186
Speaker 1: Now with the--you were saying earlier that you're not a gadgeteer.
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: But what do you think about the digital kind of revolution in photography especially the media?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I like it.  I love digital photography.  I have no problem with it.  Of course, it enables you to do so much.  I'd say the only drawback (unclear; brief interruption)--the only drawback--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: The only drawback with it is that it is so technical that it's difficult to learn the finer points of how to manipulate what goes into making an image--how to manipulate it with the computer components of, of a digital camera.  You know, it's just--it's--in the old days, you know, we, we would say with a photograph--just--it's f/8 and be there [classic rules in photography], you know what I mean.  Basically, it's a simple thing, you know what I mean.  So, you know, ef eight and be there.  With the digital, you know, I mean it's a computer.  And--but it takes quite a bit more to master that than, than most people want to devote their time to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's been a challenge for me, I can tell you that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I have a friend who--well, a person who developed into a friend who sort of teaches me.  I meet with him every week, you know, and--just to learn different things about digital printing, digital photography, you know, that type of thing.  It's a lot to know--so different, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's either that or, or stay at home.
Story_ID: 37187
Speaker 1: Okay, well, all right, are you retired [from his position as a photojournalist at the 'Chicago Tribune'] at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could--if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, it would be.  What I am doing now--and I didn't do it so much when I worked for the newspaper.  I was focused on different things.  But I'm looking at the work of other photographers now, and I think I might have spent too long at the newspapers.  I should have maybe moved on and over to another--you know, maybe become a contract photographer maybe or maybe a magnum photographer or something like that.  That's, that's about the biggest thing that I--that I see.  I--it was very--you know I got tired of, you know, a lot of the--you know I did a lot of traveling and I did a lot of stories that I really enjoyed working on, but the bulk of what I did mostly was general assignment--things that I did on a daily basis.  And yeah, I did my share of, you know, headshots and press conferences and things like that up to the point where I just couldn't do it anymore, you know.
Story_ID: 37188
Speaker 1: One question we always ask is--I'm just gonna ask this now.  And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my major concern is that we are able to empower ourselves more than--will continue to empower ourselves, I'll put it that way.  And I've always felt that the easiest way to do that would be to get, get our people educated.  But we need power.  We're, we're, we're lacking in empowerment and I mean just general empowerment.  We, we need knowledge.  We need to, to learn how to deal with the challenges that we're facing as a people across the board.  And, except for a total spiritual awakening, the only thing that would follow after that would be just to, to, to--an education.  I mean, with the number of kids who are, who are dropping out of school and who are out in the world without even a high school education, with the job market being--global job situation--the influx of, of a new working--well, class of people who are scooping up a lot of the entry level jobs and the jobs that black people would have ordinarily have, have, have taken is making an impact in our community.  I'm talking about the--basically the illegal immigrant population.  If we don't take advantage of the opportunities that education will provide for us, then I see nothing but, but a lot of continuation and worsening of the situation that we face right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37189
Speaker 1: Now this is a question we always ask too.  Right now when you look back at everything that you've done, the different milestones, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'd say that I hopefully have set a standard of excellence, or the attempt to excel in my life, in my work, in my personal life.  And I think that would probably be the thing that, that I would hope that folks would, would recognize about my life.  I--I've always sought to improve my, my, my situation and to try to be as much of a help to others as well and to inspire others as best I can, you know.  I think that might be reflected in the work that I've done in, in journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, inspirational type of attitudes, you know.
Story_ID: 37190
Speaker 1: You've been honored by the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] and you're a member of that organization too as well, as well as something called a new--recent--fairly recent organization called the Chicago Alliance of African American Photographers.  Why is it important for African American photographers to get together?
Speaker 2: African American people need to--have always needed to--we've always needed to band together for strength and for inspiration for community, you know, no matter whether it's photography or anything else.  We--as much as we've been able to integrate ourselves into the larger community, we still are a, a, a community with--who have a--just a history of, of, of coming together as a--as a people for, basically, finding inspiration and, and, and help from one another in, in the process.  So, that's what this organization does for its members, basically, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know they--there was--it was always argued in the '70s [1970s] that black people have their own--there is a black aesthetic or a black way of seeing the world that can--do you agree with that.
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think we can see it in, in, different hard forms.  Of course, you know, the three or four major ones who were in, in music, you know, or the jazz and blues and gospel and, for, for better or worse, hip hop nowadays, the black aesthetic is sort of in that--in that vein.  I guess the word "soul" has been applied to much of what we do as black people, so there's that element--that aesthetic element there and, and, and for whatever--for however you interpret that.  So yes, there's a black aesthetic.  And I think a lot of it has to do with, with the way in which we have experienced suffering and depravation and all these kinds of things that works itself out through our artistic expressions, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37191
Speaker 1: And you actually see the world differently than a lot of photographers--you use your left eye exclusively--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there's damage to your right one, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Does it cause any problems at all or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, not really.  I think I got use to using my left eye.  I've adjusted over a lifetime.  I don't even (laughter) recognize--I don't even notice it.  I might look at you a little cockeyed sometimes like that, that's because I'm focusing with my, my, my good eye.  But aside from that goal or whatever, no.  It's a problem--it, it used to be a problem sometimes with focusing and in advancing film and that kind of thing, and when I was sharing, you know, with someone else, you know, I would often have to move the camera away from my eye and focus like that.  But, you know, with, with the cameras now, you know, with the motor drive and all that, that kind of helps that.  But, it presented a problem, but it's better to have one than none at all, so I make out with what I have.  I thank God for it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37192
Speaker 1: Now can you tell us something about your family.  I know you told us about your marriage and divorce.  You have children, right, or do you?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll say this, I do have two sons [Donjah and Davis Chester] and they're--I'm--I've always tried to instill in them, you know, what I think--the things that would empower them as human beings and help them to develop in ways that they will be able to reach their fullest potential.  And I'm satisfied with the way in which they're coming along right now.  I have six grandchildren, and I, I'm very traditional in the way that I feel about them; there's something special about them.  And that's--and they're--you know, thank God they're growing up strong and healthy as well.  As a matter of fact, last night I was at a graduation.  My oldest granddaughter graduated from high school last night, and she'll be on her way to Jackson State [University] in the fall, you know.  So I try to be a positive influence in all their lives because I, I know that it takes a strong, steady, loving hand to help steer an individual in the right direction in life, and that's what I try to do.
Speaker 1: And did your parents [Mary Collins and Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] get a chance to see you become a successful photographer at all?
Speaker 2: They did, they did.  As I said before, the day that I got my job at the 'Chicago Tribune', I was visiting my father and mother out at their home in Maywood, and my father and I were watching a baseball game together.  And I got a call from the 'Tribune' that they wanted to hire me--become a member of their staff.  So I was very happy about that.  'Course my mother--my mother's a worrier like mothers.  So, you know, whenever I'd be on an assignment or she'd see me on television, she'd always call me and see if I'm okay, or, you know, if there was a demonstration or a disturbance or something, you know, or the weather was bad or if I'm in another country, that kept her little concerned.  But they were very happy, and I think, I think proud as well.
Story_ID: 37193
Speaker 1: Was there anything I haven't asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question.
Speaker 2: Okay, no I won't think of it until after I leave here. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think that for most people the natural course in life is one of growth and maturity.  And I think that's the way that the human being is, is designed, you know, to steadily, you know, grow in wisdom and so forth.  And I'd like to be recognized as someone who was, was--who had matured in, in significant ways in his life and that--if--that I've made a positive contribution to, to the world.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Larry [Crowe; interviewer for The HistoryMakers].  Okay.
Story_ID: 37194
Speaker 1: Just tell us, who's in the picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Even if it's you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  All right, well, this is a picture of me.  This is a police-issued press pass, that's what it is, from the year--from 2001.  And this pass opens a lot of doors for you.  Newspaper--couldn't really operate as a journalist without one, not very effectively.
Speaker 1: That's mom [Mary Collins] and dad [Grover Cleveland Carter, Sr.] in their later years.  They were living in Oak Park--Maywood, Illinois, there at the time--and two wonderful human beings.
Speaker 2: That's me a few years ago with my oldest grandson, Nicholas.
Speaker 1: And, well, that's me giving a little fatherly advice on, on my son's wedding day.  My son is David, and my daughter-in-law is Sonya (ph.).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Well, that's on the steps of the South Side Community Art Center, South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And that's me on, on the far right with a group of my photographer colleagues.  It's a group shot of the Chicago Association of African American Photographers, CAAAP is the name of the organization.  And we started out by publishing a book in the year 2000.
Speaker 2: And that's me, a third from the left, with a group of my closest friends and colleagues, Howard Simmons, John White, myself there, and Bob Black on the right.
Speaker 1: That's my mother and father--my mother Mary, and my father Grover.  And I think that picture was made when they were in Memphis, Tennessee, when they were very young.
Speaker 2: This is 'Slim's Table', a book by this sociologist, Mitchell Duneier.  On that book, I met Mitch during the research on this book.
Speaker 1: You can keep talking.
Speaker 2: And this is 'Sidewalk', another book by Mitchell Duneier.  It's my research on homeless men who sell books on the streets of New York--Mitch, who happens to be a professor at Princeton University now.
Speaker 1: African American studies too.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Great guy.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Well, that's me and one of the lovely people--nuns who was an administrator out at the Rosary College in the western suburbs of Chicago.  My father used to work there as a janitor, and when I won the Pulitzer [prize], I had an exhibit at the school for them.
Speaker 1: And that's me on the far left with the big afro and, and my friend and colleague, Bill [William] Mullen, on the right.  We were in one of the farthest states South in Mexico, in the state of Chiapas and doing some research on the native tribe there, the--what do you call those?  Well, the name escapes me right now--Lacandones was the name of the people.
Speaker 2: That's me with a group of young men in Niger in Niamey, the capital of Niger, during my three-month reporting venture there in Africa.
Speaker 1: The '[Chicago] Tribune' published this.  They reprinted a series of photographs that I had made and they ran as an editorial in the newspaper, and they titled it, the reprint, 'A Man, a Camera, and An idea'.
Speaker 2: This is a cover of a reprint of a series of articles.  There were six articles published in this series, 'Andrea's Dream'.  Mitch Duneier wrote the, the series, and--
Speaker 1: This is an in-house publication called the 'The Little Trib' and the day that Bill Mullen and I won the Pulitzer.  That's the publisher, Stan Cook, on, on, on the right.  They gave us a little impromptu party.
Speaker 2: One of the stories that I worked on had to do with, well, poverty I think it was.  The news-'U.S.News' picked up one of the photographs and used it on their cover.
Speaker 1: When I won the World Press Photo Award in Amsterdam [Holland], they published the news of the award and the competition in, in, in a publication there.  I don't read Dutch, so I don't even know what that means except that I think it's some type of journalist-'The Journalist'--I guess that is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Okay, well, ten years or so ago, the 'Tribune', for one entire year, published--well, documented the death of each child who was murdered in the Chicago area under the age of fourteen, and this, this is at the burial of one of the babies who was murdered.
Speaker 2: This photograph was made on the steps of Goudy Elementary School on the North Side.  Just kids, you know, playing there.  And, of course, obviously, one of them has what is--what is a toy gun, but it--
Speaker 1: Dangerous implication.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, dangerous implications.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Okay, well, what we were attempting to do at Goudy Elementary School was focus on one school to sort of take a look at the challenges that the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] faced.  And there was a, a huge disciplinary problem that, that the school was facing with many of the kids.  And this particular teacher on the right there was visiting the home of one of her students where she was trying to help discipline.
Speaker 1: This is--the lady on the left here was a social worker from Marillac House on the West Side, the social service organization who--it's a non-profit organization who'd go out into the community and, and try to assist low income people.  And she's visiting Carol, I believe this young woman's name was, who--she was trying to encourage there--to, to do something that would help her life.
Speaker 2: This photograph was made in, in the state of Bihar, in India, right after a--their monsoon period.  A lot of the local people there were, were, were starving at the time.
Speaker 1: This photograph was made in, in the Sahel region of Africa, probably in Niger in a refugee camp.  And it's just a picture of a mother comforting her, her child.  And that photograph won the World--well--yeah, the 'World Press Photo Award' as the premier photograph.
Speaker 2: And this photograph was also made at the--at the refugee camp.  And as you can see, many of the people who came into the camp were, were starving.  That was a, a common sight there.
Speaker 1: This picture was made in Calcutta, India.  And a very large percentage of the inhabitants of that city live on the streets of Calcut--Calcutta, and many of them resort to, to begging to--in order to make a living for themselves.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was made in Chiapas from the little town Chamula.  I think the Indians there--people who live there are called Chamulas; they live there.  And one of the native populations that live there they're part of the, the old Mayan people that we all know from history.
Speaker 1: That's it?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: All right gentlemen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
