Story_ID: 665920
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Maurice Cowan [HistoryMaker William "Mo" Cowan], W-I-L-L-I-A-M, M-A-U-R-I-C-E, C-O-W-A-N, but everyone knows me as Mo.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: M-O (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it comes from Maurice, I guess; right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 4, 1969, Yadkinville, Yadkin County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently president and chief executive officer of ML Strategies, LLC, a government relations and business advisory consulting group.  And I'm also of counsel of the law firm Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo [Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo, P.C.].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 20, 2017, '16 [2016], '16 [2016], sorry (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. An--
Speaker 2: Got ahead of myself.
Speaker 1: And, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently sitting in my offices in downtown Boston, Massachusetts.
Story_ID: 665921
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.  Oh, is there a follow up (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah. (Laughter) Well, what is it?
Speaker 2: I would say my favorite food actually is grilled lamb, lamb chops.
Speaker 1: All right.  That may be the first time we've heard that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do, blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cape Cod [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hm, wow, I'll try to think of one that's, that's PG rated or, or G rated.  You know, I would, I would say a phrase that I attribute to my mother [Cynthia Long Cowan], candidly I'm not sure if she ever said it this way but I certainly attribute the sentiment to her, which is, you know, you're better than no one but you can be anyone's equal.
Story_ID: 665922
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: About your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Cowan] side, and we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Cynthia Marie Long Cowan [Cynthia Long Cowan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Cynthia is C-Y-N-T-H-I-A, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, her maiden name, Long, L-O-N-G, and Cowan, C-O-W-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is April 13, 1947, date of birth is Yadkin County [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace them and who were some of the significant people on that side?
Speaker 2: You know, I, my personal memories I can go as far back as my great-grandparents, my mother's grandparents, Brady [Brady Young] and Minnie Young [Minnie Martin Young], whom I had the pleasure of knowing and spending a lot of time with probably into my adolescent years.  My grandpa Brady and Minnie, and Grandma Minnie as we said had a number of children including my maternal grandmother, Rosa Young [Rosa Young Hawkins] who then married into the Long family.  And subsequently after my grandfather passed away before I was born remarried into the Hawkins family.  Grandma Rosa also had two brothers, actually has a sister, Connie, Connie Young [Connie Young Campbell] who is still with us.  And she had at least two brothers, Martin [Martin Young] and I'm embarrassed to say I'm drawing a blank on the second name.  I, on my mother's side of the family my mother had a number of siblings, surviving siblings including her younger sister, Tina [Tina Long Imes], her brother, Larry [Larry Long], Dennis [Dennis Long], and Danny [Danny Long].  She also had her late brothers, Tim [ph.], Charles [Charles Long], and Tommy [ph.].  And she had a sister who died early after childbirth, obviously, whom I did not know.  I have scores of nieces, nephews, cousins, if you will, from that era.  And the, the, the Long family and the Young family is sort of an expansive family in this part of North Carolina so it's quite a few folks, I don't know if that's descriptive or not.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What, what did your family do for a living primarily in Yadkin County?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather, Brady, and great-grandmother, Minnie, lived on a farm, a working farm in Yadkin County which was primarily the produce and the, the livestock there were for personal family use, some was sold to market.  My grandmother, Rosa, was in the medical profession as a nurse's aide and home healthcare worker, she actually may have been a substitute teacher every once in a while as well.  My mother was a seamstress for most of her adult life working in the textile industry in Yadkin County.  That was also true of my aunt Tina for a while.  Most of the family, almost all the family really blue collar, hardworking folks in the local industries in and around Yadkin County, textiles, manufacturing, the tobacco industry.  I don't think any of my relatives prior to my generation were college educated or at least a four year college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: The exception may be my aunt Connie who I know took a number of courses, received a number of certificates through local community colleges and the like.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a local HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], I mean, one close by?
Speaker 2: The closest HBCU is Winston-Salem State University [Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is about twenty minutes away from where I grew up.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  Okay.  So, so, did your family own land that they farmed or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, not, not sort of Iowa type farm land, you know, hundreds and hundreds of acres.  But my great-grandma, great-grandparents owned quite a few acres including some that they in time gave away to or at least transferred to some of their children and, and it's still in the family, I think, some of the land. It's not, it's no longer in use in the fashion that it was but, you know, I always remember spending many, many of my youthful days as a kid running around our great-grandparents' property.  And our parents both worked, my mother in the, in the textile industry and my father, my late father was a machinist for Ingersoll-Rand [Ingersoll-Rand plc] and so during the summers we actually, our summer camp was essentially at our great-grandparents' house and we often also went there after school until our parents were home from work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665923
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Cynthia Long Cowan] say things were like when she grew up in Yadkin County [North Carolina]?  I mean, from what I, what, the research we have, I mean, I don't know, correct me if I'm wrong but black people are not a majority there by any means.
Speaker 2: No, not by any, not by any stretch of the ima- first of all, I mean, Yadkinville [North Carolina] and Yadkin County is a relatively small population, I think, probably on average these days Yadkinville or, is about three thousand people.  So, and within Yadkinville there's a community we call Huntsville [North Carolina].  And the Huntsville community is where I grew up and where most of my family lived and it was sort of a concentration of black people in the Huntsville community.  And that's pretty much where my mom spent almost all of her life, still lives there.  Obviously, my mom born in 1947 grew up in the segregated South, went to segregated schools, including I believe all the way through high school.  And your question, what was it like growing up then?  You know, it's, you know, it was like growing up in a child in a pre-civil, in a pre-civil rights U.S., you know, experiencing, you know, segregation, Jim Crow South.  But it's also interesting to hear she and her contemporaries from the era talk about how yet even among the community, the black community, there was this, it's sort of own, a deep connectivity to each other, a sense of community even though these larger issues were obviously present, bubbling around them.  And so, she talks fondly of her time in high school and with her peers and the other black students, even though, of course, you know, that presents its own formal challenges or presented their own formal challenges.  You know, we talk about the opportunities that were and were not available to her generation during that, coming out of that period.  But, you know, she speaks of it factually and candidly but not bitterly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so, you said she, she finished high school in a black high school basically?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's, that's my best recollection, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: I ask 'cause they're, they're often named after somebody that founded them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know that this one was but I would have to, I could, I'd have to call her and ask her just to confirm that but I don't recall it ever being described by someone's name but I understand the concept but yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, did she, I mean, I, I know church had to be a big deal in--
Speaker 2: Huge.
Speaker 1: --a little--yeah.
Speaker 2: Huge, huge.  Like most black folks growing up certainly in the South my parents and their parents and their parents before them and my siblings and I spent a lot of time in the church.  My church home when I was a kid was Tabernacle United Church of Christ [Yadkinville, North Carolina] which is still there, which is still my mother's church.  It's where my mother was a member, my grandmother [Rosa Young Hawkins], many of my aunts and uncles on that side of the family, great-grandparents [Minnie Martin Young and Brady Young] were members.  So, and that's where I sort of grew up, that was my church home growing up, spending a lot of time there on certainly Sundays and sometimes in the choir and in the youth groups and so forth and so on.  And my mom for as long as I can remember has been a key leader in the church in various positions, and certainly the church was a huge part of her upbringing and, you know, her growth period.
Story_ID: 665924
Speaker 1: What were your mother's [Cynthia Long Cowan] aspirations when she was growing up, did she ever talk about what she wanted to be or what she--
Speaker 2: Yes.  But I, she never talked about 'em, I guess, again the word, the word again is bitterly, you know, as if she missed out on something, right.  And, you know, if there's anyone perhaps bitter about it I think it tends to be, you know, my generation who feel like the, you know, so many talented, bright, some, you know, generation before us just never had the kind of opportunities we had.  But my mom is very creative, very musical.  I sometimes wonder if she'd had an opportunity to attend a school for music or pursue that would that have led her down a different path.  She's deeply faithful, you know, maybe she may have gone into the ministry, maybe into teaching, but she really doesn't talk about sort of the what ifs a lot, you know.  She's more prone to talk about as it were, as it was and just, you know, accept it as historical fact.  You know, and in her era, obviously, it was not uncommon for, you know, young people that age to think about immediately getting out of school, getting married and starting families and that's, that's what she did, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.  Now, so, what did she do for a living, did she have, did she have a chance to, now, she, you were the first generation to go to college but so she finished high school and then what, what did she do after that?
Speaker 2: So, she stayed in the textile industry working for a number of textile companies in Yadkinville [North Carolina] and Yadkin County [North Carolina] for a number of years until the late, I should say the mid-1990s when she had some health problems, some heart problems.  And she really hasn't worked since then and so, sort of forced retirement, so she's living in North Carolina right now, no real vocation but, you know, tending to the things that she cares about including her time with the church [Tabernacle United Church of Christ, Yadkinville, North Carolina] and doing some volunteer service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In terms of her musical talent is she a singer or does she play the piano or what?
Speaker 2: So, she's a singer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She comes from a very musical family.  Her siblings, particularly her brothers, almost all of whom were self-taught musicians, particularly strings, guitar and piano.  Her sister, Tina [Tina Long Imes], is also vocally talented, you know.  They've, they've sung in various iterations of various choirs, mostly in church but also occasionally the brothers would get together and perform sort of popular music.  They just had a family reunion back in August for that side of the family. I wasn't able to attend but I saw some Facebook clips and, you know, the surviving brothers reunited on stage to perform some classic R and B.  So, very musically talented in the Cline [sic. Long] family.  My mother is, I liken my mother's voice at its peak and at its power to, to Mahalia Jackson and I know that's a, that's a high comparison but, well, she is my mom so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, there are gems all around, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 665925
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father now.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He also was named William [William Cowan]. Different middle name, Hall, H-A, double L, last name Cowan, and he was born March 5, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in Yadkinville [North Carolina] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and are there any stories about them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, actually there's been a lot, a lot of effort recently to sort of trace that side of the family, go back a little further, spearheaded by my uncle, my father's brother, my uncle Franklin [Franklin Cowan], who is sort of the family patriarch now.  And that work is ongoing and I'm not as up to date on it as I'd like to be.  It's actually one thing that, you know, I'm not one who is big on regrets but one of my shortcomings that I think is too often reflected in sort of black history is our, you know, a real, a real sense of our own history, our ancestors, and how far we can go back and make those traces but we're working hard to do that, Franklin in particular.  I spent most of my youth living right next door to my paternal grandmother, Thelma [Thelma Hendrix Cowan].  My paternal grandfather passed away again before I was born.  And my grandmother, Thelma, maiden name was Thelma Hendrix grew up in, I believe Surry County [North Carolina], which was an abutting county to Yadkin County [North Carolina].  So, she was ever present in my life as was my maternal grandmother [Rosa Young Hawkins] until she--until both passed away.  My, my father had a number of siblings, multiple brothers and sisters almost all, many of whom lived in the greater Yadkin County area, some of whom moved away, for example, there were periods when Franklin moved to Tennessee, he was in the railroad industry and moved around a little bit.  My uncle Ed [George Cowan], who was the oldest brother, moved to Washington, D.C., as did my, my Aunt Virginia [Virginia Cowan Johnson] and they raised their families in the Washington, D.C. area where I have a number of siblings.  Aunt Virginia's husband, Walter Johnson, is still in the D.C. area.  He, he's in his eighties and drove a cab and did various things for most of his life but and they have a number of kids and my cousins, including Walter, Jr. [Walter Johnson], and Sheila [Sheila Johnson], and Debbie [Deborah Cowan].  And, and Uncle Ed had a number of sons and a daughter, Monica [Monica Cowan], who are still with us.  And it's, it was a very consistent, almost religious effort on that side of the family to have an annual family reunion where people come back to North Carolina for a family reunion.  Uncle Ed was really the spearhead for that, he sort of created that, oh, probably thirty plus years ago.  Originally it was just at my grandmother's place right next door so it was the first time I really began to meet extended family beyond North Carolina, and then discovered there were, I had family in places in North Carolina I had never visited.  So, it's a, an expansive side of the family but, you know, I'm eager to see the work that Uncle Franklin is doing to see how far back we can go to really trace that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, are there stories on that side of the family that go all the way back to slavery or, or--
Speaker 2: You know, you know, I've heard more of those stories I think on my mother's [Cynthia Long Cowan] side of the family, right, particularly from my great-grandparents [Minnie Martin Young and Brady Young] when they were with us because of their parents and the grandparents were, you know, just a generation, some generations away from that.  So, but those stories, it's interesting, it's a great question, Larry [Larry Crowe], those stories aren't shar- have--or at least weren't shared that much with me as I was growing up, to be candid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But now, there are some links to (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, now, I think that's inevitable where we're gonna go, where we're driving toward is to go back as far as we can to the origins of both sides of the family, wherever they take us, inevitably they're gonna take us to that time in our history.  Stories are still fragmented now, still beginning to take shape, still a lot of work to done, to be done, I should say.
Story_ID: 665926
Speaker 1: Yeah, North Carolina was a, like a border state during the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It had slavery but it didn't, like you said there weren't huge plantations and--
Speaker 2: Correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and it wasn't, didn't have the same economic--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --importance as it would have in Mississippi or Louisiana, so.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: The relationship's a little different, I mean, you know, just off the top, but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --one thing that, you know, you haven't mentioned and I saw in the, in the, that happens when you go to school, 'cause I think the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --comes out and buzzes a school.  I mean, so I don't know, did, was there any stories in your family of this long term presence in the Klan there and, and its activities, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, you know, I remember being a child there being just sort of casual references to discussions about the Klan being around, you know, and sort of discussing sort of like this, this eerie specter that was out there and that there were people, I mean, keep in mind, right, I, I had spoke about Huntsville [North Carolina] being sort of this black community within this larger white community.  And sometimes I'd hear family members talk about the Ku Klux Klan as like, almost like this ephemeral just entity that was out there and, you know, uncertainty, or if, if there were some evidence of bias a question would be was the person affiliated with the Klan.  So, I, I heard about the Klan from an early age, didn't always see it, didn't even know what, what it was but there was always this notion, this atmosphere that, you know, anyone you interact with might be, possibly could be somehow affiliated with it, you know, given the secret nature of it.  And--
Speaker 1: And thus the invisible empire--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, I've spoken publicly about a couple of instances that I recall but I, you know, if it was my, if my family were here they would, you'd probably hear more and more specific stories about their own interactions.  You know, I remember, you know, they would occasionally hold a, I wouldn't say a rally but they would be sort of on the main street of Yadkinville [North Carolina] and, you know, in full regalia, passing out literature, as is their constitutional right, I suppose.  And, you know, if you're a child and you don't really understand the full context of it all, it's more curious than anything. Who, you know, who are these people, what is this, that someone would dress up in a costume, hide their face, and pass out literature denouncing other people because of their race, ethnicity, what have you.
Speaker 1: So, is that the nature of the literature they were passing out at the time?
Speaker 2: That's my best recollection, right, you know.  They might have said it was, it was not denouncing anything just expressing pride in sort of a, the white race (background noise) oops, sorry, in the white race.  I think I can self-correct here (laughter).  So, you know, you, you, you know, the (air quotes) idea of the Klan was sort of just part of the conversation, right and--
Speaker 1: So, it was just like a, it was like a undercurrent of intimidation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the, in the--
Speaker 2: Well, an undercurrent, I wouldn't know if I would necessarily say it was intimidation because it wasn't spoken of in the conversations that I was part of as like just this, you know, this odious, insidious, you know, harmful entity.  It was more like, yeah, it exists, you know, there are people out there who, that's how they believe and they hold these biases, this is how they behave, but, you know, not a whole lot you can do about it, don't spend a whole lot of time worrying about it, just know it's out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it wasn't linked to any--
Speaker 2: Acts of violence or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, outrageous acts of violence or lynchings or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, not, not during my time, right, you know.  Obviously, you'd hear older family members and generations talking about, you know, you know, periods, maybe not even, maybe they didn't themselves witness lynchings but, you know, it was, it's a part of the historical fabric and you'd hear about it.  But growing up did I see those things, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 665927
Speaker 1: You'd occasionally hear about and I once witnessed an attempted--or I'll say it was the aftermath of an attempted cross burning but, you know, the newspaper would report on it too, I mean, or the news would report on it, you know, the local news and things like that when there was some sort of activity, when there was a, a march or something like that you'd hear about those things, so.
Speaker 2: And I thought I'd ask because of, you know, when, when people normally hear, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the Ku Klux Klan they think of the, the horrible things that we associate with the Klan.  But a lot of history, I mean, real life history was local and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --they belong to an organization that's linked to that but the local group may not have gotten the nerve or the inclination to do some of those things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, you'd, you'd hear things like, you know, you know, a business owner would develop a reputation for not being particularly friendly to black people or Latino immigrants when they're in town for--'cause, you know, it was a very rural farming community so there were, there were migrant workers, so. And you'd hear that, you know, people were having difficulty with a business owner and, you know, there would be questions, rumors that that business owner might be, might harbor some biases because well, he's, you know, he's really in the Klan.
Speaker 2: So, it was kind of synonymous with being a racist?
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly, exactly.  And, and look there are, you know, keep in mind I was born on the tail end of the, literally at the tail end of the '60s [1960s] and grew up in the early part of the '70s [1970s], most of that period though I'm, you know, I'm a kid, you know, I, my universe is pretty small, literally defined by what my parents [Cynthia Long Cowan and William Cowan] (laughter) and grandparents allowed me to see.  So, you, but you'd hear the conversation, so I wasn't seeing a lot of this as a child.  I do remember like, and I've told this story before, I think that was, I might have been in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] at the time, I think, I remember being on a school bus, you know, the school had these very circuitous long routes to pick up all these kids, it was like one high school.  And I remember driving and we just, we used to drive in this little trailer park community and someone had erected a gigantic cross out of logs and on the, if you will, the crossbar of the cross they had, in smaller wood pieces had constructed, you know, it said KKKK, the emphasis, you know, presumably meaning KKK country, right.  And so, we made a joke out of it that like not only are they racist but they're so stupid they can't spell country but, (laughter) but this was, you know, you're driving in this neighborhood and there it was, right, it's just on, on display.  So, you'd see things like that.  And but having said that, you know, did I ever feel threatened, any real threat by the Klan or those in the Klan?  No.  You know, were there, you know, never heard of any incidents like lynching but, you know, I'd, there was someone I knew in high school who, who was African American, he had dated some white woman from the local area, his car and home was vandalized once it was rumored to be, you know, some, from, you know, from some hate group who were with, trying to send a message, you know.
Story_ID: 665928
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I was asking you about your father and we got into this discussion but he was a machinist; right?
Speaker 2: He was.  Was a machinist, he died when I was sixteen, he was only forty. Died in a car accident, a car accident that was the result of his drunk driving.  My father was a Vietnam War veteran.  This is a little bit of my own amateur psychoanalysis, I think, he brought, brought back a lot of demons from that conflict and they haunted him for a long time and manifested themselves in, particularly in alcoholism which I witnessed a lot as a kid which I think really contributed to what I would say an odd, sort of estrangement from my father, even though up until the day he died, we, he lived in the house, we were, you know, at least by all appearances a, you know, a regular family unit, my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan], my dad, my two sisters [Felicia Cowan and Valerie Cowan] and me.  But he was not a particularly warm and fuzzy guy and could be very distant in the house. And so alcoholism was a, was a struggle for him, for us.
Speaker 1: Did he talk about the war at all?
Speaker 2: No, he never talked about the war, certainly not with me, perhaps with some of his friends and drinking buddies.  The only time sort of [U.S.] military service came up with him, my dad and I used to--probably the way we bonded most was sitting mostly silently in front of a TV watching old TV shows, like 'The Andy Griffith Show' and--
Speaker 1: It's interesting you should mention that 'cause that's a North Carolina based show.
Speaker 2: It is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it is, it is based on Mount Airy [North Carolina] as they would say or Pilot Mountain [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Pilot Mountain, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and or the Gomer Pyle show ['Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.'], things like that, you know, 'Beverly Hillbillies' ['The Beverly Hillbillies'].  And, you know, he'd come home from work every day, late afternoon, he'd sit in the same chair, read the newspaper, turn the TV on, and, you know, we'd watch these same shows, in the same room, not much conversation, if any.  In any event, one day and I can't remember how old I was but I have to admit, you asked me earlier what my favorite color is, right, and I said blue. So you remember that the Gomer Pyle show and it originally was filmed in black and white and at some point they began to film it in color, so, when Gomer and the sergeant and others would be in their dress uniform, their dress blues.  And I remember one day just sort of blurting out, I think, or, or maybe, maybe it wasn't a blurt, maybe, there may have been other people in the room and I, I said something to the effect of, you know, "I wanna, when I get older I wanna go into the, I wanna go into the military but I hope," here's an interesting fact by the way, 'cause I was just about to say, "I hope it doesn't upset dad," who was in the [U.S.] Army, right, that I would go into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] but that actually wouldn't be true.  Do you know for the entirety of my life I don't ever recall an instance where I referred to my father by anything other than his first name?  I actually called him William [William Cowan].  So, I said, "I hope that wouldn't upset William 'cause he's an Army man." And he was in the room, and this is one of those moments where he's reading the newspaper, I have no idea whether he's paying attention to the conversation. And the corner of the newspaper comes down and he peers over and he says, "Over my dead body will you go into the military," and the paper went back up. That was entirety of that.  That's the only (air quotes) conversation I can ever recall us having about military service, his, mine, any other, so.
Speaker 1: There you have his vote on--
Speaker 2: That was his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) his experience, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that was his vote on his experience.
Story_ID: 665929
Speaker 1: And so it was--you know, we were estranged but, you know, I'm like every son, you know, we all silently, secretly, sometimes, plaintively, long for the favor of our father, right.
Speaker 2: And you're the only son?
Speaker 1: I am the only son (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Named after him.
Speaker 1: Named after him.  And so, it pains me to this day that we didn't have what I perceive to be as a close relationship.  And it pains me that he never saw some of the things I've had a chance to do.  You know, wherever he is I hope, you know, he, if, if he were here I'd like to think he'd be proud and we, maybe we'd be closer today but I, I don't know.  But my relationship with my father [William Cowan] worried me greatly, particularly when I was about to become a father myself but I assume, we'll, maybe, we'll talk about that.  But so anyway the alcoholism and it was a challenging relationship with my dad.  My parents had a difficult relationship, my father particularly, actually almost exclusively when he was drinking could be very, very violent and abusive and so I witnessed that as a child. Physical violence against my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] which was painful to watch. As I got older, needing to literally, you know, physically restrain my father.  So, it was not, you know, it was a challenging relationship, challenging relationship.  And one I developed or began to develop a lot of resentment about, particularly resentment of people I felt were sort of his enablers in terms of the drinking.
Speaker 2: So, his friends and other--
Speaker 1: His friends, his--his relatives, his brothers whom I love dearly but they all knew he had a problem and nobody really did anything about it.  And, you know, I remember as a--I don't want this to be like, you know, dumping on my dad day but, you know, it was a part of my experience. I remember once playing football in grade school [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina] and seeing my dad coming to a game just obviously intoxicated and just being embarrassed about the whole situation and, and, you know, just wanting to disappear.  So, you, you know, you experience that a little bit as a kid and I'd go through the house and you'd find the, little, you know, bottles of nips that he would hide around or things like that, you know.  So, so like I tell my kids [Grant Cowan and Miles Cowan] now, you know, if you're not willing to do it in the light of day and in front of other people, then, you know, you shouldn't be doing it or you know you have a problem and you need some help.  So, but I don't wanna give the impression my dad was a bad man, he did some bad things and had some problems.  I think, or at least I'm giving him the benefit of the doubt, he tried to love us and care for us as best he could.  And I would say by the way, you know, he provided for us quite well, worked very hard and I don't ever recall wanting for anything or feeling like we were deprived of anything except sort of, you know, the emotional deprivation and connection.
Speaker 2: Did you bond around sports at all?  I, I know you said you played football and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was not--(laughter) yeah, I did, I played sports but, you know, I don't have memories of my dad really following sports, right, not being a real sports fan.  So, yeah, it wasn't a bonding experience for us.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: My, my mom was much more active and involved in many of my activities and supportive and, you know, providing the support for those activities.
Story_ID: 665930
Speaker 1: So when, or when you consider your parents then, you know, what they looked like, what they were interested in--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you know, their behavior and, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you--it might even be a grandparent (unclear) but I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.  I've sometimes wondered if I was just like a foreign alien just plopped down in the middle of my family.  Look I'm a--listen, I'm a combination of my parents, good, bad, and otherwise.  I'd like to think I take my real sense of compassion and humanity and, and love for my fellow man from my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan].  My mom is a living saint, right.  So, you asked me earlier, you know, did she ever talk about the things she might have done, she really doesn't, right.  But I think, I've often thought about the things she could have done and the way that she sacrificed so much for other people including my sisters [Felicia Cowan and Valerie Cowan] and me.  And there are times I've asked her to, to be more selfish and to think more about herself and tending to her own needs and she can't save or be there for everybody but she tries, and she tries, sometimes to a fault.  I've done it on occasion myself, occasionally still do it, but I think I do it because I think I see how much she gets out of it in terms of her own personal feelings, self-worth, and, and, you know, what her values are.  From my father [William Cowan], I'd like to think I developed my sense, my work ethic.  My father actually was a very--and I didn't realize this until I was a teenager or maybe a preteen. 'Cause again I didn't really, you know, he didn't really say much to--well, my, it turns out my dad was a really funny guy, like a, just a naturally funny guy and I saw it a couple of times or some glimpses of it whenever he was in the presence of other people, just a natural quick wit which some people tell me I have. And so maybe I take that from him, maybe it was, I learned that from him.  I also have some of his bad habits too, you know.  He was prone to go into a, you know, sort of his own bubble and shell and live inside his own head if you will for a while. I've been, I've been known to do that too and it sort of feels like you're freezing other people out but in fact you're just, maybe we call it a coping mechanism or whatever. And I try to manage that a little better.  So, yeah, a little bit, I guess, I'm a combination of them.  I try to focus on the best parts of them that make me who I am but I'd also say I'm probably different from both in a lot of ways and particularly, you know, I think I'm much more comfortable in public spaces than both my parents were.
Story_ID: 665931
Speaker 1: I think I'm also, I think I'm like them in this way or at least I'm a reflection of something they wanted of me or for me which is I am eternally curious and ambitious.  And part of that is because I grew up in a very small town [Huntsville, North Carolina], I never wanted for anything, but we did not have a lot of money and we struggled at times, our parents [Cynthia Long Cowan and William Cowan] sacrificed in a lot of ways my sisters [Felicia Cowan and Valerie Cowan] and I probably didn't realize, maybe, may never fully realize but they always pushed us in their own way, different ways, that we should think about, dream about, strive to not be defined by our current circumstances, and pushed us, my mother in particular, on the idea that school education was gonna be a catalyst for other adventures and opportunities, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's, it's interesting that in, a clue about your parents' mindset maybe and I, I don't know if I'm reaching there but they both came out of large families you said--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and they had three children.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, they're thinking about like what the implications of having so many are, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think it's different, you know, I'm sure, I mean, look they were both born in the '40s [1940s] to large families, they both spent a lot of their youth and their siblings, you know, sure of going to school but also working. Working the land and, you know, you had big families because it was, it was necessary to have big families, right, to, to tend to a lot of the needs and requirements.  So, I guess my parents' generation that sort of got scaled back a little bit.  You know, I actually never asked them why they only had three kids.  But by the time they were in their mid-twenties they were done having kids, right, my, my two sisters and me--or maybe late twenties.  So, yeah, maybe that's part of it, you know.  Although, I think, I don't know I'm doing a bit of real time pop psychoanalyst, psych analysis here, I think, you know, maybe with my mother in particular, while she didn't talk so much about other things she might have done or aspirations that were thwarted or stunted, it's possible she saw in us that the way for her, the way, you know, that our achievement would be her achievement which she should and does rightfully claim.  You know, I don't get to the U.S. Senate certainly without Deval [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] appointing me but I don't get to the U.S. Senate if I'm not my mother's son.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And if I don't live the values she taught us from an early age and continually reminds us about.
Story_ID: 665932
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Wow, earliest childhood.  A lot--my earliest childhood memories are with my grandparents and great-grandparents, right.  When I think about what are the most fun and, and carefree memories, right, it's like being on the, being at great-grandma, Brady [Brady Young] and Minnie's [Minnie Martin Young] place.  And, you know, summertime just running around, crack of dawn, you know, there are chickens running around, there are some dogs, and depending on what time of year it was, there are rabbits and all sorts of, you know, just, and you're just out there running around and, you know, grandma, or Great-grandma Minnie is making breakfast, using the eggs that were just harvested from the chickens, and vegetables that were grown right outside the kitchen window in her little garden.  And then their friends and neighbors just coming by, you know, just a, a, and I say this in the best way possible, simpler lifestyle, people just, you know, just, lives aren't nearly as complicated as our lives appear to be today, I'm sure they were complicated in other ways, right, but where schedules were dictated by, you know, the sun, (laughter) right, and the weather patterns.  And as a kid, you know, you're out there and you're, you're running around and you're climbing trees, you're eating fruit, you know, right off the trees, apples, pears, plums, right. Probably the healthiest eating I ever did in my lifetime, you know, no preservatives, when you had fried chicken, that chicken had been running around the yard about an hour ago (laughter).  And that's what I remember.  And we'd have cousins who'd come by and, you know, we'd play all these games, that, like those are some of my favorite, most fond memories, right.  And, and, you know, memories of just, just the kind of love, care, and attention your family gave you back then, you know.  Some of it was, (laughter) wasn't always easy, right, there were plenty of times when Great-grandma Minnie said, "All right," you know, "march out there and get me a switch," right, and you knew what was coming but, you know, we call that corporal punishment now or (laughter) psychological abuse as the case may be.  But, (laughter) you know, as a, you know, I hold no grudge about that because, you know, sometimes we had to learn some tough lessons, some hard lessons, and that, they were all given with love, yes, even believe it or not when a switch was involved, it was given with love.  And--
Speaker 1: And so, are, are your sisters [Felicia Cowan and Valerie Cowan] older than you?
Speaker 2: I have an older sister who is about two years older than me and I have a younger sister who is six years younger than me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665933
Speaker 1: Yeah, so those are my memories.  I, and I, and they're not always great, you know, you remember like, you know, your--those things seared in your memory like, you know, those first bee stings or things like that.  I remember, I told this recently about my grandmother, my mom's mother, Rosa [Rosa Young Hawkins], who passed away just January of 2015, and she was honored posthumously by her church [Tabernacle United Church of Christ, Yadkinville, North Carolina] over the summer and so I Skyped in, I wasn't able to be there to say some remarks and I was, I told this story, I have a memory of being about four or five years old and it was wintertime and she was watching us, and she had this big cast iron wood burning stove in the middle of her living room, right, it warmed the house and, you know, it boiled water, it had multiple uses.  And we'd run around there and she'd tell us all the time, "Be careful, stop running around the stove, stay away from the stove, it's hot."  And I was, I remember, I was sitting in a chair and I was rocking back and forth in this chair and then I rocked too far forward, started to fall and, of course, natural instinct you put your hands out to brace yourself and what was I gonna brace myself on?  The wood burning stove in the dead of the winter, full ablaze.  So, (gesture) (makes sound) right.  And what I remember about that is not even the pain, 'cause obviously by the way, the heat was so intense, right, it sort of fried your nerves for a little bit, like it's just not the pain, it's the shock of it all.  What I remember about it was immediately being terrified that my grandmother was gonna be upset, right, right.  But my real memory is in those moments, like your grandmother is your grandmother, right, and all she cares about is taking care of you and yes, you got the, "I told you kids to stop running around the stove," but immediately 'cause she had, had been a nurse's aide, she knew what to do and wrapped my hands and took me to the emergency room at Lula Conrad Hoots Memorial Hospital in Yadkinville [North Carolina], which was right--
Speaker 2: Lula Conrad?
Speaker 1: Hoots Memorial Hospital which is where I got most of my medical care (laughter) until I went to college [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].  I think, I was in kindergarten [at Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina], I must have been in kindergarten at the time 'cause I remember, you know, (air quotes) telling this story by, in, in, by drawing something in a little book that for one of my teachers, so anyway.  So, those are some of like, those are, when I think about those memories, yeah, they're around family and just sort of the youthful innocence.  And, and I remember, you know, those days were the, the good days for my dad [William Cowan] when he wasn't drinking or struggling in other ways and, you know, and where'd I'd go out and he'd be working on the car and even if no words were passed between us, you know, we were sitting, I was sitting there watching him do what he does, you know, and things like that.  So, yeah, those are some of the, when I think about those memories, yeah.
Story_ID: 665934
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Courtney Elementary School [Yadkinville, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went there from kindergarten to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: And what was the nature of Courtney?  Had they started integrating the schools yet (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was an integrated--
Speaker 2: It was an integrated grade school but here's the interesting fact, I don't think if my memory is correct, I never was in another classroom with another black student for my entire time in Courtney Elementary.  Now, by the way, there were other black students there, I just was never in a classroom with one of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it was, they were tracking you, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, they definitely were tracking us.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They definitely were tracking us.
Speaker 1: So, I guess, you were a better student?  That's what, that's what that--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --means, I don't know, but it also means that they didn't track very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tracking cuts both ways as we know.  Right.  I don't know that I was a better student. Maybe I, I tested better than other people but, you know.  So, it was just, there were a couple occasions where I was not the only student of color in the room, remember I had mentioned there were migrant workers who would come up when particularly during tobacco season, they'd bring kids and so they'd be in school for a little while.  I have this memory, I think, I was in third grade, where a young, a young boy joined our classroom for a little bit, he was Mexican, his family was up, and I was so excited that there was somebody else who looked different in the classroom.  And we, we both ended up in the boys room at the same time and I tried to talk to him and he had, he spoke some English and he crushed me by saying he didn't wanna talk to me 'cause he didn't wanna, he didn't wanna be talking to a nigger, right.  And so, you're like, you're like, huh.  Right, at the time I just remember just being devastated like, like, what are you, like what do you say, right.  He wasn't in school long, I mean, the, the, the season expired and, and I don't--and he wasn't in the school long but it was long enough to sear that memory in my mind.
Speaker 1: So, and it seems to me then, you were the only black student in these all white classrooms, you were the chosen one on one level but then the target on (laughter) or, or the outcast--
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't, I wouldn't necessarily (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or an outcast--
Speaker 2: --call it a target.  You know, it was interesting, school in those years was sort of interesting to me because it almost like I was living in two different worlds.  When I was home everyone around me, all my family, friends, neighbors, every side of the street, the kids, all black people in my, in our little community in Huntsville [North Carolina].  As soon as I got off the school bus at school, I rarely saw those kids.  These were the same, we were all going to the same school, right.
Story_ID: 665935
Speaker 1: So, during the school day I was off over here, you know, not, you know, presumab- hopefully we were all learning the same thing.  But, you know, I was, so my best friends, this is kind of interesting--from basically first grade through eighth grade, my best friends in grade school were two boys named Kevin [ph.] and Tony [ph.], both white, right, lived in the neighboring community, it sort of, Courtney [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina] was a magnet school, so Kevin and Tony.  At school we were virtually inseparable, you know, we were all being tracked the same way, both very bright young boys.  And we just gravitated towards each other in the classroom, right.  Never spent any time outside of school together, and when I say never, I mean, never. Right, in this era of playdates and, you know, parents shuttling kids all around, right.  Back then, if you didn't live in the neighborhood or wasn't a bike ride away or whatever, you know, you weren't gonna be hanging out. But again everyone a bike ride away from me was black, which was great but Tony and Kevin, they lived elsewhere, our parents weren't shuttling us back and forth. To the best of my knowledge I don't know that our parents ever met each other.  So, this actually ties back to the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] a little bit actually. Many, many years later I was in college, I was a freshman in college at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and I, I was visited on campus by one of my teachers from that period in my life who was getting some continuing, you know, she was working on a graduate degree or something and happened to be on campus, caught up with me, and we were just reminiscing.  And she said to me, she always found it remarkable my relationship with Kevin in particular, to which I naively said, "Why?"  And she said, "No, I just, I just thought it was both interesting and incredible in a good way that you two were so close to each other notwithstanding his father."  Now, I had met his father in passing a couple of times, I had actually been at their home once, just as we were part- we were on a school trip and we just made a brief stop.  And I said, "Well, what about his dad?"  I said, "I didn't really know him but he seemed like a nice guy," right, this is what we say, he seems like a nice guy.  She goes, "Oh, well, I just thought it was interesting that the entire, that entire period Kevin's father was a really high ranking guy in the local Ku Klux Klan."  And I said, "What?"  She said, "Yeah.  Like it was widely known, he was very active, and I think he had a, a high rank."  And I was just, you know, I'm like eighteen, nineteen, I'm like, "What, what are you talking about," right.  But if you think about it, it actually is rather remarkable on some level because during the school day, maybe it turns out we both were living dual lives, Kevin and myself, right. But during the school day, we bonded, we found each other, we connected because of in that school environment, you know, and the things we were studying, he also was on the, as I mentioned he was tracked as well, so, you know, at that stage of your life, being tracked in a public school like that, you know, certainly has its upsides and socially it can have its downsides, like you guys are like the, the nerds or the outcasts, right.  And so, maybe two outcasts found them, found each other but then in the outside world, never, never interacted.  So, I, I've thought about it a lot since that conversation and for the record I have no way of corroborating whether or not his dad was involved in the way she said. I mean, I have no reason to doubt her but still it's just, you know, it's one of those things, and--
Speaker 2: Was she was a white teacher?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: So, she knew that community somewhat (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yeah.  So, anyway, so that was school. Grade school, as I said, Courtney was K through eighth [kindergarten through eighth grade].  I (air quotes) graduated from eighth grade in 1984.
Story_ID: 665936
Speaker 1: So, back to grade school, we were gonna finish up something (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, I just it turned out it was somewhat prescient and unbeknownst to me but late in my grade school career around seventh grade, maybe eighth grade, I can't remember which year it was, I guess for a, both for a social studies experience and for a governance experience a small group of us were asked or tasked to try to draft a student constitution for the school and I was part of the group.  And then we actually had elections for student government so, so the first and only time I've ever run for office was for the inaugural student body president of Courtney Elementary School [Yadkinville, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, this is significant, this is the first and only time you have ever run for--
Speaker 2: First and only time I've run for office, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for office. And, and yet you served in the U.S. Senate--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --by appointment but I, I know it's by appointment--
Speaker 2: Yes, correct.
Speaker 1: --but, but this is an office that people are, would almost, you know, murder to get, you know, and you got it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Wait, are you referring to the eighth grade student body president or the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, I don't know about the school, nature of the school there but the Senate certainly seems to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, listen, I'm sure we'll talk about that plenty but, you know, as an eighth grader I ran, interestingly enough there were three candidates for president, Tony [ph.], Kevin [ph.], and myself, and, and at least that's my recollection there were three of us, and I ended up winning so I was the first student body president in the history of Courtney Elementary School.  And--
Speaker 1: The first?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so--
Speaker 1: So, not the first black one, the first?
Speaker 2: The first.  We wrote the constitution and then we had elections and I managed to eke out a victory.
Story_ID: 665937
Speaker 1: Now how was it in--being the only black male in the class or the only black person in the class [at Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all those, all those years, in a, in a--and how did, how did your black peers deal with that?  I mean, how did they treat you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a result, were they proud of you or were they resentful of you, probably all of these things I'm thinking at one time or another (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, yeah, probably all those things.  But look as kids, kids can be awfully cruel, right.  And, (laughter) you know, as I said you almost live in like these two worlds, when you come home, right, you're like, you're sort of an, you know, because you've been away, like you've been away from everybody else all day, you know, you sort of get treated like you're an outsider, right, so it's like you're an outsider in both places, right.  And I think, you know, that definitely impacted me as a kid, it probably impacts me still to this day, right, because you're forced to sort of assimilate into both circumstances, right, you got, you know, you're constantly doing that, right.  And if you don't have significant grounding and foundation in your own personal history, right, you can get lost going back and forth, right.  And--
Speaker 1: But if you can do it right isn't there a certain amount of power in that? Being able to--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  But it's always better to have that foundation to return to, right. Because if you have that foundation, that rooting, right, that's always gonna be your home base, you'll always go back to that.  And so, and by the way you'll never stray too far from that which is very important.  You know, as a child, I don't think--well, I know, and as an adult I still struggle with this, you know, having a real good sense of my own family's history and struggle.  So, that, so it makes your foundation a little uneven, shaky at times, right.  And so, as a child when you're going back and forth between those two worlds your instinct is to say, okay, what appears to be or who appears to be popular and well liked and do I need to become that person, right.  Now, best case scenario, and I'm not even sure this is the best case scenario, you sort of develop this chameleon like ability to adapt to almost any given circumstance, which I've maintained to this day for better or for worse.  No matter how unusual, how new, or how rare the circumstances I find myself in, I think I'm actually quite adept at actually almost immediately adjusting to the circumstances.  Now, it doesn't mean I adjust who I am or my values but sort of I figure out exactly how people tend to navigate in and out and, and so I may navigate accordingly.  It's been very helpful at times, it can, it also can be very discombobulating at times as well, you know.  And at the end of the day, it's important that people really know who you really are, what your real foundations and principles are 'cause if you don't have that and you can't project that and convince people of that then there's nothing there, it's just hollow.  But as a child when you're sort of going back and forth and you don't feel rooted it's a challenge, right.
Story_ID: 665938
Speaker 1: So, who did I tend to gravitate towards during those period?  Interestingly, I actually gravitated towards my teachers [at Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina], right, for a host of reasons, not the least of which these were well educated people who gave me the one, the one thing that I craved perhaps more than anything at that age was information, knowledge, right. And they were the constant.  And even in the times when there may have been upheaval at home, right, the classroom was like this safe certain space even if I was the only one in the room, meaning the only black person in the room, right.  'Cause I was being taught the same things as everyone else, I was learning the same things as everyone else, and I could demonstrate that I knew, learned, and could relate the same things as everyone else through tests or writing, whatever, you know, so it became like a, its own little safe haven.  So, you know, maybe it was three worlds, there was the school, home, and the classrooms within the school, right.  So, I don't know where I was going with that but you get, I think (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you get my point.
Speaker 2: You were talking about how your, how you related to the community [Huntsville, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, to these two different communities.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so I was, so, at home, back home again at some point when you're on this track and you don't see kids during the school it makes it difficult to, you know, reengage in your home because kids are like hey, well, you're different, you know, and there was some of that, hey, you think you're smarter than us and, you know.
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause I ask these question, that same question of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --physicists and they always, they always laugh too (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought I would, I don't know, I thought I was more interested in learning than some of them.
Story_ID: 665939
Speaker 1: But it was tough, you know, it was tough.  Like, you know, they would, like, it's like every neighborhood like there were some (air quotes) cool kids in the neighborhood. I was not part of that clique. And I had physical confrontations with that clique on occasion, you know, and it was awkward, it was uncomfortable.  By the way, and some of these people in that clique were my relatives, so it was, it was challenging.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the social dynamic of this is really something.  I mean, I, I'm, I'm thinking here, did, did you ever think or did you, you know, 'cause back in the days of tracking in school, I mean, that, that it, it was unfairly coordinated in terms of, I mean, you being the only black student in the class of the, of the, you know, just, just the, it seems like there's, and you indicated earlier that you knew there were other bright--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --black people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It wasn't like they were stupid.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they weren't being tracked, I mean, in, into your, the, the classroom that you were in?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, you know, you know, some of this is social, some of this may be racial, I don't know how they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know the mechanics of how sort of I became to be tracked and other people didn't, there were other bright kids.  I mean, you become a, you become, first you become aware of it, then you become self-conscious about it, and then at some point it's like this odd form of paranoia sets in about it, right.  Because keep in mind my older sister [Felicia Cowan] who was only two years older than me was at this same school [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina], she was not tracked as I was, right.  And I think it actually caused strain, it was part of the strain that has existed in my relationship with my older sister for a long time, right.  Because we were living in the same household, I didn't see my sister during the day, like we were not interacting, and her friends and cohorts were entirely different from mine, true, because of age, right, but also because I was over here, you know, sequestered doing these other things.  And so, yeah, it creates that fragmentation that, that unnatural distance even when you're in close proximity to each other and it was a challenge.  I mean, I say it's a challenge now in hindsight, right, at the moment, oddly enough it's like a refuge, it's like this place in school where hey, we're pulled out of the larger class to go for a couple of hours and do these special things and you feel special about that and you're getting more, more attention, more one on one 'cause it's a smaller group of people, right, and you're being told you're doing things that are more challenging than the other kids are doing back in the classroom, right.  And so, there is a sense of pride that develops in that, right.  You know, and prideful kids can be a, can be a dangerous thing.  So, when you're back in the, back in the neighborhood, you know, you've got that mix, that combustible mix of things and so sometimes it felt like it was me against these other kids or these other kids against me and as I said, these people were living across the street from me, right, but just a total disconnect, or feeling disconnected.  I was, I would describe my childhood as a relatively lonely one. Not that I wasn't surrounded by people, family, and loved ones, but in terms of if you had said, "Hey, Mo [HistoryMaker William "Mo" Cowan], who are your friends?" Well, I'd say, "Well, listen, I--you know, Kevin [ph.] and Tony [ph.] at school." At home, I probably spent most of my time with my cousin, Freddy [ph.], right, and that's really it, right, so.
Speaker 2: Now--now, what do you and Kevin and Tony bond around? Was it, was it comic books and music or sports or what was it, or politics or travel?
Speaker 1: It definitely wasn't politics (laughter) or travel, I hadn't, I hadn't traveled anywhere.  You know, what was it?  I, I don't know.  It might have been cars, things like that, you know.  You're at that age where you're like, you know, you're flipping through Car and Driver or whatever it was, you know, and developing your wish list of hot rods you wanna drive some day or something like that, it certainly wasn't music 'cause I don't think we were listening to the same music.  I think more than anything it was just like in that school environment we were the others, right?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So.
Story_ID: 665940
Speaker 1: High school, okay, so, high school is--what, what's the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Forbush High School, F-O-R-B-U-S-H, in East Bend, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  And that's close by--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So, my high school was fifteen, twenty minute drive from my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it a very large school in terms of the population (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So, if my memory serves, maybe eight hundred kids at the high school or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's small by--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --urban standards anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, roughly eight hundred kids so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight hundred graduate in a, in a in a bigger high school.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, oh, that's very, very small, so, you know, nine, ten, eleven, twelfth grade about probably just shy of two hundred students in a class.  It was, actually there were a hundred eighty-two students who graduated in my class, class of 1987.  I was number eighteen, so.  I was, I'm always amused when people assumed I was at the top of my class, I'm like, (makes sound)I could see the top (laughter) but I was (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're, we're gone pause here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pause here again.
Speaker 2: All right.  Let me, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And speed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Forbush High School.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: The, the Falcons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did this trend continue that you're the only black student in, in the--
Speaker 2: No, no, to the contrary.  So, again, it's a high school, so magnet school for a number of feeder middle and grade schools so, it was interesting 'cause it was the first time I found myself in the classroom with multiple black students, right, so, that was new to me.  And then sort of just the general dynamics of high school which are challenging for most people, right, you know, finding out where and how you fit in, you know, what are your activities.  And so, yeah, it was interesting.  So, Forbush High I, again, you know, because of some of the, the tracking in the grade school, you know, you can slide into certain kind of class but it turns out now you're not the only black person in those classes, right, and I'm like, you know, okay, well, that's, that's good.  And then so high school was, it was an interesting time, it was, academically it was exciting, I was learning new things, new challenges, socially it was at times treacherous and awkward as high school tends to be for most folks.
Story_ID: 665941
Speaker 1: You know, I was--when I tell people this they actually find it, some people tell me they find it hard to believe--I'm n- I'm a naturally shy guy, right, you know, if left to my own devices, I'd probably go sit in the corner by myself and, you know, read a book (laughter).  So, which is not a good disposition when you're in high school, right, it's sort of--so, I wasn't really sure how I was gonna fit in socially. I was shy, quiet, you know, I wasn't wearing the coolest clothes, didn't have the freshest haircut back when I had hair and--
Speaker 2: Now what was, what was the cultural climate in the '80s [1980s] for those who don't know or are gonna be watching this later? What was the, you started high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] in '83 [1983] I think it was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's sounds about right.
Speaker 2: And so in 1983--
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983], '84 [1984] or whatever, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Help me out here, like music videos are starting to hit and Michael Jackson is on TV (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, MTV [Music Television; MTV] is still relatively young.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, Michael Jackson, pop culture was just about was, was pretty big, right?  When did 'Thriller' come out?
Speaker 2: 'Thriller' about '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '82 [1982] or '83 [1983] something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, Michael Jackson was--
Speaker 2: Video's on television.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not as, yeah. It was, it was at the, just at the beginning of sort of music videos really becoming a thing, right, and MTV becoming a thing.  Rap and hip hop as we know it really was in its infancy, right.  You know, Grandmaster Flash, Run-DMC, but, Whodini some of that but, you know, nothing like we have now, what, it wasn't nearly as popular, still much more of an underground thing.  So, you know, hair bands and, you know, glam rock that was sort of the music so people, kids were dressing to that style, you know, this is when Madonna was just starting to come on to the scene, you know, so that sort of was like the culture, pop culture was really, really big.  And, you know, I just remember everybody walking around in those Members Only jackets and, you know, Michael Jackson had that red jacket with all the zippers and stuff on it so that was a thing.  You know, like member, yeah, remember--I just, everybody, you know, getting a Members Only jacket was a big deal, right, it was a big deal so, stuff like that.  You know, that was the time and I guess maybe no different than any other time but people really were taking their cues from what was happening in pop culture and it was early '80s [1980s], so.
Speaker 2: The black community was into the Jheri curl in those days (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, man, yes, thank you, Jheri curl, S curl, god, what were we thinking (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Now, did you--
Speaker 1: Now, I never went that route, I--
Speaker 2: You never went--
Speaker 1: --I never went that route, never, no.  So, as I said, you know, I always had just the slightly off kilter haircut, never had the, you know, I never got the sort of fly flat top Gumby style thing, right, didn't do that either.  So, I was just pretty low fade, as I said I was far from the coolest kid.
Story_ID: 665942
Speaker 1: But actually, it was--high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] was interesting for me 'cause I sort of discovered, you know, so cool was a relative term, right.  And, and I think in high school I really started to find myself, right, find my space.  And what I discovered, sort of going back to a little bit of our earlier conversation but in a more positive way, I found that I could make my space wherever I wanted to be, right.  So, academically I could hang with the students, you know, who were perceived to be (air quotes) the nerds, right.  Athletically I was, I played football, I wrestled, you know, I did things like that so, you know, you had credibility with (air quotes) the jocks, right.  I was in the band, right, took a band class.  I was in the marching band, right.
Speaker 2: What did you play?
Speaker 1: Brass instruments.  Started playing trumpet when I was in grade school [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina] with our music teacher in grade school, Tommy Garner, we used to call him Trail Dog [ph.] (laughter).  Tommy looked like an, Mr. Garner looked like a, a castoff from the Bee Gees, you know, so, no, not the Bee Gees, I'm sorry, what am I thinking?  The Doobie Brothers, that's what I meant to say, The Doobie Brothers, Trail Dog Tommy Garner, just a good, good dude.  And then I was in like the chorus with, you know--so which was, by the way, which was unusual, right, because I was a kid, I was, I was on the athletic team, I was doing well academically but here I was doing all this other stuff, right, 'cause it just to me it was interesting, right.  I've always had a curiosity streak, fortunately it's, it's not really gotten me into much trouble but, you know, again, you know, I like learning, always have, always will, will, you know, it's just who I am, like if I don't know something, I wanna know it, I wanna find out about it, I wanna try it.  And in high school I became, at times I became what I think of as a positive contrarian, right. Because no other black kids were doing the, you know, the school musical. Well, guess what, I'm a try out for the school musical, right.  I mean, I shouldn't say no, there were, but very few, you know, what I mean.  You know, no other, there were no other black males trying out for the show choir, you know, where we'd go out and travel around and singing show tunes, imagine that, right, I love Broadway, so, I did stuff like that.  At the same time I'm out on the track team throwing shot and doing all, all this other stuff and wrestling so.  So, to me high school was like oh, wow, this is a, this is a lot, re- comparatively speaking it was a lot of new things to experience and explore and a lot of new, interesting people, different teachers, different subjects, you know.  Had, certainly had its awkward moments but I felt I was pretty well able to navigate high school.  And I think that's when I really began to hone a skill I think has served me pretty well which I like to call sort of my listening skill which helped me--the, the way I realized I was gonna have the most success socially in high school is try to listen and understand what other, what people cared about and try to find that common bond, right, so that you could try to work around what they may perceive to be the differences, right, and so, if you could find that commonality, then you're off to the races.
Story_ID: 665943
Speaker 1: Well, were the social functions in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] integrated really or was it more like grade school [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina] where you, you were in, you'd go to school and had a school life and then had a home life?
Speaker 2: No, no, much more, much more integrated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, much more integrated.  And 'cause interestingly, you know, so as I said it's a magnet school, all these kids are pouring in from these other schools, kids who I'd heard of, right, because we were in the same neighborhood [Huntsville, North Carolina], I didn't really know so, I actually got to know these other kids.  And so, and then you start to hang out with some of these kids outside of school, so it was, the two worlds were much more integrated and overlapping at that time, you know.  And, you know, you become more social, you know, your first, I remember getting invited to escort this young woman to the sweetheart dance, I think I was a freshman or a sophomore, right, and she was one of the more popular girls, African American and (laughter) but still I remember she asked me, I was like, am I being set up like wait (laughter).  But it's funny I think I came to be viewed as sort of a, I was, I was never squarely in any of those camps or those cliques, right, and because I was doing well academically, I think I became to be viewed as sort of a, a safe option for, you know, if you were, you know, on the homecoming court and you needed an escort, right, I passed mustard with the, passed muster with the, with the parents I suppose.
Story_ID: 665944
Speaker 1: I enjoyed high school, it, you know, again, it had its ups and downs but I think I really learned to navigate complex situations and social environments through those four years at, at Forbush High School [East Bend, North Carolina].  Including by the way, there was a lot of tension, I believe in my senior year of high school, some racial tension.  And there had been some incidents at school and a number of the black students felt that the administration at the time was not taking the interests of the black students, the black population in mind and there was, you know, and there had been some, again, I can't remember all the genesis but what I recall of it is the then principal at one point invited me into her office and asked me if--sort of couched it as, you know, you're well respected by a lot of the students here, a lot of different kind of students here, and sort of was trying to enlist me to sort of be a peace, a broker of peace between various students around these challenging issues.  And it was an interesting moment for me, right, where I thought, okay, well--I felt good because I was like all right, the administration recognizes that I've worked hard to navigate in this environment, cultivate relationships wherever I could and that bridge a lot of divides.  At the same time I said I felt like the administration never really asked me to do anything before now or really involved me in ways that I might wanna be involved until they actually felt that they had a need and come to me at this critical moment.  And I felt there was some risk to me there, right.  You know, frankly, I thought to myself, one, I'm actually really not qualified to step into that breach.  And two, you're asking me to position myself where at least some of the black students are going to think that I'm selling them out.  And I told--and I, and, you know, it was interesting to me 'cause I was, I was concerned about saying no, but I ultimately said I think the right thing for me to do here is to not do what the administration and the adults here should be doing and sort of own this issue and, and help the students resolve it.  So, I respectfully told the, the, the principal that while I was honored that she thought I had the capacity and the capability of doing so that I didn't think it was appropriate and I wasn't convinced that I did have those capabilities and it was much more appropriate that she or someone at her level really step in 'cause what the students were saying or the administration is not attentive or being equitable here.  There would have been little good to come of me stepping into that breach and trying to do something I wasn't sure I was capable of doing.  So, I'm sorry, I apologize, so--
Speaker 2: So, you were pretty smart in high school?
Speaker 1: Well (laughter)--
Speaker 2: See that, that is a, that is, who would guess that a high school student would analyze the situation like that and make that kind of a, take that kind of position.  I mean, most students would have been flattered and jumped out there and gotten run over by both sides, but you did not.
Speaker 1: Ah, you know, I think, I've always known from a relatively young age things are far--often, often more complicated than they seem.  And it's beyond expecting the unexpected, just understand that there's gonna be a lot of unexpected and if you're not emotionally mature enough and or, whatever, well schooled enough to handle things, you should be cautious about where you position yourself, 'cause you may end up doing more harm than good, notwithstanding your intentions; right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right.
Story_ID: 665945
Speaker 1: So all right.  So, was there a black student organization in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina]?  Had they organized themselves into a, a student union or something, or?
Speaker 2: No, no, not that I recall.  I mean, there were students who sort of over time sort of became to be viewed as, I guess, de facto, you know, leaders, no one really was a spokesperson for black students, you know.  So, you know, you re- high school is a place where you realize that even among seemingly alike people there a lot of differences, (laughter) right.  And so, there was no coordinated effort among the black students to the best of my recollection.  You know, when I think about the student groups none, there were really, there were no affinity groups like that that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the, the '80s [1980s] I think, probably was a time, was like a, on the lower levels of black organization at any level.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the '70s [1970s] there was a lot of black organizations started, the professional organizations and some continued through the '80s [1980s] but I would say the '80s [1980s] seemed like a time, like a doldrums in term, terms of that, there was this peak of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --interest and then it seemed like the '80s [1980s] it kind of flattened out.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't, I wouldn't describe my high school certainly back then as a very socially conscious kind of environment where there was a lot of emphasis on diversity and inclusion and the celebration of such.  It was sort of more benign neglect in that people just didn't talk, I mean, the adults didn't really talk about it that much, you know.  If you were in a student group, you know, keep in mind you're in rural North Carolina, you were likely to be in Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization] or we had like a future nurses association, future nurses of America, stuff, stuff like that, right.  There were, and my school actually had a vocational component, you know, all the buildings were labeled by letters and E building was the vocational building where you'd go over and you could take classes on masonry, auto mechanics, you know, sort of healthcare, i.e., you know, sort of nursing, nursing aide, a whole host of things like that.  And so, there were, you know, there were students who spent most of their day over there 'cause, you know, they were, you know, gonna get their high school diploma and this was gonna be their trade, their craft, right.  So, you know, it wasn't a given that everyone in my high school was gonna go to college, certainly not a four year college, right.  Many of those folks graduated and, you know, went to work in one of the local industries and, and never received any, you know, any postgraduate or post high school formal education outside their trade, right, it wasn't, it wasn't unusual.  I mean, I remember going back for my fifteenth year high school reunion. So this would have been, what, 2002, am I doing my math right?  Yeah, 2002, you know, there were people there who had fourteen year old kids, right.  I had been married for just three years and it was still two years away from having a kid.  So, and, you know, their lives, (claps hands) you know, you know, their lives started, or all our lives started immediately after graduation but just went in different directions.  And so, high school for me, I, I was like, you know, I need to do well here 'cause this needs to be the platform from which I launch myself into the best college I can get into to--
Story_ID: 665946
Speaker 1: Who were your mentors in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] or who were the--were there, were there teachers that looked out for you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So much so that my first professional ambition was to be a teacher, right.  Remember that story I told you I was, you know, about the [U.S.] military and my dad [William Cowan] turns down the corner of the paper and says, you know, "Over my dead body will you go into the military."  I had some great teachers in high school and I still think teaching is the greatest profession out there, the most noble profession, unfortunately the one that's most disrespected, too.  But and these were teachers, mostly women who were very instrumental in my education and my growth as a person.  I was very close to my Spanish teacher, my advanced English teacher, and just, I mean, these were women who had dedicated themselves to educating, and they seemed awfully dedicated to individual students but I think they made everybody feel that way, right, they had that unique ability.  And I remember telling my Spanish teacher one day that, you know, I wanted to go to college and get a degree and, you know, maybe become a teacher myself.  It was interesting, without hesitation she said, "Don't do that, choose a different career."  And it, and it struck me almost like, you know, that conversation, the conversation with my father about the military, right, she didn't hesitate, and I was like, "What are you talking about, you're a teacher," I was like "don't you enjoy it?"  She said, "I love it," she goes, "but it's a hard profession. People don't respect it like they should," and she sort of said, "Look you can always teach but go out and explore and, you know, pursue other things as well 'cause you never know where it--."  I mean, it was good advice, right, you know, 'cause like many people I see what's happening right in front of me and I'm like ah, well that looks good, right, (laughter) so, she was saying, "Look, I'm glad that you respect the work that we do but understand you still haven't seen the, the great big wide world of opportunity that may be out there for you, so don't be so locked in on something right now, and college is a place and a time to really expand your horizons."  It was great advice, great advice.  But, yes, I, you know, I really respected my teachers, I enjoyed my teachers, I would talk to them after class and, you know, chat them up, and I just found them to be fascinating people.  And so, in terms of my thinking, shaping my thinking, you know, it became my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] and my teachers, right, predominantly during that period in my life and, and some friends, one friend in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A young woman who, (laughter) you know, how your senior year they do the superlatives and mostly likely to, to do and be, and the most, she pretty much won all those, so, I used to wonder why she wasted her time with me but she too was African American, very popular, but we became very, very close friends early in my high school career and we became each other's sort of support and, supporter and sort of we pushed each other.  And so, but with, among her and my mom and teachers, it was really sort of, that was like my cohort of advisors.
Story_ID: 665947
Speaker 1: Now, your father [William Cowan] passed when you were sixteen, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixteen.
Speaker 1: And you, you were in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] at the time?
Speaker 2: I was in high school, I was a--
Speaker 1: A junior, right, or a sophomore?
Speaker 2: Maybe a sophomore or a junior, right, yeah.  So, it was 1985. The Rolling Stones, I'm not, sorry, not Rolling Stones, sorry, The Temptations, 'My Father Was a Rolling Stone' [sic. 'Papa Was A Rollin' Stone'], "It was on the 3rd of September that day I'll always remember, that was the day my daddy died," which in fact, was the case.
Speaker 1: Really?  And that's something, yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so I, you know, my father was not with me for the bulk of my high school years and I think it put a lot of strain on my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] to be mother and father to my two sisters and me 'cause keep in mind, you know, at that time, if I was a sophomore, my older sister [Felicia Cowan] would have been a senior, my younger sister [Valerie Cowan] would have been fourth grade, third grade, fourth grade, something like that, yeah, yeah.  So, it was--
Speaker 1: But at the same time did, did it ease a lot of the tension in the household with him not being there any, any longer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, so it's, it's interesting you ask that question 'cause there's a, there's a truth about my father's passing that I don't like to speak to, and here is that truth: the day I found out, when I found out my father had passed it was, it was conflicting, I, I was, a series of conflicting emotions.  A lot of concern on my part about my mom, what it was gonna mean for her and the stress and the strain, a sense that I immediately needed to step into the role as sort of the man of the house at sixteen, go figure, right.  But if I am being honest and I, I hate to it say aloud but it is true, I felt a sense of relief that conflict was going to be removed from our house, the, the stress we all were living under because of his issues, alcoholism and otherwise was going to be removed, certainly consciousness that other stresses were going to be brought to bear but foolishly, naively, I actually had a thought at sixteen that maybe (pause) my mother's burdens would be lessened.
Story_ID: 665948
Speaker 1: This is a, you know, I think a lot of males that I've talked to in that situation, a moment of truth is coming at some point as, as you grow and get bigger and stronger and your father is abusing your mother, there's gonna be some, you know, big confrontation at some point and, I mean, that's what usually happens and maybe sometimes it doesn't happen right then but it's something that certainly is on the horizon.  Did you see that, something like that coming?
Speaker 2: I did, I did, and I feared the worst, right.  Feared that what if, you know, I was around and the confrontation occurred and it went beyond even the horrors that I had seen.  But, you know, we all, we all were living under that stress, we all were living that, you know.  And I gave remarks at a, at an organization maybe a year and a half ago, you know, and you, people think about domestic abuse and violence you think about the most immediate victim, right, and the victim in that case my mother [Cynthia Long Cowan], but when there are children in the house they're victims too, right, they're, they're, it's--I can't even adequately or accurately describe it in words what it's like to be a child and to witness your father [William Cowan] beating your mother.  And then as you get older you start to have these thoughts like, why won't she leave and take us with her, right.  These are overly simplistic questions but are far too complex for a young mind to really try to wrap itself around.  So, I was seeing that, my older sister [Felicia Cowan] was seeing that, my younger sister [Valerie Cowan] was seeing that.  And to your point, yes, I had began to develop this thought in my head that at some point I'm gonna need to put a stop to this, I'm gonna have to put a stop to it.  So, I was, like I said I was, there was a lot of conflicting emotions.  So, my father died September, 1985.  The first time I shed a tear thinking about his death was the spring of 1991 when my then college girlfriend forced me to talk about my father and the emotions came pouring out.
Speaker 1: That was certainly a complicated situation, yeah. So, but so you, the latter part, part of your high school life that tension, I mean, there, there are other problems that emerge--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --but not--that tension is gone, so?
Speaker 2: That tension is gone, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 665949
Speaker 1: When you're a junior or senior in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina], right, you know, it's all about you, everything you see is through your lens, you don't--as I said, there were other--the absence of a parent creates tensions, other tensions, it wasn't like my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] was a corporate executive, right, she was a blue collar woman working at, making an hourly wage with two high school kids [Cowan and his sister, Felicia Cowan] and a grade school kid [Valerie Cowan] trying to provide for us all.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have to get a job or did you, or were you working already or--
Speaker 1: You know, I worked part time at places, after school, certainly during the summer, you know, fast food joints, I baled hay in the summertime, I did it all, I worked Kelly temporary agency [Kelly Services, Inc.] getting sort of office jobs.  I once told this to Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], I don't think he'll remember it, but at one of those jobs, I don't know if it was high school or maybe a summer after college [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], summer in college I was working a temp gig at an American Express [American Express Company] and they fired me (laughter).
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Let's just say my attendance record wasn't that strong (laughter).  But the, so, yeah, you, you know, I did my part and but let me be clear, the, the bulk of the effort to keep the family afloat, that was my mom, that was mom.  And again, it gets me back to that, that sacrifice point, I do think about how much she sacrificed and I think, you know, you feel guilty about some of her later health problems and whether, you know, she was working so much and so attentive to us that she didn't have the time to take care of herself the way she needed to.
Story_ID: 665950
Speaker 1: But you're on a track though in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to be successful and I suppose that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, they--
Speaker 1: --knew that.
Speaker 2: I knew, pretty early on in high school, perhaps even before high school, certainly before high school that I wanted to go to college. I wasn't even sure what (air quotes) college was, right, 'cause it wasn't like that was a, the norm in my family.  Although in fairness and in candor, I had more distant relatives who had, you know, my uncle Franklin [Franklin Cowan] who I mentioned earlier, was a college graduate, worked in the, as an executive in the railroad industry, my aunt Virginia [Virginia Cowan Johnson], her children, college educated, Uncle Ed [George Cowan], some of his kids were college.  So, it wasn't like college was a foreign thing but in my neighborhood it wasn't sort of the norm that people would go off to a four year college. People had gone off to community colleges, like Forsyth Tech [Forsyth Technical Community College, Winston-Salem Community College] or Surry Community College [Dobson, North Carolina], things like that and taken courses but four year was something different.  My older sister [Felicia Cowan] graduated from high school, started at a college, I think it was called King's College in Charlotte [North Carolina] at the time, and she wasn't there very long, she came back home, you know, it wasn't a good experience for her.  So, any, but in high school, right, you're still on this track and your teachers are like (gesture) and then you start to gravitate towards kids who are on a similar course so there was never a question in my mind that I was gonna go to college, the question only became which college I was gonna go to.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, the choices are, I think North Carolina has more HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] than any state I think 'cause, you know, Elizabeth City [Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Winston-Salem [Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the Green- A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There's a bunch of 'em, and so--
Speaker 2: Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Johnson C. Smith.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But then, you know, you got like Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina], now integrated and you know, looking for black, bright, black students.  So, who, who influenced you, I mean, well, first of all, what was your aspiration? What did you see yourself ultimately doing besides just getting to college?
Speaker 2: So, I thought I was gonna be a doctor, specifically an anesthesiologist, right.  Now, how does this little country boy who grew up in the red clay dirt of Huntsville, North Carolina, decide he wants to be an anesthesiologist or even know what an anesthesiologist is?  So, remember I told you my high school had this vocational course?  There was a health component so I actually started to take some classes in the health component, learning about the healthcare industry and sort of really patient, patient care and it stoked my interest in the healthcare field.  I think, you know, you sort of get this feeling like hey, wouldn't it be cool to be a doctor, right.  And you gird yourself for that reality, all right, I need to go to college, then you go to med school four years and then, you know, so forth and so on, but it's like, huh, could be really interesting.  And then, you know, you think to yourself, well, I just don't wanna be any kind of doctor, I wanna be a specialist.  And I don't know why, 'cause I, I've always liked math, I've always liked science, and I thought to myself, well, anesthesiologist seems kind of cool because it's really, you know, it's almost like engineering, right, you gotta understand engineering for the human body to make sure you know what you're doing.  So, my goal became let me go and get an engineering degree undergrad and then go to medical school.  And then I said, you know, I wanna be an anesthesiologist and part of the reason why, let me be candid because somebody told me the average, at the time the average salary for an anesthesiologist was about four hundred thousand dollars, I was like, wow, that's a lot of money, right. So I said, "Why not."
Story_ID: 665951
Speaker 1: But when I--but, you know, when I started talking about going to college and maybe going to med school, you know, my circle of advisors really helped me start to think through what are the kind of schools to attend.  You know, it's interesting, no one ever, no one ever told me not to go to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] but I, if I'm being candid I had this thought in my head, I said listen, as a matter of fact, there was only one HBCU, I, I don't even know if I ultimately applied, I considered applying to, I think I did apply, it was North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] which has an incredibly strong engineering program.  But I did have a thought and it's a conversation I'm candid about, you know, if I go to an HBCU which could be a remarkable experience, I have yet to find someone who's gone to one that didn't enjoy it, right, am I prolonging or am I delaying, I should say, am I delaying my need to put myself in an environment that's gonna be closer to the real world in which I'm going to exist, right.  Meaning going to a majority institution or a white majority institution and learning to navigate those environments and circumstances.  And, you're also candid, like listen, I wanna get into the best branded school I can get into, right.
Story_ID: 665952
Speaker 1: So, I didn't apply to a lot of schools. I appli- Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] was sort of my reach, right, and I thought why not?  I was told at the time that no one from my high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] had ever attended Duke. I've since learned that that's not the case.  It's actually a funny story.  I, when I was appointed [to the U.S. Senate], I actually made reference that I was the first in my high school to go to Duke. I got a call from another graduate of my high school, a gentleman, an older gentleman, a white gentleman from my neck of the woods as we say who called to make the point that I was, I was telling an untruth and so I actually apologized to him and said I would make sure going forward that I clarified to say at the time I understood I was the first but I know now I was not the first. I had been the, I was the most recent in a number of years but in any event.  So, I think, I applied to Duke, Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], maybe A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], possibly Clemson [Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina] and you may say why Clemson, because I actually spent a couple of summers in high school at an academic program in Clemson, including (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's like an Upward Bound type program or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know what the, I can't remember the official--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --name but, yeah, similar like that.  But here was the interesting thing about this program: it targeted African American students, right, so it was like all these high achieving African American students coming together for, you know, a few weeks of summer to really do some interesting, challenging thing and you live on campus in dorms, you know, you have your summer love, right, you know, and so you get this notion about the campus.  I did it at Clemson, Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], Appalachian State [Appalachian State University, Boone, North Carolina], were just some of the schools I, you know, had attended these programs, which were great. I came up, became aware of these programs because again these teachers were promoting me, putting me out there, making me aware of these programs and my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] was very supportive of me doing this.  But, you know, by sophomore or junior year I was very focused on, you know, keeping my act together, position myself well to get into the best school I can get into so I can go on and become a doctor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Medical doctor I should note.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did any of your mentors like push Duke or have a connection with Duke?
Speaker 1: You know, I think my advanced English teacher had some affiliation with Duke or maybe her daughter had applied.  Which was, now, keep in mind I grew up in North Carolina, right, so, where college basketball at least was king in those days, right, so this is, in the early, this is 1983, '84 [1984], '85 [1985], like this is the beginning of the Michael Jordan era in college basketball, right, almost the end of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he, he, yeah, he, he joined the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Right, right, 'cause he was a freshman in '82 [1982] when they, when Dean Smith won his first championship, Jordan hit the--
Speaker 2: It was North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and Duke, North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] are dominating college basketball.
Speaker 1: Yeah, North Carolina and North Carolina State at the time, not necessarily Duke. Duke came a little later.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they're all considered like ACC [Atlantic Coast Conference] schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, you know, like every other kid North Carolina was like, you know, numero uno.  So, when I told people I was applying to Duke they were like what are you talking about, right, you know, because they didn't really see it as the academic, they're just like why would you go to Duke if you could apply to Carolina, you know, so.
Speaker 2: That's where they played better basketball.
Speaker 1: Better basketball, so.  But I, I, one of the reasons I applied to Duke 'cause no one else was, right. Right, I can be a bit of a contrarian, right.  But also they had a biomedical engineering major and even North Carolina A and T didn't have it, at least at the time, so again, my path was engineering degree, med school, anesthesiologist, so I thought let me go get a biomedical engineering degree, then I'll go to Duke med school [Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina] since I'm already there, and then who knows, I'll end up practicing at Duke Hospital [Duke University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina].  Boom, bam, bing, I had it all figured out, that was my plan.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So, but, so when you applied you, you were accepted at Duke.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: I was accepted and I didn't hesitate to go, right.
Speaker 2: Okay. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Didn't hesitate.
Story_ID: 665953
Speaker 1: Now, was there anything special about graduation from Forbush [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina], I mean, did you play any role?  Now, you, you said you were number eighteen?
Speaker 2: I think I was number eighteen, yeah.  Obviously, I didn't, I was not the valedictorian or the salutatorian so I didn't speak at the graduation. I don't recall speaking at the graduation.  You know, but I was involved in other things, like student government, student act- so there was, I mean graduation was a big deal, right, it was a big deal as it always is because it's, you know, it's the beginning, it's the end and the beginning of something.  For me it was a big deal because I knew I was now on the precipice of leaving my small little community [Huntsville, North Carolina], right, and stepping out into the much broader world and--
Speaker 1: And in that regard had you traveled any at all, in, I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at this point in your life?
Speaker 2: So, this is 1987 when I graduated from high school. At the time most of my travel had been on the East Coast, visiting relatives by car in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area predominantly or going to the beach, Myrtle Beach in South Carolina, I had been on church trips, where they charter a bus and we'd go to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], I went to the 1982 World's Fair in Knoxville [1982 Knoxville International Energy Exposition, Knoxville, Tennessee].  The first time I ever flew on an airplane I was a senior in high school and we flew to Dallas, Texas, for like a quiz comp- a quiz show competition but it was all about medical field.  So, our school had a team and the team I was on actually made, I think we won regionals or placed in regionals so we got to go to Dallas for the national competition so we flew, it was the only, it was the first time I had ever been on a plane, so it was remarkable.  So, I was not well traveled.  By the way to this day I will tell you I would not consider myself well traveled. There are still so many parts of the world I have not seen and I'd like to see.  As a matter of fact, this is a true story, no, 2014 was the first time I actually flew to and spent any considerable amount of time in Europe, yeah, and this is somebody who actually served in the U.S. Senate so go figure (laughter) but no, I was not well traveled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had a sense or at least I thought I had a sense of what the world was out there and what it might have to offer for me, even at the tender age of eighteen and I was eager at graduation to get started.
Story_ID: 665954
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is like August of '87 [1987] or something, you started at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, late August, 1987, my mom [Cynthia Long Cowan] and I drive to Durham [North Carolina], I'm not really sure I know what to expect, you know, I'm going to be moving into a dorm with a kid from Upstate New York, Corning, New York.  I really don't know what I'm getting into but pretty excited about it, right.  You know, so I get all the information over the summer from the university and, you know, suggested reading and ooh, you know, but--
Speaker 1: Is this your first time actually on the campus, or?
Speaker 2: You know, it actually may (laughter) have been the first time I actually visited campus the day I arrived, right.  So, and, you know, I got settled, my mom left and there I was, I was like huh, here I am, this is it, like this is my new world and then I began that process of getting to know people in the hall.  It was intimidating 'cause you meet all these people from different parts, not just of the country, well, I'm from Sun Valley, Idaho, I'm from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], or I'm from Nebraska, or I'm from a small town in Colorado but, hi, I'm from Barbados, you know, hi, I'm from, you know, Montreal [Canada] hi, I'm from Tokyo [Japan], you know, it's, all of a sudden the world is at your doorsteps and you realize how small your world has been up until that point, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You also realize, wow, there's a lot of smart people who get to this place 'cause it turns out, well, every third person is the, was the valedictorian or the salutatorian and you're like.  Not only that, they had traveled, certainly socially on vacation but some of them had studied abroad and done different things or they had come from these very well resourced schools, public and private, and had studied things I had never studied in high school, you know.  For example, many of them had, you know, taken physics or some hard science like that for more than one year in high school.  My recollection is my high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina] introduced physics as a course my senior year of high school. Right, so, that, that's a different, all of a sudden you realize you're playing on a different field and you, you, at least I, you start to immediately worry whether you have the capacity to play on the field, right.  So, and then here's the other thing, right, this is a progression, right, grade school [Courtney Elementary School, Yadkinville, North Carolina], it's just me in the classroom, high school there were a couple of other folks, college, well, we're everywhere, right.  And the black people are as diverse as anybody else and they know things about our history that I don't know and it's troubling, it's embarrassing, right, you know.  I had never heard the name Benjamin Banneker until I got to college and a man who ultimately became my roommate for the fa- for the last three years told me he went to Benjamin Banneker High School in Washington, D.C., and I say, "Who is Benjamin Banneker?"  And he educates me on this great designer, architect and what he had done and basically how he laid out the city, right.  I learn in high school, excuse me, in college about the great black inventors and scientists of our time. It's not taught to me in high school, candidly, I don't learn it at home either, it's not a subject of conversation 'cause I don't know that my parents knew it or had been taught.  I didn't know that the person who invented the traffic light was black [Garrett Morgan] or the first open heart surgery was done by a black man [Daniel Hale Williams], like I don't, you know, the first millionaire, Madam C.J. Walker, right.  So, and I don't learn these things necessarily in the class, I just learn them in conversation with my peers now who know more, know more about our culture, or these parts of our culture than I do, and it's embarrassing.  And it's embarrassing and made me realize that for all that I had learned or thought I had learned up until that point I was still so far behind the curve, not, about my own heritage, my own experience, but it also starts to seep in and makes you think what else don't I know and how far behind the curve am I elsewhere (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 665955
Speaker 1: Now were they--was there a black student organization--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and were there the, the Greek--
Speaker 2: Yep, so we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) organizations and all that?
Speaker 2: So, there was the Black Student Alliance, what it was called at the time.  We had black fraternities and sororities including Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] at the time, Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] were all on campus [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you join the Black Student Alliance?
Speaker 2: I did join the Black Student Alliance, I was, I sang in the BSA choir for a little while, right, 'cause when we're in places we're uncomfortable we revert to that which seems most comfortable so I sang in the choir at church so I'll sing at, I'll sing in the BSA.  It was also a social mechanism obviously.  I ultimately did not pledge, I did express interest in pledging one of the fraternities, a number of my friends ultimately pledged and (laughter) for years many people thought that, notwithstanding the fact I was not a member, I was, simply because of who I hung out with.  But I was always around. The, the, the Greek culture was a big part of the black social scene on campus.  I think at the time that was generally true for all, for the entire campus sort of the Greek life but particularly in the black community, right.  Black Greek events sort of became like the social hubs, right.
Speaker 1: And you were, it just occurred to me that you were in school right about the time that Spike Lee made 'School Daze'?
Speaker 2: Correct, I was, I was.  So, and everybody, everybody clamored to go see that movie, right.  And 'cause we, either you already had been on line and pledged or you were thinking about it or you knew somebody who had done it, so we, it wasn't, so everybody went to see that lens on black Greek life, right, and--
Speaker 1: Gamma Phi Gamma [Gamma Phi Gamma Fraternity] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Gamma Phi Gamma, you know.
Story_ID: 665956
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, so college for me, you know, the self-aware, the self-learning and, and social learning was as important as the academic learning.  Early on I probably did too much social learning than academic learning 'cause I really struggled my first, I would probably say my first year if not more in college.  I mean, I was a kid who was used to making, you know--I didn't know, you know, I barely knew what a B looked like 'cause most of, you know, my academic experience was in the A realm.  I tell this story. I took a freshman chemistry class, an introduction to chemistry and I kind of knew I was in trouble when about a week and half into the semester the professor had covered everything that I had ever learned in high school chemistry and the whole course is supposed to be a refresher but while everyone else is refreshing, I was learning still the basics.  Keep in mind at the time I still think I'm gonna be a doctor, right.  And then I thought about it in truth, you know, I didn't have a love for the hard sciences but nonetheless I was, that was my mindset.  And I remember deep into the semester we took a quiz and you take this quiz in your, in your section, like there would be a large lecture and then you'd have a section which was headed by a--a student, a graduate student teacher.  And then you'd ge- they'd grade the quiz, and you'd come back and the, the grad student would say, "Well, the high score on the quiz was 97 [percent], the low was 42, the median was whatever," blah, blah, blah.  And, you know, and then you'd go up, and they call your name and you'd go up and you get your paper, it's folded over and then you'd open it inside and there's your grade written in red.  So, (laughter) I remember one day, well, the low score was a 42 and I thought to myself, man, I'd hate to be the person in this room who got a 42, I mean, seriously, a 42? Right.  If you get a 42 you might wanna reevaluate whether you're in the right place, right.  So, sure enough he says, "(Pronunciation) Cowan [HistoryMaker William "Mo" Cowan]," which by the way is a common way people mispronounce my name and it's a clear sign that I didn't have enough of a relationship with this teacher (laughter) that he actually knew my name.  So, I go up front, I get the paper, and I turn and walk back to my desk and I open it up, and there in bright red ink is the 42.  And in that moment I decided I'm not gonna be a doctor.  In that moment I decided I am wasting my time in this class 'cause I do not care enough about the subject and the material to put in my, give it my all.  I'm better than a 42 and if all I'm willing to do is get a 42, then I'm wasting everybody's time and my mother's [Cynthia Long Cowan] money.  So, I walked back to my desk, picked up my backpack and walked out, walked to the bursar's office, I think, or soon thereafter, and withdrew from the class.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Never took another hard science class the entire time I was at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: So, they weren't required for graduation?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  Had they been, boy, I would have (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, some, some schools they are (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some, schools, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: They require you to take a hard science.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And when I went to school they required it, even though you, you had no inclination.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was envying you just now (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --(unclear) because I, I, I certainly would have at the time 'cause I wasn't prepared to do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, so I struggled through with that, you know, but that's a, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, it, look, I just, it, you know, sequentially I can't remember if everything went the right way but I realize that 42 or whatever that number was I was like, it's, this is not for me.
Story_ID: 665957
Speaker 1: And what I need to do on this campus [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] is two things, figure out why I'm really here, and then figure out what I need to be doing here to get to achieve those objectives, academically and otherwise.  So, I sort of went on a quest, a little bit of soul searching, bounced around. I tried different things, different courses, 'cause I was like I nee- at some point I'm gonna need to choose a major, right.  And ended, eventually ended up in the social sciences, a space I felt very comfortable in and what, a space in which I was quite interested in the course material, whether it was psychology, sociology, public policy, political science, right, things I liked to do, read and, and sort of digest information and, and engage in conversation and debate, right.  It was much more interesting to me than, you know, sort of just crunching the numbers or finding the formula, not that those things aren't important but I think it's important that you find out, you know, what your strong spots are, right, and, you know, play to your strengths.  Don't ignore your weaknesses but play to your strengths.  So, that's how I eventually found myself into the social science and eventually majored in sociology.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Which I graduated--which was my degree in when I graduated in 1991.
Story_ID: 665958
Speaker 1: Who were s- I mean, a lot of potential lawyers, you know, take political science and--had you thought about law as a, as a ultimate profession--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at this point?
Speaker 2: I came late to law as an idea, probably not until I was a junior, late in my junior year [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], and it's 'cause I was taking some course, I had decided on sociology as a major, had sort of prepared myself that I was gonna go to grad school because, well, what else are you gonna do with a sociology major?  (Laughter) And I was taking some courses on criminal justice, the correctional system, and so one of the professors would, would bring in lawyers every once in a while to talk and I--'cause I didn't really know any lawyers, I didn't grow up around lawyers, the lawyers I knew were on TV, right.  I knew who Perry Mason was but, you know, I, I'm an 'L.A. Law' kid I grew up in the '80s [1980s], right, I'm an 'L.A. Law' kid.  So, he would bring these lawyers in to talk to us about various issues and I just became fascinated by the people who were in the profession and I became fascinated by how the profession empowered people to do some important things, certainly around criminal and social justice, right.  And, you know, obviously if, you know, you admire people like Thurgood Marshall and all the folks in the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and the work that was done there and how lawyers really, you know, shaped this country, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, you all had [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers here in North Carolina--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who's head of the--
Speaker 2: Yep.  And so--but you don't, when you think of those people, originally you don't think about their profession. You think about their work, right, and then you realize in part they're able to accomplish the work 'cause they chose the profession that, that they did.  And you start to say to yourself 'cause, you know, I'm slightly more mature now at twenty-one, (laughter) twenty-two than I was at eighteen, you wanna actually be able to do something, at least I, at that point I was already thinking, yes, I wanna be successful in whatever it is I do but I think it's important that I try to do something, or I'd like to be able to help people too, right. Or at least, you know, do good, do well, as they say. I wasn't thinking about it necessarily in those terms but if I could then that would be great.  And I thought to myself, I remember one, this one lawyer came in and the guy was incredibly arrogant and self-centered but incredibly successful and he was a criminal defense lawyer and I thought to myself, if a guy like that can use the law or a law degree to, to be successful in the way that he's been, imagine what you could do with that degree if your focus was something else, maybe helping other people.  So, I began to explore the possibility of going to law school, very late in my college career by the way.  And I decided that I wasn't gonna take time off, I had convinced myself that I was already in the mindset of the academic grind, it was better for me that I go immediately from college to law school and not take a break for fear that if I had t- if I did take a break I might not come back to academia.
Story_ID: 665959
Speaker 1: Now, one of the--there, there's a big social justice issue I believe it was during the time that you were still in school [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], the Rodney King beating--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --out in Los Angeles [California] which, I mean, everybody today as we speak here is concerned with Black Lives Matter and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the police brutality issue but in those days there was little publicized though it happened everywhere.  So, but Rodney King was at, because somebody [George Holliday] happened to shoot it with a camera--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it became a national--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --story.
Speaker 2: Right.  But, obviously, even--which was, and the King beating and video obviously was a flashpoint and, and brought issues in a si- not the same way but in a similar way. It's like, you know, in the civil rights era when the national media began to broadcast, you know, the marchers being fire hosed and the dogs, all of a sudden it sort of woke up the country to that reality.  I think, the King video in its own way caused a lot of people to say, whoa, what is going on.  And so, what you had was, but you had a lot of people saying, this has been going on all the time, you just keep acting, you keep saying it's not, somebody just happened to capture it.  Then you got people saying, well, that's an anomaly, that doesn't happen, right.  So, yeah, a lot of that was going on and, you know, college is a place, certainly for me, where I developed a greater sense of black awareness, right, and, and being part of and around people who were much more comfortable having uncomfortable conversations about race, race relations, community relations, and people raising my consciousness about it, about the issues.  And sometimes those, those, all those conversations were important. Sometimes they were more constructive than others but all, they were always important. Sometimes there were a small group, just you and a handful of, of black folks in a room, having some pretty raw conversations.  Sometimes it's you and your roommate from, you know, Upstate New York having some awkward conversations about how you see the world and trying to figure out if you can see the world in the same way.  Sometimes it's engaging with a professor to challenge each other on a particular viewpoint or offering historical context to what's happening.
Speaker 1: You know, the Rodney King case presented an interesting scenario I know on 'Nightline' and other, '60 Minutes' and other TV shows because of the, the assertion by the Los Angeles police [Los Angeles Police Department] that even though you, you're seeing this it's not happening the way you're seeing it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Which is, (laughter) which is, I think caused a lot of people to start thinking like, you know, what, you know, what is this legal case gonna be like?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.  I mean, how can somebody say I'm not seeing what I'm seeing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, what is it?  What are the nuances of this?
Speaker 2: It was a challenging time and, of course, then there was the verdict and then the riots, right.  And there is a, this hallmark of this great nation of ours, we still don't know how to talk about race, right. We don't know how to talk about it in a way that affords people both to be angry and to be ignorant which is to say, some people, there is, some people just don't know enough or they live in a world of, of privilege, of one kind or another where they don't see and experience the things, and so their first engagement on the issue might seem to be born of ignorance but it may just be born of unawareness, and you may say how can one be aware but it's, you can be, it's quite easy to be unaware of things in this great nation of ours if you choose to be or if others make it so.  So, and, and but college campus is a place where, you know, all these elements come together, sometimes constructively, sometimes not so.  My experience was I was always more of a, candidly, a, a, you know, a studious observer of things 'cause I was learning at the same time as, as I was experiencing, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would engage in the conversations but, you know, I'd often for better or for worse, I've often tried to say, okay, let me try to understand as much of this as I can from every side, right.  Now, sometimes you say, well look, there's just only, they're like, there's nothing to understand, right. You see four or five police officers brutally beating a man on the street in L.A., you say the picture speaks for itself, right? Right, but, you know, as you said that, that's the way we begin to have a conversation about well, listen, you don't know the rest of the context, right.
Story_ID: 665960
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] was an active campus during that period, there were a host of issues and there were still things going about divestment and apartheid and, you know, so there was a lot that was still playing out--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in real time, right.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the South African issue--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was really big, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I was an interested, curious learner. I wanted to understand all the issues right, right.  So, I like, I'm a fan of history, right, because history is so telling, right, and if you wanna know what's happening today, you gotta understand everything that's happened before today and how it all led up to this, right.  You can't look at just this snapshot and think you have the whole story.  And my view is if someone doesn't understand things, if you do understand, it's always better to try to help them understand, it's incredibly frustrating too by the way. But if you can get people to start to understand things, we got a better shot of having some constructive conversation and ultimately action.  So, but it was an active period but I was learning as I said my, you know, develop my own self-awareness and developing my own self-actualization and, and how I was gonna participate in these conversations and debates and dialogues.  It was a heady time.  I loved college.  In part because every interaction, every day, whether driven by some controversy or social challenge or just a pure academic experience or social interaction, you know, like, it's constantly, it's just, you're soaking it up, it's just learning, right, it's just learning.  And for me, someone who was, I didn't, you know, I would never tell you I came to college fully formed. I came to college to continue to form myself and that was important to me particularly as it related to our history, our culture, our people, and as diverse and dynamic as we are.
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know, was [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin on campus?
Speaker 1: Yes, he was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Dr. Franklin was on campus.
Speaker 2: Did you take courses with him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C. Eric Lincoln was on campus.
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.
Speaker 1: Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] was on campus for a while.  Yeah, luminaries.
Speaker 2: Yeah, C. Eric Lincoln, you don't hear his name that much but he certainly was a top black scholar.
Speaker 1: Indeed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, form- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I took some courses--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with Dr. Lincoln.  And here goes my point about regret and, you know, I'm not a big regret guy but if I were to do it all over again I would, I would have spent more time filling out my educational experience with more classes in the African American studies department.
Speaker 2: That's quite a group of people at Duke.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, and what, what instructors, I guess, were, were the most memorable ones at Duke, I mean, for you in terms of what you would do later on and even when you were there, you know?  Anybody in the sociology department stand out as--
Speaker 1: Not enough that I can recall a name to be honest with you.  I was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, I was not that, unlike high school [Forbush High School, East Bend, North Carolina], I didn't really develop a close relationship with any particular professor in college which is admittedly remarkable since I was there for four years, right.  But the, you know, it--to me, my experience with the professors in college was less personal than it was in high school.  And in college they were sort, they were vessels by which I was receiving, you know, sustenance. I sort of viewed them that way and that's perhaps unfair to them.  But I was--the classes I was most--when I was most fulfilled is 'cause I, it was the, the reading and, and the discussion less so than the individual standing at the front of the room.
Story_ID: 665961
Speaker 1: I have a note here that Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] spoke on campus in '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: And then these are the Reagan years and--
Speaker 2: These are the Reagan--I was in the, he spoke in Cameron Indoor Stadium [Durham, North Carolina]. I was in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in there because--so this was my freshman year, I joined the marching band when I went to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] as a freshman, one, because I had been in the band in high school [Forbush High School, East Bend North Carolina] and because to join, to get, (laughter) to get on the pep band for the basketball games you have to be in the marching band first, so, it was a means to an end, the end being the rugby shirt that they give all pep band members that gives you free access to the basketball games.  So, we were in the Cameron Indoor when President Reagan came in to give his speech. I think it was, this is during the Just Say No period I think may be what he spoke about.  Did not meet him, didn't see him from any close distance.  Oh, this is definitely the Reagan years though, you know.  And Duke was a, was a, probably a fairly political campus but I wasn't particularly political at that time.  I don't remember whether or to what extent there were protests about President Reagan being on campus, I mean, I, this is one thing I--I say to people all the time, you know, my politics I don't hide 'em. They are what they are. But I, you know, I also respect off- the offices that people hold, right.  And I'm not gonna, you know, I'll never tell you otherwise being in Cameron Indoor Stadium while the president of the United States is there speaking was an awesome experience for me, just to, you know, be in the same venue, to say, at the time I thought to myself someday I'll tell my kids that I actually was in the same general vicinity of the president of the United States. Little did I know it, some years later I'd actually, you know, be standing in the White House [Washington, D.C.] with the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], so, and him actually knowing who I am (laughter), so.
Story_ID: 665962
Speaker 1: Any event, yeah.  So, yeah, Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] was, you know, but again this was the '80s [1980s] and, you know I think political activism was probably not as intense during that period as it is now and, and would have been in prior periods.
Speaker 2: The only thing, I mean, now, I guess the mid to late '80s [1980s] the big excitement in the community, at least in some segments of the black community abou- around the Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] candidacy, another North Carolina--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --native.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Who--
Speaker 1: And Harvey Gantt was running for senator against--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Jesse Helms in '90 [1990]. Was it 1990, I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gantt, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Harvey Gantt, yeah.  And I remember that race vividly both because it was happening while I was there and as a North Carolina native, right, and Harvey Gantt was, well, you know, mayor of Charlotte [North Carolina], and, you know, everybody knew who Harvey Gantt was, right.  And, you know, we sort of had this notion that Harvey was the last best hope you had of defeating Jesse Helms, right, the undefeatable, right.  But then Helms ran that nasty campaign, right, just playing to the worst elements, and ideas, and bigotry, and homophobia, and it, it was just, and yet, and he won, convincingly, like and you, it was a period where you say to yourself, what, why does my state keep, why, (laughter) you know, how can we keep doing this, right.  And I, you know, my, my political recollection of that period was I don't want nothing to do with politics, like that's just a nasty business.  I want nothing to do with it.
Story_ID: 665963
Speaker 1: Just one more story about Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] before we leave Duke--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and get you to law school.  When we came in we discussed the fact that you were the neighbor of Christian Laettner--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and a, a Duke sports hero and also the most hated man--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --in coll- in basketball is what ESPN said.  So, what, what was, what was that, that like?
Speaker 2: He was a good neighbor.  So, this was at a time when I was, so I was a senior, I guess, Christian would have been a junior maybe at the time, and Duke has on campus apartments. They call it Central Campus, which is actually kind of interesting because when I would--during my four years at Duke and historically at Duke after freshman year when all freshmen live in dorms, most of the black students would all migrate over to Central Campus, right, 'cause why wouldn't you?  You have an apartment, your own bathroom, your own little kitchen area, a little living room, it wasn't anything special but it was your space, you weren't in a dorm.  And, and unlike, unlike the white fraternities which had, had, which were assigned sections of dorms on campus the black fraternities were not so, you know, there was no natural gathering spot among the traditional dorm culture for many of the black students.  So, you know, from sophomore year through senior year I lived on Central Campus.  Many of the athletes also did the same, the student athletes, particularly, football players and basketball players, particularly the black athletes on those teams.  So, my senior year, my roommate and I lived on the ground floor of our apartment building, so there was, there were these units and there were eight units in a building, four on each side, two lower level, two upper level, separated by, obviously, there was a little balcony between it.  So, just above us lived Christian Laettner and his roommate, Brian Davis.  And so, this was 1991, my last year, or beginning of my last year, and at that time the Duke basketball team was already being projected to be a great team, win a national championship, which they ultimately did at the end of the year. They had gone, they just had been to their third trip in a row to the Final Four [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament]. They went to the Final Four every year I was there.  So, and Laettner had already emerged as like the star and leader of the team.  So, I did not know him until we ended up moving in the same unit together, I knew his roommate, Brian.  But Laettner, Christian turned out to be a, a nice guy, super bright guy, quick witted, sharp wit.  It was, it was easy enough for me to tell that if you didn't know him well or he didn't want you to know him well he could keep you at a considerable distance just with his wit, if you will, and his biting tongue.  But we had a good enough relationship.  I would never describe myself as his friend but we became friendly during that year.  We actually even took a class together and sometimes I gave him a ride to class.  And so, a funny guy, so I actually liked him, right, you know, of course, I had a bias 'cause a Duke fan, Duke student but on a personal level.  But you have to understand at that time, I mean, these guys were literally being treated like rock stars.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, it was in their interests, in his interest in particular I think to keep the circle, the universe of people around him very tight, and keep everyone else at a considerable distance. I think, I don't know how else he would have managed it, you know.
Story_ID: 665964
Speaker 1: We had a good relationship, he was a good neighbor.  As a matter of fact, the--we threw a party early in the school year my senior year [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and Christian was gonna be out of town but he let us use his stereo equipment so but then word got out that the, that Christian Laettner was having a party, which wasn't the case, and basically the entire campus showed up and party got a little out of hand, we had to resort to calling the campus police on our self to shut it down, 'cause people wouldn't leave.  And there was an incident involving a young woman ended up in the student hospital having drank too much 'cause, you know, we had a, we had a keg there but, you know, she had been at various parties, turns out she was underage, none of us knew who she was but in her recount of her evening she noted that she had been at our party, so we were all called in and we got called in to see the, the dean of student affairs who is still on campus and I remember talking to Brian [Brian Davis] who was also on the basketball team, co-captain with Christian.  I remember him, saying to him, he goes, "Listen, don't worry about it.  We're gonna be fine, don't worry about it."  And I said, "Brian, I have no doubt that Christian and you will be fine" (laughter).  I said, "I'm worried about my roommate and me," I said, "'cause, you know, nobody's expecting me to tip off anywhere any time soon."  So, but we ended up on, I guess they called it social probation, they just told us to keep our nose clean for the rest of the year.  But I did have that moment where I thought to myself, huh, I've gotten this far and I can't believe, you know, we screwed it up because of some party that got out of control and, you know, someone got sick, but lesson learned.  Although, I did have to recount that story when I applied to law school, I had it on my application so I had to acknowledge that I had been on probation as a result of that, that--
Speaker 2: So, that followed you all the way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It did.  And I think I actually may have had to put it on my bar application as well, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that's amazing.
Speaker 1: And now the world will know.  So, as I said, lesson learned.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I will, I will tell you this, it was a hell of a party (laughter).
Story_ID: 665965
Speaker 1: All right, but, but you, you had no--did you have any idea that Christian Laettner was such a hated opponent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah, oh, we knew that.  Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --or teammate even?
Speaker 2: --we knew that, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Among his teammates [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did I know that so much?  No, no, I mean that was, that was, that was internal to, I mean, you heard stuff that he was pretty hard on Bobby Hurley, right, you knew, I mean, that was widely known.  And you'd hear things from other players on the team that like, you know, he could be, you know, pretty rough and they'd occasionally call him an A hole but they say, but, you know, he's our A hole, you know, what I mean.  So, you know, when I watched that '30 for 30' ['I Hate Christian Laettner'], you know, I learned some things.  And then you see him in high school, he was sort of like same kind of kid but I think, you know, it was Christian projecting or feeling a need to project his, a certain kind of toughness. But there I go psychoanalyzing again.
Story_ID: 665966
Speaker 1: In terms of law now did you still, did you see yourself when you were a senior [at Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] trying to figure out what law school or had you figured it out by then?
Speaker 2: No, my goodness, no, I had not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --figured it out.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I, again keep in mind I came to the idea of going to law school pretty late.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably not until at the, at the earliest the end of maybe the beginning of my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by that point most other people have already thought about it and, you know, taken the LSAT multiple times and applied, I was late to the game.
Speaker 1: So, but you were like motivated you said earlier by social justice and how you saw yourself as a kind of lawyer that would be involved in social justice issues.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought so on some level.  You know, I thought, you know, maybe I'd go to law school, get a J.D. and become a criminal defense lawyer, right, you know, maybe representing indigent defendants.
Speaker 1: So, so, what law schools did you apply to and how did you end up at Northeastern [Northeastern University School of Law] here in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: So, I really didn't apply to a whole, to a lot of schools, right.  I took the LSAT which was, you know, just not an enjoyable process (laughter).  And, you know, you get your score and then you--I mean, you know, my last, let's say my last two and a half years of college I was working pretty good academically, that first year and a half I struggled, so, you know, it wasn't like I was walking out the door with a 3.9 [grade point average], right, so I had to, I was gonna have to make up some ground there.  My LSAT score was okay, it wasn't, you know, fantastic.  So, but the really thing I was motivating, when I was thinking about the schools I was applying to, I actually, one of my biggest motivating factors was to go to school somewhere outside of North Carolina, I had never lived outside of North Carolina and I said that this is my shot.  So, I thought about other schools in the South, including schools in Georgia, in Tennessee, maybe Virginia, you know, D.C. [Washington, D.C.] as well, but it also just so happens that I, at the time was dating a woman who was from the Boston area and she told me I should look at some Boston schools, and school, including the school where her mother had graduated from and was working, which ended up, which was Northeastern which is where I ultimately, one of the schools I applied to and, and decided to attend.  And, you know, again, the chance to study law outside of North Carolina, although I did have this notion in my head that once I got my J.D. I'd probably end up back in North Carolina but I wanted to at least spend three years somewhere else and Boston seemed like an interesting place.  I had only visited once or twice but again, remember I told you I like history, Boston is a city that's got a lot of history, a lot of American history, right.  It's actually got a very rich African American history that you don't know about until you're here, right, at least I didn't know about until I was here.  So, I came to Northeastern.  The other thing that attracted me to Northeastern was they had a coop program, right, so, you, you, you'll sort of get a year of apprenticeship at the same time you're getting your academic classroom environment and I thought that would be selfishly very helpful and competitive, make me competitive in the marketplace when I was ready to leave.  And I liked the idea of having four coops where I could try different things, different kinds of law to help me hone in on exactly what did I wanna, what I wanted to do with a J.D. so.
Speaker 1: And when we were preparing for this interview we discussed the fact that Northeastern had a coop (unclear) rela- you know, program--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) okay.  So, does, does it take you longer to get out of--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the program?
Speaker 2: That's the interesting thing, it actually, it's still a three year program, so how do you squeeze three years of classroom study plus a year of apprenticeship into three years, three years on the calendar?  Northeastern is on a trimester system, first of all, and then you really don't have any, you know, summers off or things like that, so you do your first full year, a traditional year, and then at the end of the first year the class basically splits in half, half those students immediately start their second year, the other half go out and on their coop, and then every three months they rotate for the balance of the two years, so, that's how they do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665967
Speaker 1: All right, so, was the first year the toughest year for you?
Speaker 2: Law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, but not for the reasons you think--or may think. I don't know why you think, but let me, let me not presume, Larry [Larry Crowe].  It was tough for me for two reasons, one, this was the biggest city I'd ever lived in and I really didn't know anyone except the family or the mother of the woman I was then dating. Period, full stop, right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And so that was, you know, it was a, you know, even when I was at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] I was still only an hour and a half from my mom's [Cynthia Long Cowan] house, right.  If I wanted some home cooking I could get in the car and drive home.  I was now hundreds of miles away in a city where I knew virtually no one and, you know, struggling to figure out how to live in this city.  I remember, I moved up here and I was looking for an apartment and a friend of the young woman I was dating said her boyfriend needed a roommate and he had a place just, you know, just, just outside of downtown and sight unseen I said--I took the place, I took the room.  (Laughter) So, the apartment was in the bottom floor of a two family house in Needham, Massachusetts, okay, and if you, (laughter) if you know sort of Boston culture, Needham is in fact not part of downtown Boston [Massachusetts], it's also not part of Boston (laughter).  So, it's, you know, I don't know what it is maybe nine, ten miles away but it's, you know, it's not a hop, skip, and a jump, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It takes--yeah, we've, we've discovered here that even something three miles away can be a half hour away because--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --of the way the streets are configured.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. So that was a little, that was a lesson learned.  And then, I then learned why the rent was so cheap 'cause the place basically, you know, at times it felt like we were more squatters than anything like, you know, the, there were periods where there was no heat and everything.  It was, it was sort of, so it was jarring coming up here from, from the Duke experience, feeling isolated.  And I have--I remember early on I had this moment of nostalgia where I'm like, you know, I need to, I need to feel, I need to grab hold of something that's gonna make me feel comfortable, right.  So, I was driving down the street in Needham and I was, and I was looking for some food, and I see a place, and keep in mind, right, I grew up in the South, so, there's all these fast food places down south including a lot of chicken restaurants, right, KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken; KFC Corporation], Bojangles [Bojangles' Famous Chicken 'n Biscuits], Popeyes [Popeyes Louisiana Kitchen, Inc.], whatever.  (Laughter) So I see this place, I'm like all right, let me just go in and grab a quick meal, like a two piece and let me get out of here.  And I went in this place, it was called Boston Chicken [Boston Market Corporation], and I walk in and I look around I'm like, I don't think this is what I think it is, and I go up and I said, "What do you, you guys serve chicken?"  They're like, "Yes, of course."  And I said, "I don't see any fried chicken."  They're like, "Oh, no, it's all rotisserie."  And I said, "Rotisserie" (laughter).  I said okay, well, I'm, I'm not in, I'm not in Yadkinville [North Carolina] anymore.  So, you know, so, you know, it took me a while to adjust here, adjust to the weather, right, you know, those first Boston winters you're like, okay, this is, this is serious, let me go out and buy some Timberlands and a big coat.  And, and then discovering that unlike in North Carolina where the hint of snow causes everything to shut down, it can snow for days here and nothing shuts down and you need, you still need to get where you need to go.  So, so, that was a bit of adjustment, not knowing anyone here.  And the other piece that made the first year an adjustment for me was I didn't appreciate how much mental and physical fatigue I would feel by just immediately starting another academic curriculum.  And I had this moment, I remember being in the first year thinking to myself I said oh, my god, I've, I am twenty-two years old now, for the last seventeen years all I've done is go to school, that's all I've done. That's all I know how to do, and I am just sick of going to school, yeah.  And so, I had to get my head right, realize that there was a lot at stake and I couldn't afford to allow myself or allow that feeling to prevent me from grinding out the first year--which is a grind as it's intended to be--and pushing through, pushing through.  But I struggled a little bit, academically and otherwise.
Story_ID: 665968
Speaker 1: You know, again, almost like college [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], different course material, different way of studying, a different way of presentation, right.  And you're told to read, you know, fifty, sixty pages a night but it's not like you're reading a novel, you're reading case law which is not written like a novel and then you're supposed to come back the next morning and say, all right, what was the holding, what was the reasoning, what was the rationale, you know, and you have to learn what those words mean, right.  So, it was a struggle but at that stage in my life I had gotten over the, my shyness about asking for help.  So, I was not shy about going to ask, talk to my law professors and let them know where I was struggling, what I was struggling to understand and that helped me right the course early on.
Speaker 2: And did you get a, a good study group together?
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that was a--you know, there's, study groups are an interesting thing for me in law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] 'cause it's, you know, it's like a thing, right, you gotta be in a study group, right.  And then it becomes like this, oh, are you in the right study group?  So, the fact of the matter for me is I studied best when I was sort of studying by myself, right, and then I would engage people and ask questions, you know.  And, and sort of, but I couldn't sit in a room with a bunch of people studying the same thing at the same time and then, that just wasn't gonna help me, right.  Now, I think that has led to--I sort of tell people all the time I hate meetings, right, and I think the more people in the meeting the less, less productive it's going to be.  And most meetings are actually held because somebody thinks they need to hold a meeting and actually aren't trying to achieve something.  And so, for me study groups were like that, I'm like you guys are just meeting for the sake of saying you have a study group but what are you actually--now for some people they actually do that, my view was--and I tell the people this all the time, study groups or otherwise, figure out how you study and work best and then pursue it. But always be open to working differently because it may help you lead, it may lead to other conclusions or ideas that can, you know, spur creativity or direction.  But in law school I wasn't a study group guy, you know.  I was, hey, let me go find a corner, go sit somewhere in the library or in my apartment, let me grind through this reading and try to understand this and then maybe I'll grab a classmate, get a cup of coffee and bounce some ideas off of.
Story_ID: 665969
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the other, some of your classmates in law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] that, that stand out and, and I'm gonna ask you about the professors too?
Speaker 2: Stand out in the sense that they've, you know, gone on to fame and acclaim or anything like that or--
Speaker 1: Or, or even that were interesting then, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, one guy stood out, he was also African American, has become a good friend, is godfather to our youngest son, was and a groomsman at our wedding, his name is Darren [ph.].  And Darren was, Darren is about three years older than me, three or four years older than me.  And Darren was, so the law was his second career, he had been in banking.  It's been, he's from the Boston [Massachusetts] area but had lived in Atlanta [Georgia].  And he sort of had this worldliness about him that I didn't, I didn't think I had and so I sort of gravitated towards Darren and we became good friends.  And I was impressed by Darren because I realized, at least I thought this was what I was, I thought what I was seeing was because Darren was, had chosen the law deliberately as a second career he was much more focused on the law and the study and the coursework, than even I was the first year dealing with my own burnout.  So, Darren was focused, he was serious, and he's super smart, right.  And he, man, did he take great notes and I would try to get my hands on those notes. And we became great friends.  We ended up working in this law firm [Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo, P.C.] together, we became partners in the same year, as I said he was, he was a groomsman in my wedding and he's godfather of my youngest son. We're still very close.  He's now an in house lawyer at a healthcare company but I still look to him for advice and counsel.  A number of my classmates have gone on to be judges, some have entered political life, many of them are in academia in one kind or another or some form of advocacy.  They stand in, you know, all these people stand out to me or the people I could list for you stand out to me because of the friendships I made with them.  These are people who during that period were as I said I was struggling were really, really there and supportive for me.  Yeah, they're professionally exceptional but I--they stand out for the humanity.
Story_ID: 665970
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite course in law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] or a favorite area of, of law?
Speaker 2: I did.  I--harkening back to my original thoughts about why I wanted to go to law school, I actually did love the, the criminal law courses.  There was a professor named Debbie Ramirez [Deborah Ramirez] whose husband [Ralph D. Gants] is the chief justice of the state supreme court. I really enjoyed her class on criminal procedure.  A really esoteric field of law, at least I think so, called federal courts. Understanding, you know, federal relations and the interplay between state and federal law.  There's a professor named Wendy Parmet who taught that, I was really impressed.  And a professor named James Hackney who started the same year--he started teaching the same year I started the first year, we've since become friends, he's now chief of staff to the university president [Joseph Aoun], stand out.  Other classmates include my roommates, Justin [ph.], Paul [ph.], and Mike [ph.].  One guy from suburban Connecticut, Italian American, one guy from the North End [Boston, Massachusetts], Italian American, and one guy from Cape Cod [Massachusetts], right.  Three different guys, three different life experiences, growing up, and me, it was a--you know, but all have gone on to do extraordinary things including Paul, who was a city councilor for a while here in Boston [Massachusetts].  Justin and Paul, excuse me, Justin and Mike own their own law firms.  But just, you know, they stand out again all for the humanity because we really got to know each other and learn a lot about each other's experiences and differences and that actually brought us together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what about the faculty?
Speaker 2: David Hall, David Hall who is now the president of the University of Virgin Islands [University of the Virgin Islands, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] was a towering, regal man.
Speaker 1: I think I know who you're talking about, tall, black man.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He played, about 6'5", played ball at--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --maybe Oklahoma State [sic. Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas] or something like that.
Speaker 1: He's from the, yeah, Oklahoma area.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but just a brilliant man, a brilliant scholar, good soul, and like to me just a guiding light, you know, you know, he, literally somebody you say when I grew up I wanna be like you.  And, you know, he was just one of those people in the, in the, in the school where if you were any student but particularly a black student you gravitated towards him, right.  Just remarkable.  And we're still very much in touch.  Actually, we eventually became neighbors, I moved into his neighborhood and we were neighbors for a number of years before he moved to the [U.S.] Virgin Islands.  So, I think about David.  I think about Hope Lewis, who is a scholar, who joined the law school and the faculty the same year as I joined as a student.  I think about the men and women in the career services offices and the coop office including Alice Alexander and her team who really helped me shape my thinking about what I wanted to do with that law degree when I got it, and how I could make the most of it, not just as a professional pursuit but as, in terms of my personal growth and satisfaction.  Just, those are just some of the folks among many.
Story_ID: 665971
Speaker 1: So, when you were on the verge of graduation did you still think that you were, you would go into criminal law?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  At that point, I had, you know, done all my coops including a summer associate at a law firm here in Boston [Massachusetts] and I had developed an increasing interest in business law. And so I decided to take a position with a law firm and further my education and profession in that space.  I just found the issues around business strategy and tactics and the interplay of regulations and business very interesting to me and that's why I went down that path.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, you joined what, Peabody and Arnold [Peabody and Arnold LLP, Boston, Massachusetts] as your first, first firm (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Peabody and Arnold was, was the first law firm, yep, indeed.
Speaker 1: And how would you characterize that experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, a venerable, you know, white shoe Boston law firm that had been around for a long time.  Heavily, at its height it was probably like a hundred and twenty-five lawyers back in the day. But it was my first real, it was my first full time employment out of law school [Northeastern University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts] and people were very, very good to me there and I learned a lot there.  Most of my time there I was one of, no more than one or two black lawyers in the firm but I was, I had some good mentors and I got some great opportunities and I never, I was never made to feel that I was unwelcome, out of place, or an other there, right.  And I really, really do appreciate the, you know, I was there for about three years about the time I spent there, it was really, really formative for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you explain this, now I've heard the term, I've heard Mintz Levin [Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo, P.C.] described as a silk stocking law firm and you just described--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As a white shoe.
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah, Peabody and Arnold as a white shoe law firm. What, what do these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know that I've ever heard silk stocking before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard it--
Speaker 2: Is that, what it, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've, Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyers use it for some reason I've heard--
Speaker 2: Silk stocking.
Speaker 1: Yeah, our, our director used it in describing Mintz Levin as a silk stocking law firm.
Speaker 2: I will--
Speaker 1: So, I--
Speaker 2: --freely admit you have stumped me on that.  I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really (laughter)?
Speaker 2: --I don't know what the silk stocking reference is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm not a lawyer but that's what I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, well--
Speaker 1: --that's what I, I hear from--
Speaker 2: I, see I need to go do some research 'cause I didn't know, that's, that's news to me, so.
Speaker 1: Well, I thought that was part of the lawyer culture.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it may be.  I don't practice as much law as I used to so I do more, I'm more consulting now but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I still have never heard silk stocking. That's interesting.
Speaker 1: And what about the white shoe law firm?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the white, my understanding is the white shoe sort of refers to like, you know, that old New England white buck shoe, you know, the Brahmin sort of--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --you know, you know--
Speaker 1: --there's a similar connotation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) moneyed class, yes.
Speaker 1: --she uses when she talks about the silk stocking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, perhaps, yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Maybe it's the, it's the rough equivalent of the white shoe, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that maybe.  Yeah.  Okay.
