Story_ID: 660773
Speaker 1: So, I want you to state your name and spell it for us, including your middle name if you have it and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Troy--and am I looking at you or the camera (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're looking at me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Troy Lemar Carter [HistoryMaker Troy Carter], T-R-O-Y, L-E-M-A-R, C-A-R-T-E-R.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 11/14/72 [November 14, 1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can I have today's date?
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's August--
Speaker 2: August 9th--today is August 9th, 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And our location?
Speaker 2: We are in Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I do many things (laughter).  My occupation is a media executive.
Story_ID: 660774
Speaker 1: And I--we have five People magazine-ish questions, and we add one extra on it, to it.  But I'd like to know your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'm actually one of those rare people without a favorite color (laughter), so it changes from time to time.  But I, I've never had one favorite color.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time of year for me is summertime.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be Chinese.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation is Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phase, phrase or saying would be, you can't fall off the floor.
Speaker 1: Okay that's good.  And I'm going to ask you your favorite song?
Speaker 2: My favorite song.  That's a really tough question.  Can we do favorite album (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Your favorite album?
Speaker 2: Favorite album would be, Stevie Wonder, 'Songs in the Key of Life.'
Story_ID: 660775
Speaker 1: So I want to, I want to start out by asking you about your family background.  And can you tell me--let's start with your mother, can you give what you know about--you know, give her name and her year of birth and what you know about her background growing up.
Speaker 2: My mother was Gilda Car- Gilda Carter [Gilda Crawford Carter].  She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1950, daughter of James Crawford and Dolores Crawford, seven siblings and just was a, a wonderful caring mother.  You know growing up, she grew up in an era where it was--you know the, the stories she told me just in terms of kind of growing up around, you know the Civil Rights Movement and the trips that she would take down south during the summer to see some of our cousins and some of the things that she, she experienced.  But things that she didn't true, didn't experience up north but you know once she went down south you know what a different place the world was, you know.  So, but I think she, she grew up in a very interesting time.
Speaker 1: You mean the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah, during the Civil Rights Movement.  And Philadelphia was, Philadelphia was always a segregated town you know just in terms of where the blacks lived, where the Italians lived, where Jewish people lived.  And, and everybody pretty much kept, kept to themselves.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and in Philadelphia it was, it's, it was such a segregated town, you know Italians lived one place, blacks lived one place, Jewish people lived one place and everybody pretty much kept to themselves.  And--but there wasn't a lot of outright racism you know just in terms of Jim Crow, you know.  And, and when she went you know to the South you know she experienced things that you know where she couldn't use certain restrooms and you know when they were on the road they couldn't stop at certain places, you know so to be able to grow up as a child during that era and you know and--but still be able to raise your kids with, without malice towards you know any sort of race or anything like that you know it, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: So she really--so you don't know where in the South she was going?
Speaker 2: South, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Oh so, so her, the family comes from the--
Speaker 2: My--yeah, both my mother's side and my father's [Charles Carter, Sr.] side of the families has deep roots in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And did you--have you spent any time in South Carolina yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't.  I've, I've gone to South Carolina but not in terms of being able to retrace my roots there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know this summer we were scheduled to do a road trip and we were going to stop there.  And--but ironically I couldn't get a tour bus (laughter), you--the summer touring season was so busy we couldn't get a bus.  But we planned on going down there just to visit some of the areas.
Speaker 1: Do you know what the areas are?
Speaker 2: It is, it's a very small town.  I want to say it's Sixty Seven, South Carolina [sic. Sixty Six, South Carolina] is the name of the town that--where, where my family is from.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660776
Speaker 1: And did--how would you describe your mother [Gilda Crawford Carter], Troy [HistoryMaker Troy Carter]?
Speaker 2: You know what, she was a very, very hard working, very strong, you know.  And I think I, I got a lot of my strength from, from her where--and resilient, you know.  So, whereas you know she was a single, single mother, raised three boys but got up to work every day, 5:30 a.m., faithfully for thirty years at the same job, Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania [Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And you know but in a time where you know she didn't, she didn't take welfare, you know.  She--and she refused to.  And you know and we weren't allowed to sleep in after, you know seven, seven a.m., 7:30 a.m., you know you better get up.  You know you, you, you know--and when we were teenagers we had to work, you know so I got my work ethic from, you know from my mom.  And I, I got--you know she had a lot, she--it was grit.  She had a lot of grit and, and was one of those who you know she didn't play around.  She didn't play around and she was very, very protective in a way where you know my brothers and I, specifically my older brother and I, you know we grew up on the streets in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you know so you know we come from an urban neighborhood and you know we would you know rip and run the streets.  But you know when it came down to ultimately us doing the right thing and you know and making sure that we had--we were grounded you know like, in love and reality but disciplined you know at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your, your father [Charles Carter, Sr.]--so you're the middle child then?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the middle child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I have a half-brother as well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on my father's side.
Speaker 1: So can you give me your, your siblings' names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have Charles Car- Carter, Jr. [Charles Carter, Jr.], who is my older brother and then I have a younger brother, Justin Carter and then a younger brother, Brian Carter.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660777
Speaker 1: So tell me your father's name and I know your father--they got, they got separated or divorced early on?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my father's name is Charles Carter, Sr.  What else do you want?
Speaker 1: Just about him, his growing up and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so and my, my father grew up in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They were one of the early black families in the, in the Strawberry Mansion area in, in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, you know and, you know hearing that--you know and he's one of eight siblings you know so he comes--we come from a really big family and you know when he, when he--when they moved to Strawberry Mansion, you know he was, you know a, a really, tough kid, you know.  So, he and his older brother, you know, they would get into, get into trouble, cause mischief and you know and--but in, in the era he grew up in you know he was a, he's a veteran, serve, served in Vietnam, you know.  And--but a very, very proud, proud guy.  And was a, was a man who--and still is a man who has always taken care of his family, has always kept the family connected.  And, and that--and you know and recently you know he retired about six years ago and one of his projects was, you know, just going back and starting to document a lot about the family and researching our family roots and--but also you know getting the stories about the family so where it's not just about a name, you know it's about the story.  So, you know so he's been putting together that archive and he's traveled to South Carolina and, you know so--but real- really, great, great father.
Speaker 1: But you know so he's, he's like us.  You should send him over then (laughter).
Speaker 2: Nice.  Exactly.  No, it, it actually--you know just knowing what he's been up to, this--it, it played a part so when I read about, you know, what you guys are doing you know it kind of all fell in line with what he's working on as well.
Speaker 1: So now when did your parent- how did your parents meet?  Do you know that story?
Speaker 2: My, my parents ironically have a mutual cousin so where, it was part of the Fuller [ph.] family, one person was married to like somebody that he knew or whatever and, and I, and I want to say that they met when he went to, he went to Vietnam and I--and they, they would write each other.  And when he came home they met and they, you know it was one of those things where you know they fell in love and, and, and me and my older brother [Charles Carter, Jr.] were the fruits of that, of, of that love.
Speaker 1: So were they, did they meet--what age were they when they met?
Speaker 2: That would have had to have been late teens, early twenties, yeah, yeah, because my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] had me when she was twenty-two, yeah.  Yeah, so about late teens.
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what about--oh you mean late teens, okay they were--
Story_ID: 660778
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about your, what your father [Charles Carter, Sr.] has uncovered about his background, the family background.  Do you know that?  Has he shared that with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what, one of the things like you know so, he's, he's, he's traced it back I want to say to maybe about four or five, five generations before him.  So, and now he's you know--Ben- Benjamin Mays is our cousin and you know so like really, close ties to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, you know he's been sending me just a ton of information and you know and, and you know the stories that go along with it, just you know about you know how Dr. Mays' mom [Louvenia Carter Mays] basically you know raised our other cousins together with Benjamin and you know and us so we're getting, we've been getting a ton of information and, and stories now.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you've got--you know Benjamin Mays had a, a physique like you, you know and a look (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, when--and now, and it's funny because you know him sending us pictures of the--you know you look at my grand- my father, then his father, and you know and even my, my nineteen year old son, it's like you know it's--you could just put us in a line and, and see the--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --see the lineage.
Story_ID: 660779
Speaker 1: So now when did your parents--so I have it that your parents divorced when you were two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents divorced when I was maybe about two or three years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were the, do you know the circumstances of the divorce?
Speaker 2: You know what, it was, it was one of those things where you know you, you just kind of grow apart, you know.  So, and, and they were one of those couples you know--my, my, my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] passed away this year in March and you know and even still it's like you know her and my dad [Charles Carter, Sr.] were great friends, still loved each other like you know like they met yesterday. And you know my dad was remarried and you know she and my, my stepmother Gail [Gail Carter] and my, and my mom, they were friends.  Actually, last--year before last, we all vacationed together here so, you know so they still had a really tight relationship.
Speaker 1: And did you--what is the time period where your father had you know the whole thing about him--was--is that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my dad was incarcerated when I was seven years old.
Speaker 1: So, so, okay.  Okay, so five years after this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this period of time, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So we'll get to that.
Story_ID: 660780
Speaker 1: So, can you tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: Wow, my earliest memory was probably elementary school, maybe about second or third grade and that was a time when--I, I think my earliest memory might be being in a stage play in elementary school in sec- in second or third grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and do you know what role you played or just--?
Speaker 2: I, I have--I don't remember the role I played.  I think it--I played a prince and, and I just remember I, I, I was walking out and I slid across the stage and this quick recovery that I, that I had to make or whatever.  But, but that was probably one of my early memories, yeah.  And, and my parents [Gilda Crawford Carter and Charles Carter, Sr.] both being there and being, and being really proud, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually--for, for elementary school you went to Huey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Samuel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --Samuel B. Huey Elementary [Samuel B. Huey Elementary School; Global Leadership Academy Southwest, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And is that within walking distance of where you're living and can you describe the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was probably thirty seconds from, from my house.  You know we lived in an apartment.  I, I was born and raised in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We lived in an apartment.  At that time, we were living on 52nd [Street] and Larchwood Streets [sic. Larchwood Avenue] and it--and we lived over top of a hardware store, you know.  And our school was about two blocks away and we--you know two bedroom apartment.  My older brother [Charles Carter, Jr.] and I share- shared a bedroom, but maybe about four, four hundred, maybe about six--five, five hundred square foot apartment.
Story_ID: 660781
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what was life like in the, you know at--at, in your home at that point?  There was, you know like daily life, what was it like?
Speaker 1: It was great.  You know we, we grew up--you know we, we had a ball growing up, you know so, you know it was always fifteen, twenty kids outside playing.  You know all of my family lived within walking distance of each other.  We come from a huge family so a ton of cousins, ton of aunts, you know.  So, I--we, we had--and, and we, and the way we were raised you know we were raised by my, you know my [maternal] grandmother [Dolores Crawford], my aunts, my uncle, you know so, and, so it--really great time.  All--you know mostly great memories, you know.  So, you know when I look back now you know I look back at you know the--some of the tough times.  You know I think my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] did a really great job of kind of protecting us from some of the things that she might have gone through at that time, you know.  But I do have memories of you know us struggling and you know water getting cut off, you know electricity getting cut off, the phone getting cut off, us having to scrape together pennies to get on the bus to go places, you know.  So, we definitely had tough times, you know but when we couldn't pay rent and we didn't have a place to live, we just went to live with my grandmother you know three blocks away and it was, it was, it was nothing odd about that, you know.  So, it just was life growing up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So now if we take your--so how long are you on 52nd [Street] and Larch- Larchwood [Avenue]?
Speaker 1: You know what, probably my elementary school years were mostly 52nd and Larchwood and my grandmother's house was right around the corner of 51st [Street] and Cedar [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Okay, for elementary?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my elementary school [Samuel B. Huey Elementary School; Global Leadership Academy Southwest, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And then we kind of--we probably lived I would say maybe about five or six places as, as I, as I was growing up.  So, between you know elementary school and high school [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I would say we moved maybe about five or six times.  But you know mama's house, my grandmother who was all, you know that was always home base.
Story_ID: 660782
Speaker 1: So I want you to take yourself back to that period of time and you know a lot of times middle kids, you know they say that they have a, they, you know they're sort of in between and just finding themselves. Was, was that--what were you as sort of a middle child and what is young Troy [HistoryMaker Troy Carter] like?
Speaker 2: I was very--no, I spent my life finding myself, you know.  And, and I was always very, very curious and very, very odd too by the way, you know.  I was the seven or eight year old kid that you know if I got ten cents for walking down the, the, the street to get you know to go to the store, I would by the Philadelphia Daily News and, and read the newspaper.  And, and I would go--you know as much time as I spent playing baseball you know on the corner or football on the corner with my friends, I would spend an equal amount of time in the public library [Lucien E. Blackwell West Philadelphia Regional Library, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] on 52nd [Street] and Sansom Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know by myself, you know.  So, I literally would go to the library and you know read books and you know and you know if I had questions I would go to, you know to the index system, you know.  So, I spent a lot of time you know as a li- in, in the library.  And, and we also spent a lot of time in church, you know.  So, we come--you know so, so it was this weird mixture of I was curious in all of these different things.  So, I wasn't one of those kids who got locked into one thing from the very beginning, you know like my youngest son just is obsessed with baseball.  He loves baseball.  Everything is baseball.  I was a mixture of baseball, football, books you know.  And when I found music, that was like the thing that I ended up getting really, really hooked on.
Speaker 1: So you, so you're talking about--now music, when did you get hooked with music as--?
Speaker 2: Probably when I, in my early, early teens.
Speaker 1: Really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Probably about thirteen, fourteen years old is when I really fell in love with music.
Speaker 1: So, but you don't know what drew you to libraries.  It's amazing we're in a library today, right?
Speaker 2: You know it's in- it's interesting but you know this is how serendipitous my life is and how everything ends up coming full circle. It was a, it was a woman that lived on my [maternal] grandmother's [Dolores Carter] block named Ms., Ms. Leonard [ph.] and she was the only white person in the neighborhood and I used to go to Ms. Leonard's house and do chores for Ms. Leonard and like I, and earn money you know and everything.  And Ms. Leonard probably was in her seventies or eighties, you know somewhere around there and she was one of the people in my life that--she had this library in, in her house.  And you know as I think back you know the--her, her square footage of her house was probably the same size as my grandmother's because she lived about six doors away, but this library was huge, you know.  So, in my mind this library might, might as well been you know the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], you know just how big it was because she had all of these books on the shelf and you know she used to let me you know read through the books.  And, and so, so that's where my love for libraries came from, you know.  And still 'til this day, I have you know I have a library in my office, you know I have a library at my house, you know, so you know, I have a, I have a love for physical books you know and the way they feel, the way they smell when they get old, so, so I--I love libraries.
Story_ID: 660783
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me, take me back to that time period living there and tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Sights were colorful, loud.  You know when you grow up in a house where you know twenty something you know first cousins you know and you know--you got to, you got to be loud to get your voice heard, so very loud household, you know.  Still 'til this day every week everybody you know gathers around my [maternal] grandmother's [Dolores Crawford] house you know and it's still just as, just as loud.  Smell wise, you know you, you, you leave the house with the smell of you know whatever is being fried in the kitchen on, on, on your clothes, you know.  And you know but you know it's, it's the broken, it's the broken concrete. It's us having to be creative in, in terms of making things.  You know I, I, I was explaining to my, my, my younger son and my, my, my, my ten year old son, eleven year old daughter, we all went back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for my mom's [Gilda Crawford Carter] funeral in March and I, and I took them to the corner where we used to play baseball.  And, and he was, "Hold on, how did you guys play baseball?"  "Well, this was our baseball court, our football court and our basketball court.  And that telephone pole right there you know we used to break out the bottom of milk crates with a hammer and you know somebody would climb up on somebody's shoulder and you put, you know, the nails in and that was our basketball court."  But we had to create things and we were, we were really hyper creative.  We made up our own games you know.  You know so--and I, I think that--you know even growing up with that, in that, and having to make things from scratch has allowed me to be creative in my, in my adult life.  So, I still carry a, a lot of those traits with me.
Story_ID: 660784
Speaker 1: Now in school were you a good student, I mean you know in elementary school [Samuel B. Huey Elementary; Global Leadership Academy Southwest, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you know 'cause--?
Speaker 2: I, I started off as, as a really good student, you know.  Still 'til this day I think I've, I, I, I may, I, I--I'm probably an undiagnosed ADD [attention deficit disorder], you know as I, as I--you know because back then peop- kids didn't get diagnosed with things or whatever.  But I always you know I was the kid in class that would talk and talk and talk and ask you know and ask questions.  And I also was the kid in class that always got really close to the teachers because I would ask the teachers a ton of questions, you know.  And so, in, in the beginning I was a really great student and then I think when, around that time when I fell in love with music, you know I'm leaving eighth grade, going into ninth grade [at West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my interest for, for structured education fell, fell, you know it went out of the window.  I wanted to know everything about music.  The books that I read you know were about music.  They, you know they became about you know business and things like that.  So, I, I went into this journey of self education and so from ninth grade you know I met my best friend at that time, he was a huge music head and from there I cut school like crazy, grades you know just plummeted and, and you know started getting into trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I want to, I want to understand this, this you know the peer you're talking about.  Now who's your best friend?
Speaker 2: A guy by name of Armique Wyche, but his name was, his nickname was Little, Little Jazz.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660785
Speaker 1: Now when you--I just want to go back to the time that your father [Charles Carter, Sr.] you know that, that incident with your father.  So, when that happens, you are how old when he--?
Speaker 2: I was, I was about--I, I had to be about six when the incident happened and seven when he was sentenced, somewhere around there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, do you remember that having impact on you or, you know--?
Speaker 2: Oh it was a, a huge impact, you know mostly because I think I was too young.  You know and it goes back to that whole thing about being protected, you know.  And I, so I think my, you know of course my family wanted to protect me from not knowing you know what, what happened, you know.  And I, you know and I don't think at that time you know my, you know, my kids at six or seven wouldn't be able to process you know something as you know--a, a, a parent being put away in jail for, you know for murder or anything like that. So, for, so for me you know looking back, I--it was a phase of being lost because somebody who was so present in your life all of a sudden is gone out of your life. You know it was really, really hard to process.  So, I think that went from, you know, acting out and be, you know and behavior.  It was, you know--but, in terms of feelings of being hurt, confused, abandoned, so you know a, a ton of things.
Speaker 1: Well see, and I was just trying to sort of put all this in context 'cause you're saying you're very act- you know you're active in school [Samuel B. Huey Elementary; Global Leadership Academy Southwest, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know you're talking in school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of that happens with a lot of black boys--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sometimes they say.  But the question, tell the circumstances, you know, for the history, tell the circumstances of your father's, you know him being--what, what happened actually?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, so it was interesting, you know at that time my father was a social worker, worked, you know worked for the city [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He and his wife [Gail Carter] were, were married.  They got into an argument and her brother got involved and altercation happened and her brother ended up, you know my father ended up killing her brother, you know.  So--and it was one of those things where, you know, they had a--up until that point you know had a great relationship.  He was really close to her family and her parent--you know her mom and like to the point where even in court, her mother you know testified you know on behalf of my father.  You know and you know that's how close they were.  And you know so the circumstances were tough.
Story_ID: 660786
Speaker 1: My father [Charles Carter, Sr.] ended up doing twelve and a half years in jail I--and you know it was tough for me to go see him in jail.  You know I, I only went twice you know because I, you know I didn't want to be in that environment and see him in that environment.  And he got out when I was about twenty years old and at that time you know it was a big portion of my life that you know he was gone and it was a, it was a disconnect.  But to his credit, he, he and, he and my stepmother Gail [Gail Carter] stayed together, stayed together.  Came back out, initially couldn't find work you know just because you know he served time, became a, a chauffeur for you know a, a, you know a older woman and worked for her for a few years and then reapplied and was able to get his old job back and became a social worker again, and became you know a guy involved in the community and helping people out with, with, with their problems, ended up becoming a fantastic grandfather and father and like you know just--you know.  So, he, he's been one of the--and, and just to be can- really candid, when--a lot of people in our family, the younger kids didn't know, know what happened.  And I did an interview in a mag- you know for Philadelphia Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer] where they you know they talked about my life and I had never talked about the circumstances before and the reporter asked me and--because he said, "Hold on, you know you talk about you know growing up with your mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] and your [maternal] grandmother [Dolores Crawford] a lot, but you never talk about you know where your dad was during that time."  And I had to be honest, you know just because I know it--he's going to find out.  It's public record, you know.  If he did any sort of a skim of my life, you know he, he, you know he would have found out, you know and I wanted to protect my dad from it and our family from it, but I was very honest about it and my dad was mad at me.  And I had, and we had a, we had a real talk about it.  And what I had to explain to him was, you know what, just--because I'm a, because I'm a public figure, people are going to find out.  I would rather tell it from my angle, you know, and you know and just be completely transparent about it.  It was unfair of me to not give him the heads up, you know so he could explain it to, you know to the younger people in our family because I didn't know that they didn't know though.  But what I told him, I said you know what, the fact that--
Story_ID: 660787
Speaker 1: You said he was upset because--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know so, so, initially you know, my, my dad [Charles Carter, Sr.] was upset, you know, that, that I, that I basically told this story and you know, and really you know put private family business you know, you know as the old saying, my [maternal] grandmother [Dolores Crawford] used to say, you know what happens at 5133 stays at 5133, you know, meaning her address you know.  So, but it, it--but we talked about it and I told him about how proud I was of him and that you know he's one of those rare cases of people who could be in, you know, in a situation so tough you know and serve that amount of time in jail and you come back and you get your, you get your family back, you, you know, you get your job back, you know you regain your dignity, you know.  You know, but you know--and, and  lot of people are, are shamed you know but I, I think I had to let him know how, and not just how proud I was but that, the fact that you know it's, it's guys in prison who've read that article and you know who--where I've gotten letters and I've gotten you know people walked up to me on the streets who you know, who that, that's somebody that they can look up to as, as well you know.  And, in looking at our--you know, the current state of you know black men in prison who, and the amount of, the amount--like the, the recidivism rate is, is, is incredible you know.  And the fact that you know he was able to come out and regain his life has just been, is, is great.
Speaker 1: It's, it's an amazing story because you know especially the amount of time he did, it wasn't insignificant time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 660788
Speaker 1: So, this, so I'm just sort of try and trace this.  So, this period of time also and I want to say you know, you said that happened when you were seven, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: And then you start really to get into, in, in junior high [William L. Sayre Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you said you started--and your mother [Gilda Crawford Carter] is then starting, you said move around, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: You know that, that's--things may be getting harder.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, exact-
Speaker 1: You know to keep everything sort of together.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and you know so where we didn't know so you know just from our standpoint like I said you know, you just know, you--when you got to choose between whether you're going to have electricity or whether the phone, you know the, the water stays on and you know and the, the electricity goes out, you know we got to go stay at mama's [Carter's maternal grandmother, Dolores Crawford] house, you know.  Then you know, so, for her, she--you know we really lived check to check and, and were barely, barely making it.  So, you know so, to, to be able to--it, it was this movie that I watched years ago, I think it was called maybe 'A Beautiful Life' [sic. 'Life is Beautiful'].  But it was about a father who, you know they, they were in concentration camps and you know and the father protected the kids so much that the kid thought that they were away at a camp and they were having this fantastic time and you know.  So, and you know he, he ended up winning an Oscar [Academy Award] for the movie.  I think it won best foreign film [Best Foreign Language Film].  But you know when I looked, when I saw the story I connected to it because with all of what had, what must have been going on in the background, we still had this beautiful life, you know.  And growing up, and, and like where when I look back, you know one of my best friends got married last week in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you know five of us you know, including you know the buddy I said from ninth grade [at West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], all of us got together you know and we, we spent about five days all of us together you know we're telling stories and everything.  And if not for the grace of God, wow you know the fact that you know to see your best friends die, my closest cousin was murdered around the corner from my grandmother's house.
Speaker 1: How old was he?
Speaker 2: He was seventeen when he, when he died, killed by another set of kids that we grew up with that robbed him.  And you know it was a midnight robbery, he's going to the corner store and you know guys jump out the car, they didn't even have a clue that it was my cousin, you know.  Those guys are in jail right now.  You know, the fact that you know at, in my teen years I'm carrying a gun bigger than me you know and you know us, you know we, you know, selling drugs here and there, just some of the things that just was available to us as young teenagers, how in the world could these things be available you know to, to kids our age, you know?  And I you know, and as a parent just thinking about that and being able to grow up in you know in that environment and, and, but not knowing that it's wrong, you know?  It's, you know, when, when you work in a fish store you know long enough you stop smelling the fish you know and it's one of those situations where you know, you don't understand how toxic and bad that environment is you know.  So, you know so you know--but growing up for us it just was, it was normal life.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 660789
Speaker 1: So, the neighborhood, I mean at that point in time what is the, the neighborhood?  Are, are a lot of men hanging out on street corners and things like that?  Is there a lot of that at that point 'cause we're (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah, it was, it was a lot of that you know and--but it was, we knew those men on the street corner and you know those were the, the, the same men--excuse me--hanging out on the street corner were the same men now if we were getting in trouble they would call my uncle or they would send us home or, you know, they would discipline us so, you know, so those were the, those were the same men.  When it--you know in our neighborhood you know we grew up in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] it's row houses you know.  So, the, with the row homes, there were about forty homes on this side of the street and about forty homes on this side of the street and it's about you know, forty yards you know between this side of the street and that side of the street.  So, all of the families knew each other, all of us had pretty big families so you know it's a ton of kids on the block and it's, it's a village.  It really is a village.  We spent the night over each other's homes, you know we called each other play cousins you know, our moms you know used to hang out together.  And then all I remember is when in the nine- about 1986, 1986 when crack [crack cocaine] hit our neighborhood--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --that's when it all fell apart.  That's when it started falling apart.
Speaker 1: So that's--you're, you're in your twenties when, when that took place?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was in my, about six- about sixteen--
Speaker 1: Sixteen?
Speaker 2: --fifteen, sixteen years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I have it down--okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I'm sorry you're right, you're right, okay.  So, that--so you remember the introduction of crack coming into the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes, and you know I remember more than just crack, I remember the money that, that, that start flowing, that started to flow in you know because that young, you know it was, you know, the older guys you know would--you know the ice cream truck comes, they're treating everybody to ice cream.  You know they would buy us a pair of sneakers here and there if you know they saw that our sneakers you know started to get holes in them.  And, and then you know, and you remember the fancy cars start- starting the pull up, you know the jewelry coming out, you know the, the clothes you know were so extravagant and you wanted to be those guys.  So, it was this luxurious life that started coming into the neighborhood, but at the same time, the violence really picked up, you know.  And it was you know the Jamaican Shower Posse against you know a gang in our neighborhood called JBM, the Junior Black Mafia and, and it was bloodshed in the streets, you know.  So, it went from--so you, you had that going on and you, and, but, and at the same time you had those older guys that were hanging out on the streets that, you know, would drink the liquor and were the fun guys, now those were the guys you know all of a sudden they're stealing the VCRs [videocassette recorder] and they're breaking into cars and they're breaking into houses and they're losing jobs you know.  And the women who you know who used to be beautiful on the block, all of a sudden, you know, they're losing teeth, they're losing weight you know.  People are starting to go to jail, families are starting to fall apart.  So, I, literally I was there at the epicenter, you know.  They--the, the guy who was getting his drugs from the Colombians lived, you know, literally right around the corner from us.  You know he's serving life in prison right now but you know that was the time when, when drugs started hitting the neighborhood and--
Speaker 1: What was his--
Speaker 2: --families start falling apart (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: Aaron Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660790
Speaker 1: Now then you say, now you, you talk about Lawrence Goodman.  Are you finding Lawrence Goodman later, I mean 'cause when you--
Speaker 2: No, this was all around the same time so you know, so, so--
Speaker 1: Are you in your teens 'cause remember you said, I thought you said it was in junior high [William L. Sayre Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you start getting into really--was it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so all, all of this kind of is all happening around the same time.  So, so when what was strangely beautiful--you know so when you look at from eight--19--1986 through '88 [1988] and those years, you had all of this flamboyance come up and then, but at the same time it was the best music.  And you know hip hop was just really giving birth to, to going into the golden age and that's when I was falling in love with music at that time.  So, what's interesting about you know Lawrence Goodman, I grew up with his kids and his nephew [Tarik Dawson].  So, he lived about five, about seven doors down from--his mother lived seven doors down from my [maternal] grandmother [Dolores Crawford].  So, Lawrence would come on the block and visit his mother.  His kids used to come play with us and the same cars that the drug dealers were pulling up in, Lawrence was pulling up in.  And you had these hip hop, you know these rappers pulling up in cars, you know, with Lawrence and I was in awe and I was more attracted to what Lawrence was doing because he was the boss you know of, of these musicians.  And you know I would write my little raps and poetry and that sort of thing and I would give it to his son Quran [Quran Goodman] you know, "Hey can you give this to your dad?"  Or I would leave a tape you know, you know in the doorstep, something that I literally just would kind of record a capella vocals on.  And, and you know Lawrence was always good to me, just you know he would encourage me.  I, I wasn't good enough you know at, at that point or whatever to, to be a professional musician but, but I was in awe of just seeing this guy who--you know, the, the lifestyle.  I was, I was really attracted to the lifestyle.
Story_ID: 660791
Speaker 1: So, who are you looking up to in music at that point?  Who are you wanting to be or--?
Speaker 2: At, at that point I would say early on I wanted to be Lawrence Goodman.  I want, I wanted to be a mixture of Lawrence Goodman, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons, but at the same time I wanted to be a rapper too.  So, you know, so it was, it was both of those sides.  I was really interested what they were doing on the business side because it was so creative and, and you know, and--but at the same time I wanted to be a musician too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And talk about the group then that you formed, like how, how old are you when you form 2 Too [2 Too Many]--?
Speaker 2: We were in junior high [William L. Sayre Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--we were in high school.
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: So going into my ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so ninth grade you go to West Phil--
Speaker 2: West Philly High [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: --West, West Philly High, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and in ninth grade my first day in ninth grade I met this kid named Little Jazz [Armique Wyche] who, he was a rapper too and we ended up sitting next to each other in class.  And he and I hit it off and we, we formed this group.  And you know it was like from battle rapping to break dancing to you know, you name it or whatever.  And, and he had a younger cousin named Anthony [Anthony Fontenot] and, and the three of us ended up forming this, this group.
Speaker 1: Now I saw that you were a year apart, each of you.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, you know you were like stair steps in age.
Speaker 2: Exact- exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  So, so Jazz was all, always a--just, from a maturity level because one of the things that I credit him for, I was very in- insular at that time coming into, into, into, into high school.  And he's, he, he kind of helped bring out that--my, my confidence, yeah.
Speaker 1: You mean you were, are--when you say insular, were you shy?
Speaker 2: Not, not shy but more you know--so I, I had a lot of i- ideas that I felt were, that I would write down on paper that I wouldn't share with other people and I had, you know, you know, whether it was songs, whether it was little business ideas, all of these things.  And you know we used to keep like composition books and you know he would look through the stuff and say, "Man you gotta do this."  Or, you know, so he was the one who kind of pushed me you know to, to, to try certain things and push me beyond you know my, my normal, my normal boundaries.
Speaker 1: So, was that common?  So, is every--are there a lot of kids at school who have composition books or are trying to start groups?  Was that happening in the school or is this outside of school?
Speaker 2: This was inside and outside of school.  So, you know, so at that time you know you had you know all of these different crews kind of forming you know.  So, different rap groups, different dance groups, guys who would write graffiti together and then you know, we, you know, it was talent shows.  And, and in our neighborhood what was interesting, you know when I look back you know at some of the little talent shows we were doing, you know it was, you know it was Boyz II Men you know as those guys were coming up, you know it was Lisa [Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes] from TLC, you know, you know who moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and you know became you know one of the biggest girl groups in the world, Boyz II Men became one of the biggest guy groups in the world.  You know we met Will and those guys in our late teens, Will Smith and Jazzy Jeff [DJ Jazzy Jeff], and you know, Will ended up becoming like the biggest movie star in the world.  So, it was--it really opened my eyes to wow, it--all things are possible.  If you're willing to you know, to be able to really have a vision for it and really work hard at executing on that vision, you know in, you know any, any and all things are possible.
Story_ID: 660792
Speaker 1: You know what I find interesting about this is I'm wondering who's mentoring you know you guys or is it--cause it's really a youth oriented thing.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And, and it seems like you know everybody then, well you look back years later they're all, you know successful.  And so what I'm trying to understand is what is--I mean and how you keep on the straight and narrow because a lot of people can sort of go off and then--
Speaker 2: We were, we were off too you know.  So, that, that's one of the things.  So, you know so as much positive you know as--like we did a lot of the positive things.  You know at the same time you know we got into a lot of, a lot of trouble you know.  You know and, and I remember, I remember my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] you know she put, she put me in this, it was a Scared Straight program at school you know where they, they, we had to sit in on a trial you know, a criminal trial at court for one day.  And then, then one day we had to go and visit a correctional facility in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right outside of Philadelphia and I got scared straight.  It was one of those things where, wow, you know, this is what it's like to be inside.  And you know and those--it wasn't a--and, and the inmates were just as mean to us and you know so it was, it was eye opening, you know.  But it was one of those things that although I still went off the rails every once in a while I think between that, knowing my dad's [Charles Carter, Sr.] circumstances, me being, always being--I was pretty much always the younger guy out of like the people I would hang with or whatever you know because having an older brother [Charles Carter, Jr.], having a, you know, older cousins, guys in the neighborhood, those guys would make sure that I didn't go too far.  I never had luck in selling drugs.  I tried.  You know, I hid my drugs, the drugs got stolen, thank god, you know so they wouldn't give me anymore.  So, I've, I've always felt like I've had this sense of not wanting to disappoint my family has, you know, has always been a big thing.  And, and not wanting to embarrass them as well.  That, that's always been big for me.  Not wanting to get into that sort of trouble where, you know, where it's no turning--that thing where it's no turning back.
Story_ID: 660793
Speaker 1: And I got kicked out of, I got kicked out of about three high schools going into my eleventh, during like eleventh and twelfth grade.
Speaker 2: So you left West Phil- you got kicked out of West--?
Speaker 1: I got kicked out of West Philly [West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I got kicked out of, it was Olney, Olney High--I left Olney High School [Olney Charter High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], got kicked out of West Philly, dropped out of like this Delaware Valley High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] program and I did a short stint at another high school.  And then finally my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] literally like dragged me down to this, to, to this Job Corps center and I didn't know what Job Corps was at the time and I remember her signing me up.  Like literally I'm sitting there no say so whatever, watching her fill out all of the paperwork and within a few weeks I was on a bus headed to Port Deposit, Maryland to this Job Corps center where it's--and it's a government sponsored program that the Shriver family started that takes kids from the inner city that are you know pretty much, it's, it's either parent, either your parents put you in or it's court appointed and you get, you gain a skillset and you get your GED [General Educational Development].  And she put me in that program and that's when it was, okay, I got to get it together.  That was really the point where it was okay, I'm getting focused.
Speaker 2: So she really, she, she, she was struggling like a lot--I mean she has three boys.
Speaker 1: Um-hm (nods head).
Speaker 2: And all of this is really happening and--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --it's hard to keep--
Speaker 1: And, and the streets were getting like you know, like I said it was getting violent so she put my, my younger brother [Justin Carter], she put him in a boarding school in Pennsylvania to get him off the street early.
Speaker 2: Which boarding school?
Speaker 1: It was Scotland [Scotland School for Veterans' Children, Scotland, Pennsylvania], Scotland was the name of the boarding school.  Me, she put me, she put me in Job Corps, and my older brother [Charles Carter, Jr.] ended up going into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].
Speaker 2: She saved all of you?
Speaker 1: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 2: Wow, okay.  That doesn't happen all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep.
Story_ID: 660794
Speaker 1: So okay.  So, so when you--so what are, talk about what's influencing you and what's going in your head in your teen, you know in the, the teens, I mean the music.  What do you want--'cause you didn't even give the name of the group.
Speaker 2: The group was called 2 Too Many.
Speaker 1: And I think I, I--you know, in YouTubing, I think I found, I don't know, it said Troy Carter [DJ Troy Carter].  There was a beat, I can't remember the name of the song but it had a (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no it's a deejay called Troy Carter right now.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause I was like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I said well maybe I found one of the recordings.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We get, we get confused.  It's a--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --deejay named Troy Carter so I get mistaken with him sometimes.
Speaker 1: So, so what are you--so the name of the group.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the name of the group was called 2 Too Many.  And you know, and for us it was hav- we were having fun so it was you know--and where a lot of people were going like super hard core, we were more like a, a Jazzy Jeff and Fresh Prince [DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince] type of, it was more silly rap than, than, than anything else.  So, but we, we had a, we had a great time doing it.  And, and Little Jazz [Armique Wyche] who was the, he pretty much the leader of the group you know he always said you know, "If Jazzy Jeff and Fresh Prince sees us, they're going to give us a record deal, I'm telling you," you know.  So, we would hop the el train [elevated train] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to, to go down to Jazzy Jeff's recording studio [A Touch of Jazz, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and literally would wait outside the studio to see if we saw somebody.  We would you know look through the windows and nobody would let us in.  And, and Jeff, we, sometimes we used to see Jeff actually looking at us you know, but you know Jeff wouldn't let us in.  And then one day some kids that we went to high school with [at West Philadelphia High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] happened to be recording in that studio and they let us in and Will Smith, his manager James Lassiter, Jeff, all of those guys, Charlie Mack you know who was the security guy who's become like my guardian angel, all of those guys just happened to be there.  And, and we just put in our demo tape and started rapping for them and you know went outside and danced in the snow and, and they fell in love with us, you know.  But more so, they fell, I think they fell in love with the fact that, hold on these kids are dancing outside in the snow and they asked us how, how we were getting, how were we getting home and we said we didn't know because literally we didn't have money to get on the train.  We hopped the train to get down and Will put us in his car and dropped us home and basically told my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] you know, he said, "I, I got 'em," yep.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And, and he--and still 'til this day between Will, James Lassiter who's his manager, James is like one of my dearest, dearest friends.  He's the guy who when I have that deep life question I still call 'til this very day and Charlie Mack you know who's been my, my other big brother.  He's, you know 'til this very day I'll talk to Charlie probably once a week.  We talk about life and kids and problems and triumphs you know so, you know I'm still close to those guys twenty something years later.
Speaker 1: Don't you think that's pretty--that's an amazing story--
Story_ID: 660795
Speaker 1: What time, what is Will [Will Smith] and Ja- what are they doing at that point?  What point in their career you know are they at, at that point?
Speaker 2: So Jame- James [James Lassiter] was still in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and, actually--
Speaker 1: He had grad- he had--how old was he at that point?  Had he--
Speaker 2: Aw man--
Speaker 1: --'cause he went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jame- James went to Temple and I don't even remember how--so that had to be maybe twenty-two years ago, some, somewhere around there, may, maybe about twenty-two years.  But James was still in Philadelphia.  He would go--Will had just gotten 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'] at that time.  And, and James would go to you know fly to L- fly to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] then kind of come back to Philly but you know he was based in Philly.  And James grew up eight blocks away from, from my [maternal] grandmother's [Dolores Crawford] house and what we ended up finding out, our moms used to catch the bus to work together, yeah.  So, our moms knew each other.  And, and the contract that I ended up signing with him, James is still staying in the back bedroom at his mother's house and you know we signed the contract in the bedroom you know at, at his mom's house.  And like you know so all of us were still basically in the neighborhood you know.  So, Will wasn't rich at this point you know just because of you know the trouble he had gone through with taxes or whatever so, you know so it wasn't you know, huge.  So--and, and Jazz [DJ Jazzy Jeff], you know everybody was still basically just, just kind of getting there.  So, so I, I, I was able to watch Will go from you know Fresh Prince rapper, TV show to you know literally the biggest star on the planet so, so it was interesting.
Speaker 1: So are you, so they see something in you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how many groups are there at that point do they have 'cause they're doing artist manage- or James is--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think James might have had two groups.  We might have been at that time the only group signed to, to their company [Willjam Productions], yeah.  Yeah, I, yeah I, I don't even remember there being--I think they were talking to a group at a time like an R and B group, but yeah we were pretty much it.
Speaker 1: And then Will took off so then the focus became Will, is that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ex- ex- exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 660796
Speaker 1: So, now they--so you, you then end up working there right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: So, so it, it kind of--the group [2 Too Many] fell apart.  You know it wasn't, it wasn't successful.  But James [James Lassiter] and those guys took, you know it--I was always interested in--I, I was more interested in what James did on the business side and I became like the de facto manager for the group, you know, because I would ask questions.  I pretty much negotiated the contracts and everything, yeah.  So, I, I was learning--
Speaker 1: So, what, what did you ask for in the contract?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I--it probably was the stupidest things but (laughter) you know I--it was one of those things I just you know I read a couple of books and thought I knew everything about the music industry.  So, but I think they, I think they, they, they respected my, my curiosity and, and you know and I asked for a job.  I remember you know when it fell apart, I never forget I was in--because I had really high hopes that I, I really thought it was going to work.  And I remember being--you know when they told us that we were going to lose our record deal [with Willjam Productions] and that it wasn't going to work out, it--I was devastated.  It was like the--nothing could be worse you know because the group disbanded so you know it was me and my you know pretty--two of my best friends [Armique Wyche and Anthony Fontenot] kind of separating at that point.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute so do you lose the record deal or the group disbands first?
Speaker 2: We both at the same time.  So, like, so when the--when we lost the deal--
Speaker 1: Now how did you, why did you lose the deal, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Just because with James and those guys it was about them focusing on, on television and less on the music side of it.  And, but for us you know we didn't have anything else and that was you know that was our world, that was you know our hope.  And you know--so I remember having a breakdown crying like you know, aw man like this is devastating and why me and you know, that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 660797
Speaker 1: And, and I would call up James [James Lassiter] constantly you know 'cause he had moved to California and I would ask him for a job you know like, "Look, dude, you know I don't have any money.  You know I'm out here doing parties and you know little concerts here and there.  You know all I, all I want is an opportunity, I'm not asking for anything," and he was kind enough to give me that, that opportunity you know.  So, you know so I started off, you know I would carry records for Jeff, you know, as DJ Jazzy Jeff's assistant.  So, Jeff would do gigs and I would you know carry his records and you know answer his phones and you know, you know, do whatever.  Then I went to California.  I worked for their television production company [Overbrook Entertainment, Beverly Hills, California], Will [Will Smith] and James' production company and so I worked on J.L.'s desk, I would run errands, you know.  So, so my thing was I would do anything to be around it and you know and still be a part of the business and you know so--and, and, and--but at the same time and--I started getting too big for my britches and you know--and James sent me back to Philadelphia [Philadelphia].
Speaker 2: Right.  The story is, I mean that you, you hired car service?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For a girl you were dating or something like that?
Speaker 1: Yes, so I didn't, I didn't have a driver's license at the time and (laughter), and I was dating this girl in Long Beach [California].  I met this girl, I was dating this girl and, and to go see her I would use the, the company car service.  But I had a deal cut with the, the general manager of the company when the car service bill comes in, let me know and I'll pay it so, so that way you know the company's not paying for it.  So, but when I get my check, I'll pay it or whatever.  So, me and, me and, and the, and the, and the GM, we, we had a little fight about something and she went and told James, "You know Troy's [HistoryMaker Troy Carter] been using the car service," and James, it--he was pissed and he came into the office that day and he said, "You know what, you're taking advantage of the company.  It's no reason in the world you should be using, doing that or--," whatever you know.  "You're, you're, you, you know you're out here you know you're cutting these side deals because you know you're still trying to do parties and da, da, da, da, da, da, you need to go back to Philly."  And he and I got into this big fight in his office.  You know we went upstairs in his, in his office and, and Will just happened to be in the office that day.  And Will said, "You know what, go home and you know get your, get yourself together, you know."  Like you know--and, and they gave me a severance so, so that, that helped you know give me a little cushion when I, when I got home.  And I went home with my tail between my legs and I was so mad at James, I was really like pissed off at him.  And I got this opportunity to start working with a management company [Black Friday Management] and you know and I was kind of funding the office with, you know, with the little severance that I had.  And one of the clients you know she was just leav- you know and it didn't work out with the company that I was going to work with and one of the clients she said, "You know what, can you help me find a manager?"  And I said, "Yeah I know a few, I can take you around and you know introduce you," and after a few meetings she said, "You know what, I want you to do it," and she--and that was Eve and that's when she gave me the opportunity to manage her.
Story_ID: 660798
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So we were talking about where is the (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But we, we were like West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] famous.  Like you know everybody in the neighborhood thought we were like you know the, the, the big deal.
Speaker 1: Well I mean that's a big deal though--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --whenever you get something recorded like that.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That, that's a big deal.  I want you though to talk before we go to Eve, about what it was to work with James and them at that point in time and even when you go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], at that point and what are you really learning?  You know what are you observing, what are you learning, what are your hours? I mean--
Speaker 2: You know work, working for, working for, working for James, you know--it, it's funny because everybody you know because Will [Will Smith] was, you know, on TV every day and he was such a big star, everybody was starstruck with James.  I--I mean with Will and, and I was starstruck with James because I'm looking at wow, this is a guy from, you know, from around the corner from us and you know the way he carried himself, the way you know I--you know part of my gig was I had to listen to every phone call, you know, so I would be the guy that connected his phone calls you know.  "Such and such you know we have James Lassiter for you," and you know, and James would be on the call and my job would be to take notes on the call you know, remind him of certain things. And like to listen to the conversations and how he carried himself and the level of respect that the receiver on the other end or the caller on the other end gave him was just amazing.  And you know so he had a certain poise to him and, you know, I would emulate the poise, you know.  So, I noticed that you know my conversations started sounding similar to James' conversation so I, I, when I--so I really even more than just specific elements of the business that I learned, I learned how to be a businessman.  And, and, and, and so at that time in Hollywood prior to Will, Tom Cruise was the biggest star in the world, right?  And prior to him it was probably Tom Hanks that, that was you know the biggest movie star.  And here, here comes two black guys from, from West Philly by the way that all of a sudden these guys are, are, you know, if--I don't care where you're calling from in the world, these are the guys you got to talk to.  And so it just opened my eyes to the possibilities and that there weren't any limits.  And, and it gets--so it gave, it gave me a sense of, of, of, of confidence.
Story_ID: 660799
Speaker 1: So when you get out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], is it--'cause I mean L.A. is a whole different thing--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, and it, and it is the entertainment business.  So, is that why you were feeling your oats?  You, I mean do you remember even when you arrived and where you were living and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what the--when, when I arrived I was--a friend of mine, a friend of mine ended up subleasing her apartment to me in Koreatown [Los Angeles, California].  And so, and this is before Koreatown was cool.  You know now it's like you know a hip area.  You know, so all of a sudden, you know, I'm, I'm the only black guy in Koreatown.  Its--I didn't have a car at the time because I'm thinking you know I--in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you didn't need a car.  It's like you know you jump on public transportation.  It's pretty easy or whatever.  L.A., not, not so much. You know, you, you got to have a car to get around, you know.  The language that, that's spoken and, and, and the, the opulence and like you know it, it was very, very intimidating and I still had a lot of, of, of Philly in me just in terms of rebellion and like, you know, I'm not going to assimilate to this environment, you know.  So, I still had a lot of, a lot, a lot of you know, a lot of the negative side of it to me, to me as well.
Story_ID: 660800
Speaker 1: Shortcuts--and that, and that was one of the things too, it's like you know, and that I learned from James it's, it's no shortcuts, you know.
Speaker 2: Well he talked about that.  He said that you had a lot of hustle to you.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, so you were trying to you know hustle your way.
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: You're--okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And you know and, and, and still you know still 'til this day it's like you know it's--because we had to come up fighting for everything and creating things you know you got this sense of hustle but the hustle in terms of being able to build a scalable, you know, respectable business is not the same as the hustle that you, that you use on 52nd Street.  You know and that's the thing, that's one of the things that it took me a long time to learn.  And you know when, and when James sent me back to, to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, it, it probably took a year and a half or, or, or maybe even two years, maybe even longer for me to come around.  It was longer because I remember the moment was you know, I had worked with Eve and, and the a--it was the aha moment like, I get it.  I worked with Eve and she won her first Video Music Award [MTV Video Music Award] and part of it they give one to the managers, the producer.  And when I got it, you know I put it up on the shelf and it was like you know as a manager getting a Moon Man is the equivalent, that's our Oscar [Academy Award] you know getting that moon man.  And after I packed it up in a box and I wrote a letter to James and I put it in a box and I sent it, I sent it to James. And I, man I'm getting choked up.  But I told James, I said, "This is yours.  You, you won this.  You won this."  Yep.
Speaker 2: So, he--so you, you didn't speak for him for a year so you're taking about really a year and a half you have--
Speaker 1: Yeah, or more, or, or more.
Speaker 2: Or more?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--'cause I, I didn't get it.  I thought you know--
Speaker 2: Well he was taking away your dream?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean and, and you thought really you were trying to be honest about it--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --you know sort of in your own way.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: You know, you were going to reimburse--?
Speaker 1: Yep.  And, and, and now it's like you know I, I, I--sitting in a seat as the guy who mentors a lot of people and, and the, the CEO of a company [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] and like--if--first of all, the level of patience that Will and James and Charlie [Charlie Mack] and all of those guys, the, their patience with me, they, they've had the patience of Job because I acted out and I did all sort of things that so many people would have turned their backs on me and, and whether it's--never, never spoke to me or at least never given me a second chance.  And I, and I, I think that's what was giving me the patience with being able to give younger people second chances and giving them the ability to learn through hard mistakes you know.  And, and also being able to forgive people in a, in a way where you, you, you give them a hard lesson but you forgive them but they never, they, they know not to, not, not to ever do that again.
Speaker 2: So what were some--just give an example of, of the things you know some of the things that you did you know that you look back and say that was a knucklehead or whatever, what--?
Speaker 1: We, we, we charged hotel rooms, you know thousands of dollars when we were on the road after they said you know don't do it, we did--like when I, when--like if, if, if, if James said go left, chances are I would go right, you know.  And, and it just was one of those thing--we did everything. Like stuff that where these, these guys you know you, you look at it and where--Will, Will Smith and James Lassiter didn't need me to work for them.  They didn't need to sign us [Carter's hip hop group, 2 Too Many] to, to a deal [with Willjam Productions].  They, you know these guys are dealing in big business and you know and all, and all of these things.  They didn't have to take my phone calls.  They didn't have to read my letters that, that I, that I wrote you know.  So, so the fact that these guys you know that they even had the patience for me to make one mistake without saying okay you know what, he doesn't make the cut.  You know they, they saw something, something in me that I didn't see in myself.
Story_ID: 660801
Speaker 1: So what, what are you, what are you, what do they see in you though?  That's--they have to see something in you.  And how many people are going through their, you know, their facility?
Speaker 2: I, to be honest I have no idea what they saw, no idea, no idea.  You know what, what, what I do know is that I, I just would not give up.  Like you know in, in--I, I would all, I--but the answer is the first answer.  I don't, I don't clearly know what they saw, you know.  May- maybe they, they saw in me what I see in some of the younger people that, that, that I mentor and some, and some of the people that I mentor that I'm zoned in on, where, where I'm like you know what, that kid has something, some, just something special.  But even more you know I just think that, I think that God has, God always has a bigger plan than, than what we know about.  And, and, and the universe has a way of being able to bring the right people around you.  To be able to put you in the right place at the right time, you know.  So, so you know I think it, it all, it all, you know--I, I wish I had, had the answer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you know I want to get the chronology.  I think I--hadn't you had at this point before you go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and you--didn't you work at Bad Boy Records?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So I did two stints in L.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the first stint you get sent back.
Speaker 2: Did--no, so--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first stint, the first stint I, I left.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: Hold on, wait, let me go.  Now you got me.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause--
Speaker 2: First stint was around '92 [1992], '93 [1993].  First stint was around '92 [1992], '93 [1993].  Then I went to Bad Boy around '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Yep, '95 [1995].
Speaker 2: Went back--ninety--yeah, '94 [1994], '95 [1995] Bad Boy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now--
Story_ID: 660802
Speaker 1: How do you get to Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] at that time?
Speaker 2: I was doing--I was promoting these shows in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you know I, I--the hip hop shows in Philly, nobody--none, none of the big promoters would touch the hip hop shows in Philly and you couldn't get them insured.  They were really, really tough to get insurance for just because it would be violence and you know things like that would happen so nobody didn't want to touch it.  So--and I loved the music and I would go and I would get money from guys in my neighborhood to go out and, and bring these acts from New York [New York] in to do these concerts.  And--
Speaker 1: Would you get the place for it to be held?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would go, I would find the hall or the nightclub and you know, and you know, we would pay a rental fee and we would pay the acts you know a few thousand bucks [dollars] or whatever.  And what I didn't know is you know those acts would turn out to be you know, Wu-Tang Clan, Notorious B.I.G. [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], Jay-Z, Lil' Kim, Foxy Brown, so a lot of those acts you know we were the first promoters to bring them to Philly.  And one of the concerts that I had, I was bringing Notorious B.I.G. to the, to the Penn, to University of Penn's campus [University of Pennsylvania] at the Civic Center [Philadelphia Convention Hall and Civic Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and one of his first concerts in Philly, I--one of the kids who was working on the show runs to the back and he said he you know, "B.I.G.'s not here yet.  He's scheduled to be on stage in fifteen minutes.  We got to call the manager."  So, I called up the manager and you know I said, "Where the hell is B.I.G.?  Where is he?"  He said, "We're shooting this video right now in New York but you know we're going to still try to make it down in time."  You know New York's two hours away from Philly.  And, and they came two hours late, the show was over.  And the guy who ran the music label was this guy named Puff, P. Diddy [Sean Combs] and he told the manager, Mark Pitts, he said, "You know what, let's give this guy his money back and let's give him another, another show.  Let's go all hang out."  So, we had this, we were having this after party at a club called Fever downtown [Club Fever, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I was asking Puff, I said, "You know what, what, what do you do?  Like tell, tell me about what you do?"  So, you know he's telling me you know, "I run, da, da, da, da, da, da."  I said, "I want to come work for you."  He said, "Your first job is to get me that girl behind the bar," (laughter) and I went up to the bar and I told the girl, I said, "Hey, this guy is--," you know.  So, I made the, I made the introduction.  Probably three or four weeks later I was, I was joining the internship program at Bad Boy Entertainment.
Speaker 1: So, where was Bad Boy located at that point?
Speaker 2: In New York City.
Speaker 1: No, but I mean what, what building?
Speaker 2: This--we were on 19th [Street] and 5th [Avenue] at the time.
Story_ID: 660803
Speaker 1: And so what is, what is, what is the Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] that you come to?  I mean who's there, who is the--he has, he has--B.I.G. [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.] is one--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had Notorious B.I.G., Craig Mack and Total were, were the groups signed at that time.  And, and you know it was--I was, I was living a dream.  You know my first week at the job I was taking out trash all week and you know the second week I was in the mailroom you know.  And I would do this internship.  It was--you know, so I would take the Peter Pan, Trailways bus up to New York [New York], so it wasn't a paid internship so I would have to pay I think it was eleven bucks [dollars] you know each way to get there or whatever.  But you know taking out the trash at Bad Boy was better than being the CEO of American Express [American Express Company] for me.  Like I was in my world.  That was it.  And watching Puff [P. Diddy; Sean Combs] operate was, was so inspiring because like Puff still had Harlem [New York, New York] in him, you know.  And, and you know he was a guy that would, he wouldn't, you know he would kick down any door.  It was a grit and a, you know--it, and, and it was the time--I was having the time of my life.  The music was great.  I was working on artists who I would listen to everyday who I loved and, and you know and I was one of the hardest working, working guys there, hardest working interns.
Speaker 1: So, you--there's a picture that your office sent over and it's you and Puff and Notorious B.I.G.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was happening?  Do you know what, what that picture was, what--?
Speaker 2: That, that was the concert that, when he said give him another concert, that was, that was the concert.  So, you know that was a, a concert I promoted in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at a place called the Red Zone that I, that I was running.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's a big deal to, I mean to be able to--because they could have totally dissed you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then that, that affects you as a promoter.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Now how much money are you making on any of these concerts at that point, do you remember?
Speaker 2: You know probably walking home for--you know with a, a few thousand bucks here and there so, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of--I mean that would be considered a lot of money back then, right?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was you know it was okay money.  Like you know only because you know you still--I, you know the guys, I would get the money from guys in the neighborhood so I would have to pay them back their money, I would have to pay all of the artists, you know, their money you know.  You know some, at some concerts we didn't make money so--but everybody still had to get paid regardless.  So, yeah so it was, it was--you know if I walked away with a few grand in my pocket it, it, it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any artists that you particularly liked working with and others that you got stiffed or you know there was a problem or--'cause everybody is learning at that point.  I'm--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was, it was definitely, it was definitely homeboy 101. And you know so what's, what's funny, some of my good friends in the music industry today are guys who I would do those concerts with you know who were managing some of those acts you know.  So, you know Manny Halley who manages Keyshia Cole was you know working with, you know, Foxy Brown, you know, and, and their team back then.  And you know Mark Pitts who I work on Miguel with was Notorious B.I.G.'s manager.  You know he's an executive at RCA Records.  You know and all of us were, we were all learning together, you know.  So, it was--but we, I think we all had a respect level for each other because you know a lot of it is the honor system you know because there weren't escrow accounts.  It was you know what, I'm going to pay you cash when you show up to the venue, so you know you--so it was, it was a trust system and you know and so if you burned somebody they wouldn't come back and that would destroy your reputation.  And I was the promoter that whether I made money or not, whether, if that venue was half empty, everybody still got paid and everybody who showed up still got you know the show that they paid, that, that they paid for.  So, I think you know so it was a, it was a, a bit--it was a reputation system.
Speaker 1: So, were the--who was your competition at that point?  Was there or were you--I mean in the, in the, with the rap, hip hop, was there any, any other--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --'cause you know--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't real competition.  You know it was a couple of guys in, in Philly that, that would do concerts here and there but I think you know me, between me, Charlie Mack and a guy named Corey [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know we all kind of worked in conjunction together.  You know I think we, we had it on lock.
Story_ID: 660804
Speaker 1: Now what about Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff] and you know, where are they in this and where--when are you getting to sort of know them as--are you past them at this point you know 'cause--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they--those guys you know they were quite a few generations ahead of me but [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble was a guy who was like, you know, he was like a god like figure in Philly when it came to music and, and community as well.  And, and I remember meeting him in high school and you know I remember going and saying, "Hey you know, Mr. Gamble you know I want to get into the music industry, you know, can you give me some advice?"  He said, "Every dollar that you make put it into real estate," (laughter) you know.  So, no, no advice really on music but you know just telling me you know put it into real estate you know.  So--and, and 'til this day you know I still call him every time I go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and you know he gives, he gives me great advice.  You know Mr. Gamble's you know still--when I tell you he can tell you every you know top, every record in the top ten today you know so he's still really current and keeps up and knows the trends and everything.  So, you know, so he's a real, he's, he's always been a role model.
Story_ID: 660805
Speaker 1: And now No- Notorious B.I.G. [Biggie Smalls; The Notorious B.I.G.], he dies though I mean around this time also and where are you when he, when that whole thing happened?
Speaker 2: So, so when B.I.G., you know--what's interesting you know just living through--I was working at Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] when Tupac [Tupac Shakur], Tupac got shot the first time in New York [New York] and I remember getting--you know I was answering the phone you know and I, I would get the death threats.  You know people would call you know we're going to kill you guys, da, da, da, da, da, da.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you know who they were?
Speaker 2: No, it just would be you know random you know peop- Tupac fans you know that, that would call up to the office.  I remember you know the high level of security at the office, you know.  The Fruit of Islam security that, you know would, protect you know, stand outside the, the elevators you know checking everybody who went upstairs.
Speaker 1: You mean the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly yep, Nation of Islam.  But the security was called the Fruit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Fruit of Islam was the security group and so I remember, you know, living, living through that.  And then once I left I, I, I was gone from Bad Boy and you know but still, you know, pretty close to those guys and you know and kept in touch.  And I remember you know waking up to the news that, that B.I.G. had gotten killed and for me you know, with, with Pac already dying--and I didn't know Tupac or anything like that but you know at--he was a, you know as crazy as he was, the guy was special. You know with us being you know, knowing B.I.G. and you know being so close to it and everything else and really being a, a fan of the music because what--he was our John Lennon,  you know so, we didn't grow up to The Beatles or, or anything like that.  When you want to talk about somebody who told our stories, somebody from the East Coast, somebody who spoke for a generation, somebody who I could--when--every--the, the lyrics I could relate to, things that we could aspire to, when he got killed it was the same thing when, for us, when John Lennon got shot, you know.  So, so it was pretty devastating.
Speaker 1: So where were you when you heard that he had gotten shot?  Do you remember where you were?
Speaker 2: I was, I know I was, I was in West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at the time.  I don't know whether I was, I was home visiting and--but my, my girlfriend at the time, you know, we, we had a baby together, she woke me up and told me she had just heard that B.I.G. got, had gotten killed.
Speaker 1: So, you, this was before you went out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] the second time or was--?
Speaker 2: So when I was going, so I would, I would still--so just to kind of give you--so I was still going back and forth.  So even when I was living in L.A., I still had my son in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So, I was going, I was--and I still had my house in Philly so I would go back and forth.  So, at the time I think I was still working, I might have still been working with Will [Will Smith] and those guys maybe.  But--and I remember being in Philly at that specific time.
Speaker 1: Now, financially how are you doing at this point?  You're just really making ends meet, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a regular job you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know if that was '97 [1997] you know, I had a two year old son, you know.  I was, you know so I had to pay bills in California and bills in Philadelphia.  I still had to buy my own tickets to you know to commute back and forth.  So, you know so just check to check.
Story_ID: 660806
Speaker 1: So, Eve, when you--so this whole thing, Eve--'cause it seems like the story about artists coming into your life--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (nods head).
Speaker 1: --I mean you know that at these various points that are turning points its, it appears.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when Eve comes, so how is the discussion?  How is it that, I want you to be my manager, how does that discussion even happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She, she and I--you know I, I first, when I first met Eve, Eve was sixteen years old and, and we had a little place we used to go record demos and, and everything in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And we showed up one day and it was two girls in the studio auditioning and it was this one, and it was this one cute girl with these blonde braids going down the back of her hair or whatever.  And, you know but when I say light the room on fire, lit the room on fire and I never forgot her.  And, and then years later here comes you know this same person you know I think she--I think at that time she had just gotten a, a record deal with Dr. Dre with Aftermath [Aftermath Entertainment] at that time.  And, and you know so--and I knew like a bunch of--for me, promoting those shows over the years, I knew pretty much every manager in hip hop.  So, when she came to me and you know and said, "Look you know if you can help me find a manager you know it would be helpful," I, you know I wasn't a manager at that time you know but I you know I introduced her to like Chris Lighty you know and a bun- bunch of different people. And you know she said, "You know what, I want you to do it. Why don't you just do it?"  And that was like you know, I remember getting you know my first week or two on the job you know she was going on tour and you know and I would have to call up James [James Lassiter] and the other managers and say, "Hey what does such and such mean," you know.  You know leave out, leave out the room, get the information just because I was, I was so green.
Speaker 1: Now how old was she at that point in time when you start managing her?
Speaker 2: I started managing Eve I think in like '98 [1998] or '99 [1999], some--
Speaker 1: Okay and she was how old?
Speaker 2: --somewhere around there.  I--yeah I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know how old you were.  But, okay so, so tell me what you learned, what are you doing and what would you say your time with her you know 'cause she--I mean like a lot of peop- you know she's gone on to you know still do a lot of things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  We had--Eve and I, you, you might as well say she and I went to school together you know because we learned so much together.  So, I would say, what's interesting.  I would say Eve and, Eve and I went to high school together and Gaga [Lady Gaga] and I went to college together you know.  So, Eve and I, you know both, both of us were you know, I think we, we had this great relationship because growing up with all aunts and female cousins and everything else or whatever, I really understood her you know just as, as, as a woman, you know.  And, at the--being, being, just going through you know whether, whether she was you know probably twenty years old or so or you know twenty-one when we started working together, I got her as a person you know.  So, I think that's where we really clicked.  And I was extra protective of her, you know, so and you know, and she always knew I had her back you know.  So, with that being said everything else like I could learn on the job you know.  And, and I, and I ended up being able to, to develop good instincts around the music, good instincts around strategy, good instincts around what the next move should be.  And, and, and we had a great, great time together.
Story_ID: 660807
Speaker 1: You know but this is the whole thing, the relationship between a manager and an artist is a very special relationship and it's, it can be a personal relationship.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean personal in that you have to know your artist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how are you finding, how do you--I mean I know you said you went to school together but what are you learning about each other?  What are you even saying you want to be?  What is your vision or what is her vision for herself?
Speaker 2: We, we knew--you know what we knew was that there was a blueprint there.  You know Ja- James [James Lassiter] and Will [Will Smith] laid this blueprint of how do you become, how do you go from rapper to television to star to movie star?  And, and that was, that was really the only blueprint that, that I, that I knew at that time.  So, the, so the vision that she and I shared was okay you know what, we can do this, you know.  So, it doesn't have to just be this urban thing you know we can cross this over to pop, you know.  And, and we were able to cross her career over to pop.  It doesn't just have to be this music thing, we can cross this over to TV, you know.  So, it was you know going back and you know, and ironically when you know we got her you know we, we got her the TV show on, on the UPN network [United Paramount Network], 'Eve,' and we shot that show on the Sunset Gower lot [Sunset Gower Studios, Los Angeles, California] where Will's, where Will taped 'Fresh Prince of Bel-Air' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'] and her dressing room was Will's dressing room, yeah.  So, it was you know all kind of coming full circle.  And you know, and then you know we leveraged that you know to, for her to be able to go do 'The Woodsman' with Lee Daniels and to be able to do you know 'Barbershop' you know.  And these were roles that were written for--you know the 'Barbershop' role was written for, you know, you know, this you know I think the character was originally you know the really overweight woman you know older, you know, that sort of thing.  And my job as a manager was how do I convince the director and the producer to make this work for Eve and that she's the right person?  The role in the Lee Daniels movie, 'The Woodsman,' was written for a forty year old white woman and my job was to go in--you know I remember I read that script and I had a meeting and I ended up miss- missing the meeting because I was so into this script.  And I called Eve up and I said, "I read the most disturbing script ever, but it's brilliant.  You--we got to do this."  And you know that--we lobbied Lee Daniels and we called him left and right and I went and I met him.  And you know, you know, Lee with his foul mouth you know, "That B-I-T-C-H not doing this movie, da, da, da, da, da, da," you know.  So, Lee's crazy and finally we got Lee to come around.  So, my job was to go out and translate and block and protect and, and push her to boundaries that she didn't know she had.  She pushed me to boundaries that I didn't know that, that, that I had and you know, and we, we had fun doing it.
Speaker 1: Had you, had you been reading scripts before at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to, you know I used to read you know scripts that would come through Overbrook [Overbrook Entertainment, Beverly Hills, California] and you know so I, I, I, I read a lot of scripts--
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: --prior to that.
Story_ID: 660808
Speaker 1: So, now when do you start working with Nelly?  I mean you worked with a variety of people so is this--once you start with--Eve is the beginning and then--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eve--so, Eve was, was, was, was the beginning of, you know, starting this, this company.  And, and I ended up--
Speaker 1: And the name of the company?
Speaker 2: So, so it started off as Boy Wonder [Boy Wonder Management] was the name of the management company.  And then I met, a guy named J. Erving [Julius Erving III] who was doing something similar to me on the management side and you know we started off as kind of like archrivals and then a mutual friend said, "No, you guys need to come together," and we hit it off and we ended up merging the two companies together and that became Erving Wonder Entertainment.  And, and from there you know J. and I you know, we created this really cool boutique music management company in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We had this downtown, this office in this basement downtown like with no windows.  We just wanted this downtown address though and, and we built something really cool.  And, and Mathew Knowles, Beyonce's [Beyonce Knowles] dad and manager of Destiny's Child at that time had just sold his company to a company called Sanctuary [Sanctuary Records Group Ltd.] out of the UK [United Kingdom], and he asked me to come over to be his number two guy.  So, we ended up selling our company to, to, to Sanctuary and, and that's how we, we, we went in there.  And then my first job was to buy the company that managed Nelly and I brought, I brought those guys in.
Speaker 1: I see--oh, so that's how they were growing then, Sanctuary?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: So, one--he, he sold his company then you, then he brought you in, you sold--?
Speaker 2: Yep.  And then I, and then I bought, and then I did some M and A [mergers and acquisitions] work for those guys.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay.  So, I then--when you're reading the story you don't know that's how you know those things are happening because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we've actually interviewed Mathew Knowles [sic.].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I love Mathew.
Speaker 1: So, so what happens then?  So, you get in but you've been entrepreneurial right now.  You're in a major British company and I--what I wanted to understand then is what is Sanctuary's role right there and why are they, why have they decided to do this kind of M and A acquisition at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, well Sanctuary, they were this publicly traded company out of the UK and like with any publicly traded company, you know, it's all about growth and it's all about quarter to quarter.  And, and they had a huge amount of success in the merchandise business and in, in, in the rock management business and they were looking to expand the company into America and also get into the urban business.  And at that time, Destiny's Child was you know, one of the biggest acts in the world and Mathew was a, was a, a great way for them to get into, not only to enter America but also enter the pop and the urban spaces as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you, are you--at that point were the acquisitions correct?   Who, who else could they have acquired or who else did they acquire after that?
Speaker 2: Who else?  It was, it was many companies.  It's hard to remember.  But the one I was involved in was Nelly's group.  It was also a guy by the name of Max Gousse who--they, they bought Max, Max's company as well.  And Max worked unlike D12 with Eminem and those guys.  They did a ton of rock, rock acquisitions.  A big rock manager by the name of Carl Stubner and, and so they did a, a lot, lot of acquisitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you make a lot of money on the acquisition of--you, you and J. Erving (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Well at, at that time you know we, we thought it was a, a ton, a ton of money.
Speaker 1: How much was it?
Speaker 2: You know I don't want, I, I don't, I don't want to disclose (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well then don't say--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, but--
Story_ID: 660809
Speaker 1: But at that time so you know when they [Sanctuary Records Group Ltd.] were, when they were buying our company [Erving Wonder Entertainment] they were doing this you know this, whole due diligence process and our company you know, it was a, you know a cash business back then just you know the way you collect money at shows because there weren't escrow accounts.  There wasn't a ton of great bookkeeping or anything like that.  So, when they asked us to turn in our, our due, you know, our records, you know, its papers, it was just the worst record keeping that you could possibly find.  So, you know so going from that to you know this corporate environment was you know, was totally different.  But, but you know it just, it just was, it was a bit, it was a bitter, bitter culture shock.  The mon- you know, but this is one of the big lessons that I learned because, you know, during the process there were a couple of things that were red flags for me that, you know, culturally about the company that I chose to ignore because that was going to be our first big liquidity event, you know.  I had never made money like that at one time, you know, so to be able to make money like that at one time versus you know getting paid here and there was a big deal for us.  And--but I never forget you know when the money got wired in, I, I called the bank listening to the automated message machine and just kept pressing it over and over just to kind, kind of (laughter) hear the amount and then call back like the next day just to make sure it was still there, like okay.  So, but in ret- but you know, but one of the lessons that I learned was, you know, maybe a year into the relationship, I was miserable and I hated working there and, and I wanted to buy the company back.  I wanted to give them every nickel back.  You know, it was money can't buy you happiness.  And I, you know and I was a kid that I woke up every day looking forward to go into like, you know, whether it was the office or a studio and I always loved, you know, where I worked and the people that I worked with.  And it was--and I hated it.  And you know, and I could, you know, it was that thing I got in my stomach every time I walked into the office.  And so, so I learned at that point, you know, money, money and happiness don't, don't necessarily go hand in hand.
Speaker 2: So, it was corporate and you couldn't do the things you had done before.  Were you tied--I mean what was your job there?  That's what I'm trying to--?
Speaker 1: So, so I was still a manager you know, but I was also executive vice president.  So, you know so I had to oversee you know a division of employees and I had to deal with P and Ls, you know the, you know the profit and loss statements.  I had to deal with you know all of the projections for you know for the following year, you know. So, and this is a company that has to do public reports so it was, you know, it was time intensive.  You know, it took--it was less time of me dealing with clients and being creative and doing the things that I loved.  But on the flip side of it, you know, the discipline that I learned around it and, and also the business of touring.  One day--you know we used--you know every, I think every other week they used to fax us these--our P and L sheets to show us you know how much money we made, what we got coming in, da, da, da.  And one day, I don't even know if Mathew [Mathew Knowles] knows this.  But one day they made a mistake and they sent me Mathew's.  I said, wow!  Hold on.  Destiny's Child makes this much money?  It was like eye opening.  And, and that was like one of the moments where I said okay, I'm thinking small time right now.  My eye--you know, I got to open up my eyes a bit more and I started learning about the touring business from Mathew and a couple of other guys in the company.  So, so that was my eye opener for how big the business could be.
Speaker 2: So, you're talking about the, the, the business of touring (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know because that's how artists make--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was you know that--touring and merchandise, you know, those were the line items that I saw that were like okay, this is much bigger--we, we were in the minor leagues.  These guys are playing in the major leagues.
Story_ID: 660810
Speaker 1: Now do you, was, was there any significance with Eve's fe- feud with Easy--you know Fox- with Foxy Brown now?  Didn't--
Speaker 2: Nah, it was pretty, pretty--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --pretty insignificant.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happens with J. Erving [Julius Erving III] though?  Does he--'cause that's Julius Erving's--J.--
Speaker 2: Yeah J. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Dr. J's son?
Speaker 2: Yep, J., J. is Julius Erving's son.
Speaker 1: Was there any significance with, with--I mean what happens with him at--?
Speaker 2: So, so when we ended up--so the Sanctuary [Sanctuary Records Group Ltd.] relationship ended up ending, I never forget it was, it was on, on my birthday 'cause you know we were negotiating to buy the company [Erving Wonder Entertainment] back and we couldn't get to a number that, that, that both we, that, you know, J. and I and Sanctuary could agree on 'cause J. and I were just going to buy the company back and we couldn't get a number, get to a number that we all could agree on.  And, I got a tip that Sanctuary was going to go bankrupt so we stopped negotiating.  And the tip was in a few weeks, these guys aren't even going to be able to pay your salary, you know, because we had this contract and we, they weren't even going to be able to pay salary.  I said, wow.  So, I stopped negotiating at that point and on my birthday, I'm walking into a dinner and my lawyer calls me and he said, "Happy birthday but by the way, you guys have been fired."  I said fired, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Sanctuary just decided to fire you, J. and Tony [Tony Davis]."  Tony is Nelly's manager who's, who's company [Tony Davis Management, Inc.] we bought.  He's like, "We--they decided to fire you guys."  I said, "What did they fire us for?"  Said, "It doesn't say," you know.  So, come to find out instead of them you know just paying a severance or whatever, they you know, they decided that they wanted to get rid of us this way.  So, make a long story short, they ended up having to settle, settle with us, we ended up being able to get the company back.  We ended up being able to get all, all of the clients and J. decided to, to move to Atlanta [Georgia] and I ended up staying in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So, so J. started a new company in L.A. and I started a new company in California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of your company?
Speaker 2: At that time it was called Coalition Media Group [Beverly Hills, California] and then we changed the name from Coalition to Atom Factory [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California].
Speaker 1: Okay that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, is that--was--did Eve have her deal?  Do you do the deal with UPN [United Paramount Network] then, at--or, or is Eve--?
Speaker 2: That overlapped with Sanctuary as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause things, they start moving real quickly sort of you know on a lot of things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: But--
Story_ID: 660811
Speaker 1: Now when do you find yourself in severe debt?  Is this, this--I have, I'm at 2006.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so around that time once I got the company [Erving Wonder Entertainment] back, I basically had to take the money that I made to start--you know from the deal with Sanctuary [Sanctuary Records Group Ltd.] and the severance to start this new company [Coalition Media Group; Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California].  And, and unfortunately at that time you know going into like two- 2007, the world crashed, you know.  So, the credit markets froze up, housing market froze up, you know.  And our company was at this place that what I realized a lot of companies were in at the same time, and a lot of people were in at the same time where, you know, I couldn't finance the company anymore from my savings.  I couldn't go to the bank to get a, to get a loan to fund the business because banks weren't loaning monies, loaning money at the, at the time.  I, I was maxed out on, on credit and liter- and literally for a, a year to almost yeah, maybe a little over a year, you know, it was no access to capital. So, so it was a tough period.  It was a really, really tough period.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that's true (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --everything dried up.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, now Eve fired you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eve fired me right, right around that time you know.  So, and you know that was, that was a situation where this, you know, this girl is, is like a close friend, relative, everything else or whatever.  But one of the things I, I realized you know when you have--and a lot of times in that manager-client relationship, you can get to the point where you outgrow each other and you can get to the point where you have a difference of opinion and, and where you want to go.  And, and, and it was one of those things where you know she wanted to go in, in a different direction.  And I think at that time she didn't, she--I, I don't think it was enough faith at the time that I could get her there as quickly as other, you know, somebody else could get her there.
Speaker 1: With all these things happening.  And, and then you were, you were still learning too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--what, you know what, I, I, I don't know if I, I--I think I'm all, in all fairness I think I'm always learning.  But at that time I think, I think I've could, I, I could have gotten her there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For, for, for sure.
Speaker 1: Oh you think, okay so you think if she had stayed with you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you could have gotten her there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: That's fair enough.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660812
Speaker 1: So Vincent Herbert--so talk about him because it's during this--you're sitting in your office, right?  Okay, so what--
Speaker 2: Yeah so, so Vince and I, Vincent Herbert and I have been friends since you know, before Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] days.  And like you know he's a kid from Jersey [New Jersey], a music producer, you know child prodigy, produced like, you know, Celine Dion, Whitney Houston, you know--like his disc--
Speaker 1: Toni Braxton.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Toni Braxton, you know.  But like from a kid he was producing these type of records.  And so, he and I just kind of knew each other through the business over the years.  And, and we always kind of kept in touch.  When I was in town he would come, you know, I would go see him and vice versa.  And, and I remember he was trying to set me up a meeting with this artist he had named JoJo who was a singer and--but he just couldn't pull it off.  He said, "You know what, JoJo's going with another manager.  You know her parents are involved.  I got you.  You know, I, I--you know next time something comes around I'll come see you," you know.  And, and it would have been years.  And Vince had called me up and he said, "You know what, I got this girl that I want you to see."  Rob Fusari, you know, an, a, another friend of ours had sent Vince a demo or, or sent him a link and he said, "I'm flying her to New York [New York] tomorrow.  Come--I'll bring her by your office."  And Vince, you know, is this big guy and I could, you know I could see him kind of coming through.  And, but coming from behind him was this girl with, you know, the fishnet stockings and big sunglasses and it ended up being, being Gaga [Lady Gaga], yep.
Speaker 1: So, you know what is, and you've spoken about this, but it, you know it's two black guys--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and Gaga is, she's--
Speaker 2: Italian.
Speaker 1: --Italian--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, how, how had he met her and really have you been in the--well Gaga is a combination between rock and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it, it--like pop is where--
Speaker 1: Pop, pop, pop (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, is what it is, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's pop.  So, had you moved over do you think into the pop space and had Vince moved it, you know?
Speaker 2: Vin- Vince has always been like just a colorless guy you know just in term- in terms of the music, the type of music that he produced and the type of music he understood as well.  So, he, he had never just been an R and B guy.  And, and for me, it was, and I think the, the big thing with Vince was, I want to be able to put this artist with somebody who I know is--it--that's going to take really good care of her and that, and that, that, that we all can trust, you know.  So, I think that was more important than, than any sort of experience in, you know, in that space or whatever.  And you know, and, and I think at that time because you know I, I didn't have clients and, and you know because you know with the Eve situation, Vince had just lost his deal with--
Speaker 1: Universal [Universal Music Group].
Speaker 2: Yeah, with, with, and, yeah with Barry Hankerson and he had moved over to a different part of Universal.  He was going over to Interscope [Interscope Records] now.  You know we were just you know--and Gaga had--get, just gotten dropped from Def Jam Records [Def Jam Recordings].  All of us were like in this point where we were fighting for our lives, you know.  It was that--and that was it.  So it wasn't about color, it wasn't about type of music, it was about you know we--by the way, we hit it off out the gate and we were having a really good time doing it, and all, and we all just got in there and worked.
Story_ID: 660813
Speaker 1: So, how, what, what are your role--who, who's playing what role at--I mean I know she's the artist.  But--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you say you got, got along great off the gate, what are you envisioning for her and what is the plan?
Speaker 2: So, so Vin- Vincent's [Vincent Herbert] job was, Vincent's job is the producer.  So, Vincent's job is I have the vision of what this record should sound like.  And Gaga's [Lady Gaga] job as the artist is, I know like, you know, what she's always been great at is I have this humungous vision that I want to be the biggest star in the world and you know, and, and she helped stretch the vision.  So, you know--and, and our job was how, how to--and my job as a manager is I'm chief strategy officer and it's how do we get there and who do we need to get there?  And my job is to put all of those people in place that, that--to help us get there and to keep that train running on time and to keep it on, on the tracks.
Speaker 1: So, this is, we're at 2006 when this happened.  So--
Speaker 2: That's--Gaga was about '07 [2007], '08 [2008].
Speaker 1: O-seven [2007], '08 [2008], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah like I think '07 [2007], '08 [2008].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what do you then set out?  What are the things that you do 'cause you--you know the, the talk is that you--she's playing small places?  You know that you're literally having to, to build from scratch.  So--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what are, what do you set out in that first year?  What are the things you're doing?
Speaker 2: Really it's just--one it was, you know I, I think a lot had to do with protecting the music, number one, just because she was a songwriter first, you know.  So, every hit record she would write you know somebody would try to take it and give it to another popular artist, you know.  So, you know so we had to do a, a job of being able to protect her music so she could be--keep it for herself you know as she was making this album ['The Fame'].  And then once the album was made, it's how do we get it in front of as many people as possible you know?  So, you know whether it's through digital media, you know, how do we get it on the radio, how do we get her on TV, how do we get her on tours, how do we get her on nightclubs.  So, anywhere we could get her to play, our job was just to push her to get you know in front of people.  So, whether it was twenty-five people at a showcase or you know fifty people or a hundred people, it was just getting her out there.
Story_ID: 660814
Speaker 1: Now you, I--you know when I, when I was preparing for this, you know it says that at the beginning you know you knew YouTube but you weren't a big user at that point, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean this was--so talk about that whole, you know, what, what the process is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So, so at that time you know YouTube wasn't that powerful of a platform, you know. It was really kind of just, just taking off.  And, and you know, and it's the same thing with like Twitter [Twitter Inc.] and, and, and Facebook [Facebook, Inc.] you know.  So, and we were--you know, Myspace was huge when it came to music and--but we were one of the first teams to be able to really open up and use them as partners versus being adversarial with, with, with digital, digital media companies like YouTube.
Speaker 1: Why did you make that decision?  Was it just out of need because--?
Speaker 2: It was really out of need.  You know, we didn't--you know just be- her music at that time was, was considered dance music, you know.  So, we were getting notes from programmers basically saying, "Hey, this is, is--this is more gay club music than it is you know pop music.  Take this to, to dance radio or take this to the gay clubs," you know that sort of thing.  So, you know, our job was you know, how do, how do we get it out there to as many people as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And YouTube you know was, was the best, best medium at that time too.
Speaker 1: And so what are, what do you learn about YouTube when you get on and what are you supplementing YouTube with 'cause--?
Speaker 2: So, one of the, the big things we learned is that there's a real, is that there's a really engaged audience there and that it doesn't, and that it breaks geographical boundaries, you know, so that was really important.  And just because you know prior to you know these big dist- global distribution systems, we would have to break artists territory by territory by lit- you know literally getting them on a plane or sending product to these other places or whatever.  But with YouTube, when people in New York [New York] were discovering, discovering her [Lady Gaga], people in Belgium were doing it at the same time and people in Canada and people in Australia so, it was this global thing happening all, all, all at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you know what, what I found--I wanted to ask this because YouTube and Twitter, they're all so new.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, was there ever, at some point are you just users at the beginning?  Do you ever have discussions with the company at some point?
Speaker 2: We, we started having discussions a little later but you know, because these companies were, weren't set up to have discussions with people like us, you know.  These were engineer, you know, these were engineering-centric companies you know, but not, not--their, their jobs weren't to, you know--this is, this is what--they weren't built for what people are currently using them for.  So, Twitter was actually, you know, a side project and a feature of another, of, you know, in another company.  So, these guys weren't think- none of us were thinking like this.  It was one of those things that just happened serendipitously.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660815
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about the significant things that sort of happened and even her firs- . Well the--you, you did how many tours with--you did, there were--?
Speaker 2: I think we did, I think--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --Gaga and I probably did four tours together.
Speaker 1: Okay, four tours.  So, the first tour can you talk about that 'cause I, you know--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know so the first tour--we actually did several tours.  We did--the first tour was the New Kids on the Block tour where she was the support act for New Kids on the Block.  And Vincent Herbert had a great relationship with, with the guys from New Kids.  He helped them with, you know put together their reunion and he helped them get their deal with Interscope [Interscope Records].  And as a favor for, in, in return, they put Lady Gaga on as the opening act which kind of taught us about the, the arena business and okay you know we're, we're watching how they move around and, you know, all of the mechanics of it.  She's learning how to play to this larger audience because she was used to playing nightclubs.  And then once she finished that we put her on The Pussycat Dolls tour which was an international tour which taught us a lot about the international touring business.
Speaker 1: What did it teach you?
Speaker 2: Really about the, one about logistics because the logistics there, you know, for everything from truck, truck size, crew size, deal- dealing with foreign currencies.  You know it's just so many things has to go to, go into play what--because when you're dealing with a domestic tour you're dealing with English speaking people, playing to, you know, a crowd that you know, know all of the lyrics you know through English.  And then, you know, you got language barriers when you travel from place to place on a, on a, on a nightly basis basically, you know.  So, so--and then culturally it just opened your eyes up to just what the possibilities are and you know, and you know, me go- a guy going from hip hop nightclubs you know and that sort of thing to all of a sudden you're inside of stadiums you know is, is just a total- totally different ballgame.  You--yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so the, the thing that I, I you know I'm wondering 'cause this is, this all happened so quickly.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean really.  And what I'm trying to understand because when I read that she was, you know, when I was preparing, I was reading that you know she was playing you--on the, the tour was it with, god, was it, where he leaves the tour, where--Kanye [Kanye West].  Kanye.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a later tour, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You talk about playing small places at the very beginning and you talk about playing small--you know, taking her off and doing small places there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Her act is so big.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, I was wondering when, when you start working with her you know what is her act like?  What, what is it like in a small place 'cause you know it's, it's really a spectacle, you know--
Speaker 2: And, and it's always, it's always been a spectacle.  So, you know, we, we've, we, we always had the challenge of you know squeezing a big production into you know the--in, into small places you know.  So, when we were playing nightclubs, we would try to squeeze a theater size, you know, show into a nightclub.  When we were playing theaters, it would be squeezing an arena sized show into a theater.  When we're playing arenas, it's squeezing a stadium size show into, into an arena.  So, you know, so the production and the spectacle has always been big and I think that you know that's always been a, a part of you know just who she is as, as, as an artist.
Speaker 1: So, when do you see the seminal moment because you're talking about the Pussycat tour.  She is, you're playing in large houses.  Is it, is she the opening act (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the opening act, yes.
Story_ID: 660816
Speaker 1: What happens in that, you know, during the first tour that then allows her [Lady Gaga] to be this opening act in the second tour with large audiences?  That's what I'm not--
Speaker 2: A lot happened.  You know the, the records took off you know.  It, it--these were the, you know, these big, big, big hit records.  You know it took a year to get there but once it, once they, once they took off, you know, they were rocket ships just one after another and the audience just grew exponentially.
Speaker 1: Talk about who--those records, what the records (unclear).
Speaker 2: You know we started off with a record called 'Just Dance' were, was the first single and that was you know a dance song you know real club song, didn't sound like anything on the radio so it was hard to get radio to buy in.  But, you know Canada was really the first place to, to, to play it on the radio and once it broke into Canada, we then went to a station in Buffalo, New York and just because of proximity, you know, they knew what was happening and you know and they broke it and then it kind of you know spread out from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then so you are--so how is the relationship though, the relationship between the three of you stays really solid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --during this period.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You know during the period of time.  And then what is the--what are you wanting to do 'cause they're--you know when fame comes that quickly there can be tensions that sort of happen.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you're saying you did how many tours with her, you said--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did about I think four headlining tours, four headlining tours and, and two support tours.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the third tour was what?  That--
Speaker 2: That was a club tour.
Speaker 1: That's a club tour.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then it's the Monst--
Speaker 2: Yep, we did a club tour--because we did--the tours kind of blended.  So, we did a, a, we did a theater version--we did a club tour which was Fame Ball tour [The Fame Ball Tour], we did a theater tour which was Monster Ball [The Monster Ball Tour].  Then we turned Monster Ball into an arena tour and then, and then we did The Born This Way Ball.
Speaker 1: So, you--there's a lot said about the Monster tour--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know because you know you have the relationship--now when--
Story_ID: 660817
Speaker 1: So, I want to understand though, you're with which label at this point?  You know, did the labels change (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she was, so she's with Interscope [Interscope Records] at the time.
Speaker 1: She was Interscope.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that stayed Interscope--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or that became Universal [Universal Music Group], it's--?
Speaker 2: Universal owns Interscope.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, they do own--okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  So, they're the parent company (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, Lucian Grainge, he, he, Lu- did, did his ownership, was he at that point in Lu- Lucian--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lucian, when we came in Lucian was running Universal International [Universal Music Group International] under Doug Morris and then when, then Doug brought in Lucian as his successor and then he runs the whole world now.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, what are you, what are the things that you have to--you explain on the Pussycat [The Pussycat Dolls] tour you're learning an international, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --how to work those venues.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now are you finding--what are you, what about--who is your competition?  Do you see anyone as your competition with Lady Gog- Gaga [Lady Gaga] at that point?
Speaker 1: No.  You know what, I, I think she had you know--it's, it's--only thing you're fighting for, you know, really is attention you know just because it's so fragmented.  People are inundated with you know information and music and content and all of those things.  And you know I think she, I think she was so unique she just cut through be- just because she didn't look like anybody else, she didn't sound anybody else.  She didn't--you know her, her performances were incredible and over the top, you know, great live performer.  So, so I think--I don't, I don't think there was any competition there.
Speaker 2: And you know you always, in all the interviews, you know, you talked about what a great talent 00--and--that she had.  And when people were talking about the marketing behind it--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you kept referencing you know I couldn't really do anything if she didn't have the talent.
Speaker 1: I, I think you know just in general I think a, a manager, you're only as great as the talent you represent you know.  So, you know and I think any, any great manager you know with, with great, you know, and that represents great talent, you get inspired by that talent to go out and do big things and come up with big ideas, you know.  So, you know, I think it's almost like having a muse, you know, so where you know, you know so where I, I was in- truly inspired by the music, the message you know the--how brave you know she was and, and continues to be as an artist.
Speaker 2: So, can you give me a day in the life of you know working, you, the three of you working together?  Can you give me some idea?  Like, even you know I remember, I think The Monster Ball [The Monster Ball Tour], you know that you were in London [England] and you know you sort of scratched the, or she scratched out her vision on the back of a napkin and--
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: --and you know you were talking about the people that you brought in you know to sort of make that happen.  I'm just trying to understand the nature of the--
Speaker 1: It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of the relation.  I know it's, it's artistic and organic (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah it's very, it's, it's you know and, and it all, it's always very fluid you know, especially when it works well.  When it works well it's very, very fluid.  And, and you just got that, that--a natural chemistry that kind of where, where it flows, where idea, where ideas flow, where you know you can say, you can, you can say the beginning of a word and, and I can finish the sentence and vi- and vice versa you know just because it, it--you're, you're that congruent just where you know what the mission and, and, and the vision is.  And I, and you know and still to the, to this day you know Vincent [Vincent Herbert] and I, you know Vincent's one of my good friends.  I talk to Vince all the time.  You know we, when, when, when you share, when you share the same interests at--at the core and you got the same, you have the same goals, you know it's, it's, it's easy to get there.
Story_ID: 660818
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: So, but at what point do you, the three of you say that you've made it?  At what point does that realization--what are the key--if you look, the key steps along the way, and that relationship that lasted, was it seven, seven?
Speaker 1: Yeah we, we, we were together about seven years.  It was--I, I don't know if it was--it, it was a series of points that you know what, that, that I would say--
Speaker 2: Can you talk about those?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the, I think the first point for me with Gaga [Lady Gaga] was when we were doing, doing her theater tour [The Monster Ball Tour].  I think it was like the third or fourth night of the theater tour and we were stopping in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I had to drive downtown and I was driving past the theater that she was playing.  And it was maybe you know in the early afternoon and it was kids just asleep outside just kind of lined up.  And I just pulled over and I got chills and I'm like you're not--you know I got on the phone, "Vince [Vincent Herbert], you know, Gaga you're not going to believe this," you know.  But you know, that was, that was one of those moments.  That was a really you know, okay something, something's happening here.  And then you know from there you know it was, you know it was the moment when you know I watched her on stage you know I think it was for Sting's sixtieth birthday or something like that.  One of--it was a big milestone for us, for--no, it was a Rainforest Foundation [Rainforest Foundation Fund, New York, New York] thing and it was Sting and Bono and El- Elton John and you know all of these legends.  And then there, and then, then, then you have us you know these, these newbies on the block pretty much and that was one of those moments where you could see how the other artists were looking at her and the conversations that they were having about her, you know.  So, and I think the last moment I would say was when we played for the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] at, you know at the inauguration party, the staff inauguration ball.  That, you know that was a really, really special moment.
Speaker 2: Now you, what did--I know that you stayed in your lane and she stayed in her lane.  But did the lanes ever you know her vision interfere with what you saw was good marketing or business?  Never?
Speaker 1: No, you know for the, for the most part you know when--we like to work with really smart artists you know and if they're not really smart from a business perspective and marketing perspective from when, when we meet, when we meet them, by the time you know we get into a rhythm they're really smart.  And she's one of those people who walked in the door you know right away kind of knowing what the vision was and exactly where she wanted to go and so there's not a, a, a lot of explaining that you, you need to do, you know.  So, so it, it, it wasn't difficult.  And then I think quite naturally the worlds blend, you know, just because, you know, what I do has a lot to do, is going to effective the creative at the end of the day because if I'm managing budgets and I'm trying to fit, you know, things into venues and all of those things there has to be creative compromises made for, you know, for us to run a business.  And it's the same exact way for any artist where, you know, if you know they, they're, they're going to have a major say in what's happening with, with, with their, with the contracts that they need to sign.  They might not get involved in the minutiae and you know and the overall strategy but you know when they, when they have to commit their lives you know to, to a term of X amount of years or you know they, or, or they got to, you know we're creating partnerships with somebody, they're going to have a real seat at the table.
Story_ID: 660819
Speaker 1: Which of the performances that you've, you've, you--were most memorable for you of, of Gaga, Lady Gaga's performing?
Speaker 2: Most memorable for me was Radio City, first night at Radio City Music Hall on The Monster Ball Tour.  That was, that was probably one of, one of my favorites, yeah.  That, that stands out.
Speaker 1: And why?
Speaker 2: Just the way the production was set up.  One, we had sold out four, four nights in New York [New York] for a brand new act at Radio City Music Hall and it, and it become--it had become the event to go to.  So, you know so you had everybody from you know Madonna showing up to like you--the who's who in New York, you know, Barbara Walters, Lorne Michaels, you know, you name them, who's who in New York showed up for, for these shows.  And, but the way the production was set up, we had a, a creative director build the set.  She, she's used to build- she was used to building operas.  And, and the way she set it up was where only thing you could see and focus on was Gaga on stage.  So, it was you know, so for two hours, you know, it's no bells, whistles, distractions or anything like that.  It was you know it, it was all about the, the music, the art you know a little bit of pageantry, you know.  So, that was, that was my favorite.
Story_ID: 660820
Speaker 1: So, now you, you bring in, you talk about--and I don't know, this is, I think you were talking about the Monster tour [The Monster Ball Tour]. But you were talking about you know bringing in people like Arthur is it Ful- Fulbright?
Speaker 2: Arthur Fogel.
Speaker 1: Fogel?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then I think Mark Fisher and Tait Towers [Tait Towers, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This was, was this the Monster--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we bought in, we bought in Mark--we bought in Tait prior to Arthur Fogel.  So, Arthur came when, after Tait and all of those guys.  But when we brought Arthur in, that was really about scaling up the operation and, and you know because if we're going to build a global touring business it just was nobody better in the world to help you build a global touring business.
Speaker 1: And you were talking about having thirty trucks and--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --three airplanes and--
Speaker 2: How do you, how do you move, how do you move you know thirty, forty trucks around, around the world and make money, you know, that's, that's the thing.  And Arthur was the--Arthur had figured it out you know.  And prior--before I hired him I, I went and I, you know I flew to London [England] and I sat down with U2's manager and I, and I asked Paul [Paul McGuinness], I said, "Paul," you know, "tell me about you know how you guys tour," da, da, da, and he said, "You got to hire Arthur Fogel."  He's like, "I'm telling you, you got to do Arthur Fogel."  And he told me about you know when the Zoo, the Zoo TV Tour with U2, you know how it was a financial disaster and Arthur came in after and helped them fix it.  I flew to New York [New York], I sat down with Guy Oseary who manages Madonna.  "How did you know, tell me about Madonna's touring business," same exact thing, you got to go see Arthur.  And, and sure enough you know to, to this very day, even now on tour, Arthur is still with Gaga [Lady Gaga], yeah.  And I'm, and I'm sure he'll be there for the next you know however long Arthur is on this earth you know and Gaga is touring, he'll be the guy.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.  So, you put all those, those--I mean you, anyway you put all those things together in that way--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know during that, that time.  So, you're entering--I mean at this point then you're in a whole different league.  I mean people are looking at you in a, a totally different way.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yep. You know it, it, I think it--and it, it's just that thing where you know like I said I, I felt like I was in high school with, you know, during the Eve era and you know in college with, you know with the, with the Gaga era.  And so you know you, you--from--I was, I learned a lot as we went along, you know.  The, the global touring business is a lot different from you know, from, from, from what, what we were doing, you know.  The, the, the types of, you know, deals that we were doing are totally, totally different, you know.  So, and, and the, the level of people that you, that you're now dealing with on a regular basis you know is a, is a much higher level and the stakes were much higher.  So, you know I learned a lot.
Story_ID: 660821
Speaker 1: So, when you--so let's talk about the tech piece because I mean I want to go back to that and the marketing piece because at the same time you also get very involved, I mean Gaga leads you or you lead--I'm not exactly sure who's leading what or how people are coming into your space.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: But you are becoming very involved in the tech industry.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and, and I know you've said in one interview that you know you had to innovate so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that was the way you know you got led into tech.  But--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --soon you're being asked to speak to lots of place- people because the numbers are so large.  So, first talk about the numbers, you know, Twitter [Twitter Inc.], Facebook [Facebook, Inc.], I mean, I mean all the things that sort of happen and then who's coming to you at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know I think the numbers, I think we were at the right place at the right time, you know just, just in terms of being able to get on these platforms really early because when you're on really early you, you get to catch the wave of the growth as more users come, are, are coming on.  So, the more, the more the users are coming on, they're, they're looking for people to follow.  Like, you know, so they're going to follow the celebrity, they're going to follow this you know this, this person that you know this public figure or whatever.  And so, so we were able to catch that wave very, very early, right, so our time, our timing was perfect.  And then when you have an artist that knows how to engage on those platforms in, in a way where they can interact, they, it--where, where it's conversational and people feel like they can get to know them, they don't overuse the platform, they're not selling things on the platform, people don't feel, people don't want to tune them out they'd rather, they want to lean in, I think that's where you get those, that's where you get those numbers from, you know.  And so I, so I think we, we've had clients over the years that, that have just been great at that, you know, be it Lindsey Stirling on YouTube, be it, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause her numbers, what are her numbers?
Speaker 2: Lindsey, Lindsey's at you know, well over a half a billion views you know maybe 600, 700 million views on YouTube right now.  Probably 6 million subscribers you know to, just to her personal channel you know.  So, what she's been doing is phenomenal, you know.  And, but she's, she's figured out how, how to use YouTube as her medium, you know where, a person like you know Lady Gaga was able to figure out how to use Twitter as her medium, you know.  So, different artists have, different artists have different types of mediums that they're better at and that they know how to leverage.
Speaker 1: And Lady Gaga how, she had how many followers on Twitter and--?
Speaker 2: Probably you know, I would say over, over 41 million followers on Twitter.
Speaker 1: And then Facebook was just, that was, you said that was a sort of a static (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly.  Stay--Facebook is a little bit--actually they just released a new product for artists you know so, where they can try to engage you know regularly with their audiences.  But Facebook's not really built for it.
Speaker 1: But John Legend you said, who also you represent--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, and I don't know--when did he come into the mix?
Speaker 2: We signed John about two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 660822
Speaker 1: And when did you transfer into Atom Factory [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] and what--how did that name come (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, yeah the Atom Factory was really just a name change you know--
Speaker 1: And why did--what's the meaning of it?
Speaker 2: You know I was, I was thinking about what, you know when, when, when we left Sanctuary [Sanctuary Records Group Ltd.] you know when I was thinking about Coalition [Coalition Media Group, Beverly Hills, California] it was more, it felt rebellious and it felt almost, almost military like you know when you think about coalitions.  And, and then as the company evolved it, it, it started evolving into something different that, where I didn't feel like the name quite fit what, what the mission was.  And with Atom, you know I, I was thinking about you know molecular structures and like you know and you know and all of the work we, you know, we were doing in tech.  And when, when you think about an atom it was like just something small but, but just powerful and, and energetic and Atom Factory just came to mind and then I just you know, I, I, I called up the team and I said you know what, I, I know we, we started branding but I'm changing the name of this company, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh they had--you had started another branding?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We were, we were going, we were out under Coalition Media and you know that was our email address and you know it was on the back of album covers and everything else and I, it just didn't fit with, with what, what I felt with Atom Factory was.
Speaker 1: Now who is the team that you're building as part of Atom Factory 'cause you said that, you know, you purposely have kept it small.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I, and I've, I've gone against it lately (laughter).  You know we, we started off for the first few years I think it was six or seven of us, you know, somewhere around there.  And then you know as you know we started bringing in, you know, other clients and, you know, going into other businesses you know it's really started to scale.  And you know and at one point I thought we were going to cap out around a dozen, you know.  I said you know what, this feels like a big company.  It feels like you know something that I really can manage on a day to day basis because I didn't want a ton of direct reports or anything like that.  And, and now we're about, almost seventy people.  We're about seventy and you know we'll, we'll probably be, you know, over a hundred you know within the next six months or so you know.  So, but with all of these different divisions it's just you know, it's really scaling.  But you know I brought on a COO, I brought on you know a human resources director.  So, so the way I lay- you know I, I was able to layer the company so where I didn't, you know, where I can still have fun doing the things that I love doing without having to deal with, you know, the management of, you know, a, a full work force.
Story_ID: 660823
Speaker 1: So, what--at what point do you decide you're going to bring on other, you know, other, other artists? And is that sort of discussed you know, I mean that's what I'm just trying to figure--I, it's hard to figure out the timeline.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what, I think maybe two years into Gaga [Lady Gaga] we, we signed our, our second artist at the company [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California], you know.  And it was pretty much the same, same format that I did with Eve though you know.  For the first couple of years, Eve was the client that, you know, the sole client, I focused on her or whatever.  And, and, and it's a good way to work just to develop a rhythm and feel like you know, okay once I feel like we got this under control and you know and we got a team in place and it's working, then we can start layering in, in, in other artists and other people.  And now you know we, I think we have a system in place within the company and we have a team in place with the company that you know if we want to go out and sign you know an, another act, you know the infrastructure is there to, to support it.
Speaker 1: So, who, who are the artists now then?
Speaker 2: We managed John Legend that we spoke about, Lindsey Stirling we spoke about, Meghan Trainor we spoke about--oh we didn't speak about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We haven't.
Speaker 2: --but that's a new artist, Meghan Trainor, John Mayer we manage, Priyanka Chopra out of India, Nico and Vinz out of Europe.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Who else--and Sky Ferreira, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I'm--so you have a global reach through even your cli- you know music has become, the management of music--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're saying has also become international.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's become international and you know so, you know where one, one point we were in the export business where you know we would you know sign domestic talent and export it to the rest of the world.  And, and, and now you know part of our strategy is to be in the import business where we can sign you know people from other places around the world and being able to bring them into America and, and other places as well.
Story_ID: 660824
Speaker 1: So, what are, what is, what is a typical--I mean who, what are you seeing by the people you manage that, I mean who are you looking for at--besides just the next, next great talent?
Speaker 2: We're, we're looking for people with a, a point of view.  And you know I, I think that would be the, the biggest thing.  You know what, what's, what's your point of view?  By the way, not just your point of view on music but you know what, what do you, what do you stand for, you know?  So, and, and so I think that, I think that's been a lot of the connective tissue between you know the, the clients that we manage.  So, so where you look at what, what a, a, an artist like Gaga [Lady Gaga], the impact that she's had in the LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender] community you know, so we're talking about before it was in, before it was in vogue to you know, to, to do, you know talk about don't ask, don't tell, talk about you know the gay marriage act [Obergefell v. Hodges, 2015], you know.  You know she's, where she's gone on for marches around the world, you know the, the, the work she's done behind the scenes has you know, has been incredible.  Same thing with John Legend when it comes to public education you know so whether it's you know at the White House with Arne Duncan or whether it's you know local school board elections you know, him being on the board of Teach for America and you know the Harlem Empowerment Zone [sic. Harlem Children's Zone, New York, New York], you know.  So the, the you know and you know we've helped him build a partnership with MacArthur [John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] and The California Endowment [Los Angeles, California], John Mayer and the work that he's done around veterans you know that, that are coming home.  So, you know we're just, that, those are the things that's important for us, you know.  If, if it's just about managing pop stars you know, it's--that, that's, we're not--that's, that's not what we do.
Speaker 1: So, it's really a combination of music, international and sort of civic action?
Speaker 2: Yeah, social impact.  Social, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Social impact.
Speaker 2: --yeah social impact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 660825
Speaker 1: What--where--what about the tech stuff--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and when are you starting to become a tech investor?  And are people then seeking you out?  I mean how does--what is your first deal that you do?
Speaker 2: You know what, the first deal I invested in was actually with Guy Oseary, Madonna's manager.  It was a company called Tinychat that it was like online chat rooms or whatever and, so that, that was our first, that was the first deal.  And I never envisioned becoming a tech investor.  It was really out of curiosity, you know me starting to hang out with some of these guys, you know welcome, welcome in, welcoming them into my world, me--them welcoming me into their world and that kind of turned into, hey, you might want to see this deal or hey, would you advise us in exchange for some shares in the company, you know.  And you know seventy-two companies later, you know, it's like a full focus, you know we have a division [AF Square] that's fully focused on investing in technology.
Story_ID: 660826
Speaker 1: The Atom Factory [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California], can you talk about your divisions then--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --because, so--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, so the way Atom Factory is set up you know the, we have our music department which, and our music and talent which we manage everything from songwriters and music producers to the talent that you see on, you know, on TV and online.  We have some visual artists who, you know, who, who show at museums that, that we work with.  So, so, so that's the talent portion of the company.  Then we also have the Atom Factory fund [AF Square], which we use to invest in early stage technology companies.  We have a division called A \ IDEA that's almost, that's like our think tank that you know that comes up with creative campaigns for brands.  So, we do brand work, we do work for, you know, around social impact.  They also work across some of our tech companies and our, and our artists as well to help them come up with music video concepts, packaging concepts, you know, that, that sort of thing.  And then we have a digital content unit called Evergreen [ph.] that produces television commercials, music videos, short films and those things.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're really on the leading edge of where things are, you know, are going.
Speaker 2: Well we, we're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You are.
Speaker 2: --we're, we're, we're trying.
Speaker 1: You're just--okay.
Speaker 2: We're trying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean but how many others in the music space are, are there right now? I know there's a paramount shift right now.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: We're talking about a paramount shift and even when you know you were talking about the young people you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and people being really smart you know and keeping up.  But what are you--what do I want to say?  What are you, do you see in this diversified space that you're in, that's sort of integrated you know, it's not even integrated marketing.  It's like you can make deal, you know, a lot of deals you can sort of bring in.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do you call that now (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know what, no--I don't, I don't know if, if anybody has coined a term for the convergence yet.  You know we, we actually do it out of necessity you know.  So, so where you know as a, as a company you know in the 21st century, we have to be diverse like this.  And you know where we, we, we have to understand technology because, you know, some of the jobs that we do now they're, they're going to be, you know, robots doing our job and software doing those jobs you know in, in the very near future, you know.  So, so how do, how do we, how do we get ahead of that and you know and how--and I also think it gives us, it gives us an advantage to be able to know about these things you know be- before the general public knows about it.  So, I look at it as just a, you know a, a necessity.  The other divisions that we integrate are, you know, I, I would, I would rather you know, you--a perfect example is you know John Legend shot this video for his song 'You and I' last month and the concept you know one of the managers who, you know, she's a partner in the company, she came up with the concept for John and then she walked across the street to our digital content unit, pitched them the idea and they shot it, you know.  So, you know, so for a client you know like John Legend to be, for him to be able to have the confidence in our team that you know what, I can give this just to my management company, they you know--so it's not like you got to go to the record label or you got to outsource it or anything like that.  So, I think it's, it's a, it's a good resource to have you know for the, for the clients.
Speaker 1: You know that is like--now that's disruptive.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know if you call it--
Story_ID: 660827
Speaker 1: You know there--in, in this whole tech space, you know you talk about a lot of the people you partner with (unclear) ventures and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and these are like well known names and so talk about some of your investments that you've had.
Speaker 2: We, you know we, we've invested in quite, quite a few different companies like you know and, and really diverse in terms of type, types of companies, you know.  You know, we, we look for really strong innovative entrepreneurs, you know.  So, so like that, and that's the connective tissue between the entrepreneurs that we invest in.  So, we've invested in, in Uber [Uber Technologies Inc.], we've invested in Dropbox [Dropbox, Inc.], we've invested in Lyft [Lyft Inc.], we've invested in Spotify [Spotify Ltd.], Warby Parker [Warby Parker Retail, Inc.], Fab [Fab.com, Inc.], just--and some, some incredible, in- incredible companies that, that have become, that have begun to change, change the world and, and the way we operate on a day to day basis.
Speaker 1: And when you are vetting these investments I mean what--are you coming in as angel investors, are you coming in as you know an early stage or even later stage?
Speaker 2: So, we, it--we come in at various stages, you know.  So, a lot of companies we, will come in at seed and they you know the seed angel round and just because we get a lot of early looks at, at these companies.  And then some companies that we've invested in, you know, there may be an opportunity in a, in, in a later round where we say you know what, this company still has a lot more room to grow.  We still feel like the evaluation of the company is reasonable and we believe in the mission of this company.  We, you know, we'll invest in that as well.
Speaker 1: So, when you, when you--are there any things that you passed up that doesn't look like it--but are there things that you've passed up (laughter) that you thought or you know you, you're, you regret you missed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I was talking about one yesterday.  It was Guy Oseary, you know, Madonna's manager and as you can see he's a, he, he's become a good buddy and we share a lot of information.  We were on tour and he sent me a case of this drink.  And he said, "Look I want you to invest in this drink.  I'm telling you it's going to be big and it's you know it's, it's a $20 million evaluation, I think it's early."  And you know so I got the drink and I drink it and I said ugh, this is terrible and it was you know a warm case, I drank it warm.  And, and I called him up and I'm like this is terrible.  So, he's, he, he said, "Watch."  Last week they just announced that that company, the valuation is $300 million so we would have made over 10x on our money.  A, a company in China just you know made a huge investment in it and it's Vita Coco, the coconut water.  So, so that was one that--that was a big one that I missed out on, yeah.
Speaker 1: You haven't missed out on that many others.
Speaker 2: Yeah you know what, yeah we, we got some good ones.  That, that was the one that got away though.
Story_ID: 660828
Speaker 1: So, and there are other things that you did I, you know like the--but Backplane, that really became, that was more--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: --that was around Gaga right?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why, why did you do the--why was that done, that platform created?
Speaker 2: So, the, the idea around Backplane was that you know we're, we're seeing this trend that's going where Facebook has done an incredible job a- around connecting you with, around relationships, you know.  So, whether it's friends from school, coworkers, family members, long distance relationships they, they've done, they've done a great job of connecting, making those connections work.  We're seeing this trend of being able to connect around specific interests.  And so, whether it's you know I'm a Harley Davidson lover or whether I'm a Ford Mustang lover or whether I love Yorkshire Terrier puppies or whatever that special interests there is you know hundreds of thousands or you know and as it gets more niche, tens of thousands of people who want to connect around that specific interest.  So, and that's what, that's what Backplane's built to do.  So, you know the first one was around connecting Lady Gaga fans but since then you know we built communities for Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], for Nike [Nike, Inc.], for Cirque du Soleil and, and some, some other companies as well and, and we're getting ready to open it up to the, to the public as well.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is really your platform then that you're opening (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean that you--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it developed by some site you know or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One of, one of the co-founders and, and actually is the chairman is a guy by the name of Joe Lonsdale.  So Joe's a Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] graduate from, in computer science, Pay- worked at PayPal [PayPal Holdings, Inc.], started a--was the founder, cofounder of Palantir [Palantir Technologies, Palo Alto, California] which is one of you know it's now become an $8 billion company around data analytics and he's, he's one of the cofounders of, of it as well.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: How did you miss?  Well, I'm just--okay I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, so what about AID, AI, I, A \ IDEA?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A \ IDEA.
Speaker 1: And AF Square?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so that's the Atom Factory [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] fund and A \ IDEA that I spoke of, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh that's--okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 660829
Speaker 1: So, I want to ask--so let's talk about the--Gaga [Lady Gaga] and you stopped working with in--
Speaker 2: November.
Speaker 1: November?  Just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh just November.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  God, that's--okay.  So, how did you--I read someplace how you found out and I--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --can you recount how you found out?
Speaker 2: You know I, I, I got, I got to be careful with, just because I'm on a non- a nondisclosure.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, no worries.  But, can I skip that question just 'cause I don't want to tread on--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I can, I can talk about it but I just want to be careful with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so no, so, so basically in, in general you know it was one of those things where I got, I got fired from, from my, from my job and, and I had to figure out well you know well what, what's next?  And you know and I think because of, you know, I have a responsibility to, to the company [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] you know meaning my, my employees that worked for me and you know the other artists that, that we worked with and you know and my family and to myself to get back up and, and keep moving you know and, and that was important, you know.  And all, and by the way, huge impact you know in my, in my personal and professional life you know with, with having a Gaga as a client over the last you know seven years.  But I think it's important that that's not what defines me as, as a, as a person, you know.  And, and as, as a businessperson and just in general, that just, that is part of my journey and it's a part that I've really appreciate and I'll, I'll always be grateful and, and, and will always have good memories.  But you know it's one of the--life, life goes on and, and business goes on.
Speaker 1: Well, now where is Vincent Herbert, where is he now?  Is he still--where, where, where is he?
Speaker 2: Vin- Vince is still around.  So, Vince is still a, you know, great friend of mine.  He's still--
Speaker 1: Is he with Gaga?
Speaker 2: Yeah still producing on Gaga's project as well, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Vince is still in both of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, when you did that like you know, the last time that we were talking about that that was with Eve, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then Gaga came in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so but it is like a divorce.
Speaker 2: Yeah you, you know what, now the funny thing you know is it's--manage, managers and, and, and clients part every day, you know.  So, in our industry every week is you know some- some- somebody leaving.  And I think you know being, managing these clients for as long as I've managed them, you know Eve was eight years, Gaga was seven years, that by itself is you know is not normal in, in, in our industry.  You know it's just, it's a handful of those sort of long, long relationships in the modern, in the modern music industry.  So--and I, and I think also they've been high profile breakups.  So, you know so these aren't just, you know, a client just happens to leave a manager, you know. These have been high profile breakups or whatever.  So, I think that's, I think they've gotten more attention.  And, and the other thing too you know it's not a thing that I've been ashamed to talk about.  You know a lot of people don't talk about you know when they're fired from a, you know, from a client or, or anything like that and for me I, I've just, I've, I've used my, my life as a lesson for other entrepreneurs and people.  So, I, so I've, I've been pretty open source about it.
Story_ID: 660830
Speaker 1: So, as we sit here, what are your plans sort of going, you know what do you want to be?  I--what do you want to be? You know 'cause you, you're forty-two?
Speaker 2: I'm forty-one.
Speaker 1: Forty-one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You'll be forty-two this year.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean you're still like you know in, in our world, you know, halfway through.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know what, I don't, I don't take, I don't take time for granted, you know.  So, you know my, my mom [Gilda Crawford Carter] passed away in March.  She was sixty-three years old you know.  So, I don't take time for granted.  My--like you know one of the guys who you, you know you doing this series I'm sure you've heard of you know Reginald F. Lewis who's like you know, he was Jackie Robinson for, for us as you know any, any African American guy in business, he was our Jackie Robinson.  He passed away at fifty, you know. And, but you know his wife was, you know she--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she wrote this--
Speaker 1: Loida Lewis [Loida Nicolas Lewis].
Speaker 2: Yes, Loida was you know in, incredible and I've been spending time with Loida and, and his daughter Christine [Christina Lewis Halpern] and I sit on the board of her foundation [Reginald F. Lewis Foundation, New York, New York].  And you learn not to take time for granted.  So, where you know knock on wood I live to see you know into my eighties and nineties or Google [Google Inc.], Google will come up with something where I can live until 150.  But now you know for me it's about the legacy that, that, that I leave and who, who, who's--how many lives have, have I impacted in, in scale you know both by being, being an example of where I came from and, and what I've been able to become.  And--but, but also outside of just being an example, being, being actually being hands on and being able to effect change amongst young African American men specifically you know just because I think right now we are, this is an epidemic, you know, just what's happening with us with mass incarceration, with the, with the lack of, the lack of education, the lack of family structure.  You know, all of these--it's, it's a really complicated problem that guys like me have to solve you know because I'm not, I'm not a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate, you know I'm not Ivy League, you know.  I'm, I'm, I, I come from where these, where these guys come from.  So, in terms of story, you know I sat at, at the, at the Men's Central Jail in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know three weeks ago with a bunch of eighteen year old and nineteen year old guys who are serving the rest of their, their lives in jail.  And you know and as, and as you know I started talking to these, to, to these guys it's--they couldn't believe--they were shocked when I told them my background, shocked.  And, and I, and I, I, I think people to know that you know what, you can come from where we come from and, and, and, and, and do great things and still be a, you know--and, and not sell your soul in, in, in the midst of it you know.  So, where you know I think on, on TV right now you know the examples that they see you know--and by the way, you know everybody can make it however they want to make it but I think when you see--when most of the images you see of young black guys are on the news for killing somebody, robbing somebody, being in jail, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah you know you hear about Mark Cuban talks about you know I see a black guy in a hoodie, I'm run- , I'm going, I'm crossing the other side of the street, you know.  Just, it's--this is how we're being portrayed and this is the perception of, of what a young, young black guy is in, in, in, in in, in the world right now.  When you turn on BET [Black Entertainment Television] and you see the, the images that, that, that we see, those images you know--and by the way some of those guys are going to come around and become great role models I think.  Some of them might--may not.  But the images that they see I want them to be able to see what I saw in J.L. [James Lassiter], and what I was able to read about Reginald Lewis.  Well you know what, sometimes you got to put on a, you got to put on a suit that fits, you know.  You got to get dressed up to go to work you know.  You gotta, you gotta look the part.  You got to be able to know how to sit at a table and, and, and be confident sitting across the table from somebody in, in Corporate America.  You gotta, you got- you gotta be, be able to shake somebody's hand firmly and look them in the eye. You got to be able to show up on time.  You got- you know so all of these things in terms of, of, of values that it's going to take to be able to carry you through life.  All of that you know I--that's, that's a responsibility that I feel like this next stage of my life, that--that I, that I have to dive into.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause you're really talking about what you want your legacy to be.  And--
Story_ID: 660831
Speaker 1: I kept thinking about a couple of things.  I was thinking about as you were just talking and talking about the (unclear) about your recount of visiting your father [Charles Carter, Sr.] like you did--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and how that was hard.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and then I was thinking about you know how you came to tears when you were talking about James, you know Jay, when you call Jay, J.L., James Lassiter.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I want you to, I mean your journey, have you thought a lot about your, your journey?  I mean you know you talked about carrying a gun you know and it being bigger than you were, you know.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And I'm just--you made it out and I'm just wondering how, like when you look at how did you make it out and not only did you--you're excelling!
Speaker 2: It, it, it's on, it's on the, the shoulders of a lot of great people.  And it, and it's people who, it's, it's the, the, like--it's, it's you know so, so where, you know, you look at you know when I mention like a James Lassiter and, and Charlie Mack and guys like that who have been big platforms in my life if you think about it as stairs.  But it's also been Ms. Moore [ph.], my fifth grade teacher [at Samuel B. Huey Elementary; Global Leadership Academy Southwest, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It's al- it also was you know like John Whitehead you know who is the singer from McFadden and Whitehead who gave me great advice you know.  So, it, you know so, so many people who either you know just even if it was a little bit of this (gesture) you know a, just that little bit of confidence that, that, that I needed at that specific time, these were pivotal, pivotal people at--and, in, within my, within my, within my life.
Story_ID: 660832
Speaker 1: So, you know a few weeks ago--and this was like my, it was, it was mind blowing. Because you know I read, I read the, I read you know Reginald Lewis' biography ['Why Should White Guys Have All the Fun?: How Reginald Lewis Created a Billion-Dollar Business Empire,' Reginald F. Lewis and Blair S. Walker] you know when I--in, in '95 [1995], '96 [1996], some- somewhere like when it first came out.  And no, it was before that, maybe '93 [1993], and it blew my mind.  I read this book probably fifteen, twenty times, over and over.  And I always would think about this guy, what would he do?  Like you know it just really, it was incredible.  So, last year I spoke at this MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] conference and I was coming off stage and this girl [Christina Lewis Halpern] walks over to me and she said, "You know I'm starting this foundation around black kids that code.  I would love to talk to you about it."  So, I said, "I'm in."  I said, "Anything around computer science with young black kids I'm, I'm in."  So, you know we, we're talking about it.  So, a guy walks over and he has his lanyard on and she says, "Oh this is such and such.  He, he, he worked with my father." And then I looked and it said the Reginald F. Lewis Foundation [New York, New York] and I said, "Your dad was Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis]?"  She said, "Yes."  I said "Look," I said, "I got chills."  I said, "You have no idea the impact your dad has had on my life."  I said, "I'm here on--today because of him.  Like you have no idea."  So, I'm getting excited, I'm talking to her about it.  So, over the last year I helped her with it.  Three weeks ago she had this thing at her house.  And, and it was at her place, their, their place in the Hamptons [New York] and it was the launch of this, of the, the foundation that they launched, All Star Code.  And me and my wife [Rebecca Carter] flew in and at the airport is this you know astute black gentleman at the airport and he says, "Mr. Carter [HistoryMaker Troy Carter], we've been waiting for you.  The, you know, thank you for coming, dah, dah, dah."  And I'm not, and I'm you know so he walks us to this car and it's a 1988 Bentley and we get in and he turns around and he says, "This was Mr. Lewis' car.  And it, and you're sitting where Mr. Lewis used to sit."  This--the guy was his but- was his butler and driver.  So, now it's like--I was you know in the car, I was speechless because I never could have imagined sitting in his seat, going to his house and spending that time with his family, I never could have imagined being there.  And so, you know, we stayed the night at the house and the next morning when we, when we were leaving Loida [Loida Nicolas Lewis] walked over to me and she said, "It's time for you to write your book."  And I said, "Well you know I thought about it.  I don't know if I, you know, if I want to do it, you know, I don't, you know I don't know if it, if it's time."  And she said, "I'm telling you," she said, "you know my--," she's like my--, "I had to do my husband's book after he died."  She said, "It's time for you to write your book."  She said, "I'm going to introduce you to Blair [Blair S. Walker] who wrote my husband's book."  This is how the world comes full circle.  Monday she introduces, she sends out an email with, to Blair and Blair responds, "I've been looking for you."  He said, "I've called your office.  I've tried to get in touch with you.  I've been wanting to write this book about you, you know because this is the next generation of what Reginald left behind, this is, this is for that next generation behind Reginald," because Reginald was about Wall Street and you know and leverage buyouts and that sort of thing.  And to be able to talk to young black kids about technology and thinking--you know.  So, and so now Blair and I are getting ready to start on, embark on this project.
Speaker 2: Thanks to Loida.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Story_ID: 660833
Speaker 1: So you know on the whole issue of legacy which is how we always end, I want to ask you first your generation's legacy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Before--what do you see as your, what, what generation are you and, and--are you a millennial?
Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'm ahead of millennial.  I'll be, I would be an X-er, I think.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: X-er.
Speaker 2: --I would be an X-er.
Speaker 1: So, what do you think your, the generation of the generation X is, I mean the legacy, sorry of the generation?
Speaker 2: It, it's, it's, it's so many ways, it's so many ways of what, what the legacy could be.  I--what--so this is what I would--because I--you know I think it's this macro gen- general, generation X legacy, right?  And then I look at this, another set of, another legacy of myself, James Lassiter, Jay-Z, Jay Brown, P. Diddy [Sean Combs], you know, it's maybe about a dozen of us who, who have come through, that have come, all come from really similar circumstances, all from the same generation, all with kids within the same you know age, age, age range and all of us are facing the same legacy question and, and, and looking at what, what--the Sherpas, the Sherpa that, that, that we're leaving behind you know, that the, that, that's, that's left behind.  All of those kids that, that are coming behind us, what can we do both individually and collectively that, where, where, where we can make the, this, this grand impact?  And I think we, I think--so in general my, I, I, I--no, personally I, you know, what I'm hoping that my legacy will say I changed the lives of hundreds of thousands of young black boys that looked exactly like me and I changed the, I changed the course of their lives.  That--that's what, that's what' I'm hoping.  And then, and, and maybe I can add a zero on to that and--and make it, make it a million but that, that's, that's what I'm hoping.
Story_ID: 660834
Speaker 1: And what--as we talk about that, what hopes and concerns do you have for the black community?
Speaker 2: We are, we are being, we are being left behind like no other race.  You--where--yeah we're, we're, we're being left behind like no other race where the, the educational opportunities right now, just, just, just the way, just the way things are structured.  If you are born a black kid in any urban city in, in, in America you have a very high chance that you are going to end up in prison, you're going to end up unemployed, you're going to end up with you know multiple kids being on, you know and like--so it's, it's, it's all of these things that, that is, that just the way systematically it's structured.  Because right now if you, we're, we're--if you're born in West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to a, to a, a single mother in her late teens, early twenties, where are you going to go for an education, you know?  So, so just the way the school system is, is structured by, by, by itself.  It's, it's, it's such, it's such a complicated, it's such a complicated issue and it's going to take--you know and that--when, when the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] stepped up and said that this is what basically he wants his legacy to be, we raised our hands, you know.  So, so it, it's, it's my company [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] with The California Endowment [Los Angeles, California], the CAA agency [Creative Artists Agency], James [James Lassiter] and Will [Will Smith] and those guys, you know LeBron James, Chris Paul you know so you know it's, it's a whole lot of people that, that are, that are going to gather around it and, and try to figure out how do we solve this complicated issue.
Speaker 1: And then so your hope, you hope, you're saying you hope, your hope is good if those can be done?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yep.
Story_ID: 660835
Speaker 1: So this--I have two--you talked about, I would like to not dismiss over your family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know so can you talk about your, you know your, your family, you have five--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well yep we have, we have five kids, twenty, nineteen, ten, eleven and ten months old.  And you know it's a, it's--I, I, I--managing kids is hard, much harder than managing pop stars.  So, you know so the real work happens you know being, being at home.
Speaker 1: And my wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah and my, and my wife is the CFO of our company [Atom Factory, Inc., Culver City, California] so not, not only my, my life partner but also my business partner as well.
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Rebecca Carter.
Speaker 1: And she comes from a finan- she's from a financial (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so Rebecca was a, a broker at Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management], yes.
Speaker 1: So last question, when, when all is said and done, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That I was fair.  That, you know just, just as, just as simple as that.  That--that I was fair.  That I was fair.  Yep.
