Story_ID: 308331
Speaker 1: --The camera, my name is Shawn Wilson, the interviewer.  This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer, and today we're interviewing Pastor Cook [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And we will start just having you state your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: I'm Suzan Johnson Cook, S-U-Z-A-N, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, C-O-O-K, no hyphen, no E.  It's pronounced Suzan even though it has a Z.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: One, twenty-eight, fifty-seven [January 28, 1957].
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City, New York, New York, so nice they named it twice.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Thursday, December 1st, in the year of our Lord, 2005.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an ordained minister.  I am the pastor of Believers' Christian Fellowship Church [Bronx Christian Fellowship Church, New York, New York], and I'm a motivational speaker, president of Jonco Productions.
Story_ID: 308332
Speaker 1: So we will start today with sort of five People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I want just straight simple answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is spaghetti with meat sauce, or clam sauce.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple, always, or blue.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring and summer.  I love to dress down, not a lot of clothing.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere by the water, hot water.
Speaker 1: And finally your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "To whom much is given, much is required."  St. Luke 12:48.  My aunt gave me that when I was twelve and that pretty much is true.
Story_ID: 308333
Speaker 1: So let's start by talking about your family, your mom's side of the family and then we'll talk about your father's [Wilbert Johnson] side of the family, separately.  But you were born here in New York City [New York, New York].  Was your, what's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother is now deceased, Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson, and she died two years ago on November, actually, of '03 [2003].  She was a southern woman from Monroe, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: I'm going to stop you and just have you spell her name for me before we continue.
Speaker 2: D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, C-U-T-H-B-E-R-T-S-O-N, Johnson, J-O-H-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, now continuing.  She was a woman from the South.
Speaker 2: She was a southern woman born in Monroe, North Carolina.  It bordered Charlotte, North Carolina, and now it's a real suburb of Charlotte, but in those days it was a rural town.  Most people were agriculturalists, farmers.  She came from a line of farming parents.  They also were entrepreneurs in many respects.  Women in those days were seamstresses for the most part.  The men were the farmers, but they really parlayed it into a business.  She went into education and became one of the first black teachers with a master's degree from that area.  And so she ended up going back to Monroe teaching all of her cousins.  They used to have a one-room schoolhouse.  Many of the grades were in one classroom.  She taught them and she said after a certain point, "I need a break out of Monroe," and teaching was her escape route, and she came to New York City, found much success here, on her first day here met my father, who was a black trolley-car driver at the time.  And that was a big deal in those days, and they met on her first day here, fell in love, and he was a southern gentleman.  And the two of them had a lot of dreams for each other and they had a lot of dreams for their family.  My father raised his nieces and nephews before he started his own family.  So both of them had had responsibility in terms of raising and taking responsibility for those who didn't have as much as them, and that was part of the value system that we were raised in, that even though we were achieving success and finding it in New York, we were always accountable to and responsible for our relatives.  In other words, unless all of us made it, none of us made it.  So we constantly were asked to go south for the summers, which has been the best experience of my life.  I still preach about it, you know, thirty some years later.  I stayed with my maternal grandmother and my maternal aunts most of the time, but we went from house to house meeting all of the maternal relatives.  They were cousins and they had all grown up together.  And so they embraced us as the daughter of Dorothy Johnson, and I just really had a wonderful, wonderful childhood, so I had the North all winter, and I had the South all summer, had the cement and the concrete and the savvy of New York and navigating New York, and then I had the dirt roads and walking bare feet and learning about all the southern customs, learning how to cook, learning what southern women were like and so I really had the best of all worlds since I'm a fusion of that.
Story_ID: 308334
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] ever talk to you about her childhood, what her childhood had been like in South--
Speaker 2: North Carolina.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, Monroe [North Carolina], was it Monroe?
Speaker 2: She did, Monroe.  My mother talked about it often, and part of going south for the summer was also hearing the stories from the relatives.  It was a very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What are some of the stories?
Speaker 2: It was a very tough childhood because they were poor.  They were rural southerners.  It was because of education that she was able to leave the fields, but she had to pick cotton and tobacco as a child, along with her aunts and relatives.  Her parents, her biological parents [Amy Cuthbertson and Eli Cuthbertson] died before she was nine and her nine siblings also died, so she was raised, she was raised by like, really extended family.  And so, you know, at the beginning it was very painful because in those days she talked about there was an outbreak of tuberculosis and another disease they called dropsy, which we now call elephantiasis, and polio, and so a lot of the relatives because of poor healthcare were getting those and so she went for a while from house to house until the woman we now call my grandmother, who was her aunt, said, "Let me take Dorothy."  And so she talked about the pain, and it was because of that she was so driven and so her dreams were really, a lot of them were realized, but a lot of them were placed on myself and my siblings.  Like, you have to achieve because you don't want to go back to that, no one wants to go back to that.  And so we were very driven, and they worked and sacrificed so hard to send us to private schools, River (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were--I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --went to Riverdale Country School [Bronx, New York] from seventh to twelfth grade, and you know, in those days, it was four thousand dollars a year's tuition, which was a lot of money on a school teacher's salary.  I think she was making maybe eleven.  And she just understood that there was a world beyond Monroe, there was a world beyond New York City [New York, New York], and she wanted me to be exposed to it and ready for it.  And, so when I got to my becomingness, as [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou says, I was ready for life.  I had had the best of all worlds.  I had seen poverty, used an outhouse where my relatives didn't have plumbing for a long time.
Speaker 1: In Monroe?
Speaker 2: In Monroe and Concord [North Carolina] outside of Monroe.  Many of them didn't have plumbing maybe until I was a teenager, so it was an experience for this northern girl.
Speaker 1: So what year was your mother born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1921.
Speaker 1: So she was born during the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: She was born during the Depression.
Speaker 1: Now she had nine siblings.  How did she lose all nine siblings?
Speaker 2: Most of them because of poor healthcare.  I think tuberculosis and polio took a lot of people out.  They were, you know, many diseases at that time that they just didn't have the healthcare.  They didn't have health plans.
Speaker 1: So her siblings died relative young?
Speaker 2: Relatively young.
Speaker 1: And that left her sort of orphaned?
Speaker 2: Sort of orphaned, but you know, the other piece was that cousins in those days who were also orphaned, they kind of banded together and even though they were first cousins, they were raised as brothers and sisters.  And so we didn't know the pain that she went through.  She talked about it, but they, so we had, you know, aunts and uncles that were her, really her cousins, and my grandmother was really her aunt, and so, that was the story we knew and that's how they loved us.
Speaker 1: Because you find a lot of that in the black community, like the extended family, peoples' cousins, did your mom talk about her experiences with her mother growing up, as a child?  Her mother had died when she was young?
Speaker 2: Very young.  You know, very vaguely, because she barely knew her parents, you know.
Speaker 1: How did she barely know them?
Speaker 2: Because, I mean, you're nine years old, they had experienced a lot of funerals and burials.  She didn't talk a lot about her biological parents other than when like her temper would raise or whenever somebody would really offend her, she was like, you know, she would call her mother's name out, this is Amy Cuthbertson's, you know, daughter, you know, and you would see, she was seeing the characteristics and the traits of her mother in her and now as I discipline my children [Samuel Cook and Christopher Cook] and raise my family, I am like, I am Dorothy Johnson's daughter, you know, all the things we said we were not going to do.  So things like that, but I think sometimes when you have a painful past, you don't talk about it a lot, you bury it.  And then she had such a beautiful, I guess, present, in terms of the people who embraced her that she kind of counted life from that point forward.   You know, she never wanted to go back to the fields, again, you know.
Speaker 1: Now did she grow up in any sort of sharecropping situation in the South?
Speaker 2: Very, probably in her younger years, I mean when she talked about picking tobacco and cotton, they had to do that, they were, it was labor, it was labor.  Their income, sort of sharecropping, but they were also becoming the middle class of that community which was still working middle class, but it was a little better than some other people.  They had houses and they were starting to get plumbing, and so she knew, because she had come up to New York, that that was not the experience she wanted, because there was another experience.  And so she didn't stay there long--
Story_ID: 308335
Speaker 1: Her [Cook's mother, Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] whole experience was, how do we become the emerging black middle class and so when they moved to Harlem [New York, New York], she and my father [Wilbert Johnson] partnered together with a strong work ethic, that we're never going back south again in terms of that kind of existence.  We'll go back to visit.  We'll help our relatives, but there was the major black migration north, and the whole migration was for better opportunities for home ownership, for employment that would really bring in the bacon and so they both got city jobs, you know, which was a big deal, a civil servant, to be a motorman with the transit authority [Metropolitan Transportation Authority].  My father worked thirty years and was never absent a day or late a day.  He got that certificate, you know, and my mother worked twenty-two years in the school system.  And they were just, you know, exceptional people, and so all the people they worked with, my mother's friends especially, she taught here in Harlem at P.S. 194 [Countee Cullen School, New York, New York] for twenty years, and all of the school teachers was predominately Jewish and African American, a few Caribbeans, but they were so special, they wanted us to learn.  They talked about college, you know, what was beyond junior high and high school and elementary school, so, you know, from first to sixth grade she would always teach the grade that I was in, so if I was in first grade, she taught first grade, so that she knew the curriculum, and so I always got extra help, you know, at home.  And then she did something special, she would bring children home from Harlem who were poor themselves.  Many of them were in welfare, their parents really didn't have a lot for them, and one of two things would happen.  Either the clothes that I would outgrow would be given to them, or on weekends she would bring them to our home.  And so every weekend we had some kind of experience with some other children in our bedroom, because we had now a house in the northeast Bronx [New York].  We had two cars.  We had kind of a piece of the American dream.
Story_ID: 308336
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your roots in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Well, probably about a hundred years.
Speaker 1: A hundred years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about a hundred years.  You know, my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] was eighty-four when she died, so we were able to go back quite a bit.  And we went back every year.
Speaker 1: So talk to me about some of those, some of the history of that hundred years with your family.
Speaker 2: Most of the people, most of our family were farmers initially, the men.  So Uncle George was the big name.  George Rushing, and most of the cousins either were a Rushing or a Fisher [ph.].  My mother was, her mother was, oh gosh, Amy Fisher Cuthbertson, and so most of them were Fishers, and they were pretty much either seamstresses for the women or farmers for the men.  But they were not just people that worked the field, they owned the land, and so they had acres and acres of land, and they weren't as savvy as some business people today, but they knew how to bring home the bacon.  They knew how to give, they divided the land for each of the children, so that as they became adults they had the choice of either selling the land or working it themselves.  And so as the economy changed from an agricultural society to an industrial one, and then certainly a technological one, you know most of them had sold the land off, but when we would go south for the summers, it was the farms that we played in, you know.  I remember being in between ears of corn and asking, "What are those worms?"  You know, city girl, and seeing cows and having them actually milked, and that was our milk, or it was going out to the dairy to be produced.  And so you know it was kind of, it was the beginning of entrepreneurialism, even though I didn't know it to be at that time, but understanding if you have your own, you can do a whole lot more than if you have to depend on someone else to get it.
Speaker 1: So in that hundred years you talked about, was it Uncle Joe [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Uncle George.
Speaker 1: Uncle George, now Uncle George was your mother's brother?
Speaker 2: He was really her uncle.  He was an older gentleman.
Speaker 1: So he was your mother's--
Speaker 2: Mother's mother's brother, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was a prominent--he owned, he was a farmer, he owned a lot of land.
Speaker 2: Lot of land, and I remember, you know, I mean at that time it was black and white.  There was no other colors in the South, you know.  You on this side of the tracks or that side of the tracks, and I remember white people coming and having to negotiate with Uncle George.  Now we weren't able to be around a whole lot, you know, and certainly children had to be quiet if they were around, but I remember them making deals and at the end of it exchanging money and, you know, kind of him nodding his head that this was a good deal, and, you know, as he aged, certainly, many of his children didn't want to assume the same responsibility.  Oh, we played on those farms probably from the time I was three 'til I was about in college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts].  I remember going back south, and it was a wonderful experience for me to have the land and to know that my people, you know, owned this, and that we were responsible for the land.  And it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 308337
Speaker 1: We're going to move forward a little bit and talk about your father's side of the family.  When your mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] moved to New York [New York] she met your father.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Wilbert, W-I-L-B-E-R-T, T. Johnson.  He was from Petersburg, Virginia, Prince George- Prince Edward County [Virginia].  He was one of three siblings.  He was the oldest.  He had a brother Highland [ph.] and a sister Etta [ph.].  Highland was one of the first black actors.  He performed with Sidney Poitier in those days.  Etta lived in Baltimore [Maryland], but my father was older.  He married my mother.  He was fourteen years older than her, and so when he had us, he was fifty years old when I was born.  He had raised an entire family because he was in a sharecropping situation.  They lived very much on, it was as close to slavery as I ever wanted to experience, but they lived on land and they had a woman, Miss Kitty [ph.], who owned the land, and they had to report into her how much they had picked that day, and how much, you know, their produce was worth, and they'd give it to her.  Now she stayed in their lives for quite a bit.  They took care of Miss Kitty once they got off the field.  It was a very important reversal, because as he left the fields, he left at sixteen and he went to Baltimore.  That was his first inner city experience.  He left all of his baby cousins and nieces and nephews there and he vowed never to go back, and he had a determination and will that was incredible.  Maybe that's why he's called Wilbert, because he had this will, and he came to Baltimore first, then to New York [New York], and just hit the pavement until he found us.  He was very outgoing, which is where I get my extrovert personality from.  He could be in a room, he was not intimidated by anybody's ethnicity or culture.  He had Polish friends, Jewish friends.  He was a tall man so I get his height, I've got his weight, and when he walked into a room he was a gentlemen.  He wore a hat, you know, a felt hat, always a jacket, always dressed.  His dressed down days were maybe he unbuttoned his shirt, but he always was dressed up.  And so when he came, people's heads would turn, and I would just notice that and people's heads would literally go, Mr. Johnson is here.  So, of course, being his daughter, I ran with him.  He never had kind of a role differentiation.  You know, you wanna go with me, you go, and so I was exposed very early to the business world.  He worked for the transit authority [Metropolitan Transportation Authority], but at the same time, he took the test for the New York City Police Department, and then he also found out that he could start his own security agency.  And so while he worked by day as a motorman, and then later on, yeah, motorman, by night he was forming our family business, so when I was five years old in the basement of our home in the northeast Bronx [New York], there was this business forming called Johnson Security Bureau [Johnson Security Bureau, Inc., Bronx, New York].  Most of his first employees were his cousins and nephews, but then I started seeing all of these men.  At that time, it was mainly men, coming into our basement.  He kept it very separate so they weren't in our home, and I was learning how to fingerprint, I was learning how to write checks.  I couldn't sign yet, but I knew how to write, I knew how to negotiate and take messages on the phone, and we had to take them correctly because they meant business, and so here again that entrepreneurial side, the southern farmers from my mother's side, who were businessmen.  Now my own father who was a businessman.  And worked extremely hard.  So every day, you know, there was always ample money.  There was never a time in my life that I experienced really hardship.  They never let on that it was tough times.  And they wanted so much for us to have everything that the American dream represented, so we had this house in the northeast Bronx, they were preparing me for private school, so that I wasn't going to be one of the hangout girls in the corner.  It was very important to him that I was not going to be a common woman, and that all these guys, different guys couldn't take me out.  It had to be kind of a committed relationship, and I couldn't date until I was sixteen, so it meant that I was a senior in high school, mind you, at sixteen.  And then I couldn't date until sixteen, so I was like, "Okay dad," you know, but I understood his value system.  He stuck to it.  No drinking in his house by his children, certainly no drugs or anything.  So I was scared to try anything because my dad, it wasn't because of what they would do to me, it was like, I, there was a sense of honor, how you leave this house is how you come back.  And so we went out with a group of kids and everyone knew everyone's parents.  They usually started at my house.  My father would be sitting in the living room so it was nothing like these kids today who say, "Can you leave the room?"  No, the parents sat in there.  They knew every child whose home they were from and where we were going, the itinerary for the night and he would be up when we got back, so if our curfew was twelve o'clock, he was sitting in that chair and he expected us to come in the way we went out there.  And that was very appreciated by me.  You couldn't, you know, I didn't feel really pressured as a teenager.  I felt kind of really loved, because you felt safe.  And he would lend me his Cadillac.  I got my driver's license, you know, I think you could take driver's ed [driver's education] so at seventeen I could have my driver's license then.  He would lend me his Cadillac, and we would pile tons of teenagers and college students in this Eldorado.  It was yellow, and we would fly up and down the Major Deegan [Major Deegan Expressway], but I also understood the sense of accountability and responsibility that I was Wilbert and Dorothy Johnson's daughter, and so that I wasn't going to drive recklessly.  I wasn't going to be high, and so we didn't even have to have a designated driver because we knew we were gonna be clean kids, and that is the value system I grew up with.  It translates into my ministry.  It's the way I raised my children [Samuel Cook and Christopher Cook].
Story_ID: 308338
Speaker 1: I want you to talk to me about Miss Kitty [ph.] and your father [Wilbert Johnson], talking about that relationship and the role reversal, how they had to eventually take care of her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting because you know mainly in the South, the children spent most time with their maternal relatives.  We would go through Virginia on the way to North Carolina and meet some of my father's relatives, but because they were older, many of them were old, so, you know, kids don't spend a lot of times with old people.  But he talked about, he had three, three nieces and nephews, two were men, Robert Lee [Robert Lee Johnson] and Thodre [Thodre Johnson], and the niece was Catherine [ph.], all three just recently deceased, so we grew up in our lives calling them uncle and aunt because of their adult status, but they were really his nephews and they were really our cousins.  He first went, and they still were on, I call it a plantation.  They don't like to hear that word, but it was really, it was a sharecropping situation.  He sent money to them at first.  When Robert Lee and Thodre were able to go into the armed forces, they left, like at eighteen, and they joined the [U.S.] Army.  Catherine, he sent money back to get off that place and go to Lawrenceville College [sic. St. Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia], which was also in Virginia.  So that was the first lesson.  He kind of sent money back to them.
Speaker 1: But let me, help me understand.  So he left North Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He left Virginia.
Speaker 1: --Virginia and moved to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Baltimore [Maryland], then to New York, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But his, the nieces and nephews--
Speaker 2: Had to stay.
Speaker 1: Had to stay and they were still on this land that Miss Kitty owned?
Speaker 2: Right, and so--
Speaker 1: So they were still doing the same chores or the same jobs that they had been doing--
Speaker 2: For all of their lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were young, I mean, I guess at that time they were teenagers, you know, but he was clear, let me go because the big thing was in the North, you could make quicker money, you could make more more.  Let me send first money to get them out the situation.  When they got off, the relationship hadn't been a severe one.  Miss Kitty apparently was a nice field owner and she was white and she, they had a relationship with her, because there was love there, I mean you lived in a common community.  You lived, there was a big house and then you had the people who lived on the property.
Speaker 1: Where was the big house?
Speaker 2: Where Miss Kitty lived.  I mean so it was very--
Speaker 1: Did you, did you ever see it?
Speaker 2: I can't really.  I've seen pictures of it.  I can't, I just remember meeting Miss Kitty.  She was very, very, I mean I was a kid, so she was old then.  She was maybe about eighty, very pleasant, very loving, and she really, she called them by their first names, and they called her Miss Kitty, and there was always hugs and embraces, and I remember as she was aging, you know, and times got learner for her, each of them, my father first, but each of the nephews and nieces also began to sew money back into her, because, you know, the society was changing, agriculture wasn't great and now she didn't have as many people to work her fields, and people, in terms of the emerging black middle class, were not going to work the fields.  It was just kind of like, this is a different season.  We're not going to be working for anyone in terms of this.  We're going to start trying to work for ourselves, and to create our own families.  So, it was a gentle, loving kind of moving on with your life, but it was still very much a part of their history.  They talked about it openly.
Speaker 1: Can you give me like approximately the dates that this is taking place?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was about five or six, so we're talking about '62 [1962], '63 [1963] was the last time I kind of really heard Miss Kitty's name a lot, and, you know, when we have family reunions, they would pull out some pictures of her on her front porch, and I was able to identify her as Miss Kitty, but that was pretty much the most part of it, you know.  By the time I was a teenager there was no more Miss Kitty talk, so my assumption is that she died and, you know, that was the end of that era.  By that time, by the time I was a teenager, my father's nephews and nieces were homeowners, and had families of their own, so it was a very different season.
Story_ID: 308339
Speaker 1: They [Cook's parents, Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] didn't--all of my cousins and I, we didn't hear a lot of the pain, we knew it was painful.
Speaker 2: How did you know it was painful?
Speaker 1: Because they talked about it very briefly and abruptly and they didn't want to spend a lot of time on it.  And you know, at various times, you know, my mother would, you know, at family gatherings they would say, wow it was tough being in those fields all day, but I mean it was always in a passing kind of thing.  They didn't sit us down and say let me tell you the story about when I was in the fields because we weren't that kind of generation.  We were New York [New York] kids with cement and so the fields didn't have as much relevance to us, but what it did do was drive them tremendously to push us, so that that would never be our experience.  And so what we felt was kind of like, you better do well in school.  I mean, so if we were ever slipping in grades and not doing our homework, "Let me tell you about the days I walked the five miles to school with one pair of shoes."  I mean those were how the stories were interwoven.  Well we only had this to eat and they talked about the Depression [Great Depression].  I mean like if we were shopping in the supermarket and we ran across butter, any kind of brand, Land O'Lakes, any of them, Hotel Bar butter, they would say, "My goodness, it's so good to be able to buy this butter," and we'd say, "Why?" and they were like, "because we had lard and we had to add coloring to make it butter, and it was welfare butter."  "We had to stand in line during the Depression," and they talked about it, one of the aunts would chime in, "Don't forget that peanut butter, and don't forget."  So they basically had certain staples that could last a long time and, it was very interesting because at my first pastorate, you know, there was a lot of the government cheese being passed around maybe in the '80s [1980s] and my mother and my aunts refused, you know, people would actually give like big blocks of it away and they refused, and I was like, "Why?"  They were like, "You don't know how much of this we had to eat as kids."  I mean that's how it would come out, or, you don't know what the Depression was like.  And so for them to be able to shop in the supermarket was the erasure of that past and a new chapter and they weren't going back to it.
Speaker 2: Now your father, your father, did he know, did you know your father's parents?
Speaker 1: They were both, no, he was fifty when I was born, so both of his relatives, both of his parents, excuse me, he had had a father, Eli Johnson [sic.], I have, in fact, no, his father was Prince Edward [Prince Edward Johnson], named after the county [Prince Edward County, Virginia] he lived in, and I have a picture on my wall back there, and his mother died early.  His father remarried a woman named Miss Lily [ph.] and that's what they called her.  So his stepmother was Miss Lily and that's why he had gone to Baltimore [Maryland].  She lived in Baltimore, and she died when I was very young, so I knew her at, you know, some Thanksgiving occasions and a couple of other times when we went through Baltimore, but not very well, you know, and I never spent any length of time with them.  But, it's interesting, because both of my parents had, came from two-parent households and they were very clear that were going to be a two-parent household.  So throughout my life, I had, you know, a mother and a father there.  Very important to them.  Very important to them.  And so we don't know, behind the scenes, what kinds of things went down, but I know in front of the scenes it was like, we're family and we're gonna pull together and this is what it takes, and whatever it takes, you know, we're gonna do it, so that's what they did.
Story_ID: 308340
Speaker 1: Are any of the family members mixed, or is it just African American, or are they Native (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Straight African American.
Speaker 1: Straight African American.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the black culture was very important to us.  When I went to these private schools, they were like, you know, "Make sure you stay black in the midst of it," so we lived in an inner city community because they wanted me to maintain my friends and my values, and we went to a black church, and so when I started dating, they were like, "I hope you date a black guy," you know, and I found myself saying that to my children [Samuel Cook and Christopher Cook], that--
Speaker 1: Today, you did?
Speaker 2: Still today, um-hm.  That I hope you--
Speaker 1: Okay, now we will talk, we, I just want to talk about this briefly, then we'll go back to the old history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You say that to your kids today because?
Speaker 2: Because culture is important to me, and I think it took us a long time to be proud of who we are, and so that is important to have, I think cultural sensitivity is important.  I think certainly that they're exposed to diversity, they're certainly not in all-black situations anymore in life, but I think our culture is important.  I want them to be able to have spouses they can take back to Monroe [North Carolina].  And that was really important to me when I was dating, to have a boyfriend that could go back to Monroe and not kind of look down on my whole history to say, it's okay, you know.  We come from all kinds of socioeconomic backgrounds but we're still black, and the common foods we eat and common experiences we have, and you don't have to spend your life interpreting.  I wouldn't be opposed to it, but my preference would be African American for my sons.
Speaker 1: Do you, and I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this, but do you find that people want to challenge that when you say it?
Speaker 2: Well my kids are ten and thirteen so we haven't--
Speaker 1: No, not the kids, I mean people.  Would you say, would you--
Speaker 2: I haven't, that's a private discussion.
Speaker 1: Private, right, private.
Speaker 2: That's a private family discussion.  I wouldn't, no, no, but the children who go away to college and from my church who come back and ask me, I'm like, "Who are you dating?"  And I ask them, tell me about your experience.  I would always, I think, preferentially, culturally, yeah.
Story_ID: 308341
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My earliest memories.
Speaker 2: --your earliest memories of childhood.  Your mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] and father [Wilbert Johnson] moved to New York [New York], got married (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  We lived first on 130--
Speaker 2: But what are your earliest memories?
Speaker 1: Earliest memories were being two and three, we had moved, I was born in Harlem [New York, New York] in Sydenham Hospital.  When I was two we moved to the northeast Bronx [New York] so that's really the beginning of my memory system.  They bought a house on 213th Street on Laconia Avenue, which was a big deal, and in an Italian, Jewish neighborhood, but it was also kind of breaking the poverty barrier that we could own this house.  It was a row house.  We had a backyard which I thought was huge at the time.  Now you go back, it was about three by four, but it was huge, and it was where our family was established.  And so my earliest memories were that my parents were very social, so we always had a party in our house on the weekends.  My mother was Presbyterian, my dad was Baptist.  My mother was a school teacher.  My daddy worked for the city and was starting his business [Johnson Security Bureau, Inc., Bronx, New York], so every weekend there was a different group of people, either from my mother's school, from P.S. 194 [Countee Cullen School, New York, New York], who were coming up to see the house, either my daddy's co-workers from the transit authority [Metropolitan Transportation Authority], my daddy's co-parishioners from Union Baptist Church [New York, New York], or my mother's co-parishioners from Rendall Presbyterian Church [Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church, New York, New York].  They were all excited about life and everybody celebrated each other's accomplishments.  Some were homeowners, some became co-op owners, some were renters, but it was the sense that we've achieved.  We've left the fields of the South, we moved north, we've kept our value systems and our churches, so we worshipped together, and they partied together.  My first remembrance of partying was about five years old at the Renaissance Ballroom [New York, New York].  They called it the Renny.  It was my mother's pastor, and they used to have tables, you know, round tables of ten, and everybody would put deviled eggs or whatever food they brought.  Fried chicken was always on there, deviled eggs.  They'd have a bottle of liquor, and they'd have some other foods that that particular household made.  And they went from table to table and they shared.  What do you have over here?  But I remember dancing with my mother's pastor, that was a very important piece of the whole, you know, village.  We were one village, and that social life was part of that.  So that for me I grew up without the church being, you know, here, and your social life being there, which many churches kind of dissect you, like you can't party if you're a Christian.  And mine was the opposite, because you are a Christian and you celebrate, then partying is a part of it.  Fellowship is a part of it.  And so I learned how to conduct myself around men and women as a child, because I was in the presence of other believers who were having a good time, so my dancing with my pastor, my dancing with my dad and all of his friends, they were gentlemen and they were like, "If you go out, this is how a guy supposed to treat you.  They're supposed to say, 'May I have this dance please?'  And, you know, they're not supposed to just jerk you up," and so I learned how to be a lady looking at my mother and her friends dress up, you know, put their little pearl earrings on, and the hair was just right, and they had ironed their clothes and so there was a sense of, you know, we are a people that love each other, a mighty people.  We work hard during the week and we play hard on the weekends.
Story_ID: 308342
Speaker 1: And so in our home [in the Bronx, New York], I remember people coming into the house, you know.
Speaker 2: What kind of people?
Speaker 1: Usually the co-workers or the co-parishioners.  They were usually from that, one of those communities, either our church community, or one of my parents' [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] working communities.  And then, of course, neighbors in the neighborhood.  My parents, you know, going into this Jewish, Italian neighborhood, we lived next door to an Italian family.  So there was always ziti or lasagna, always cooking.  That's my favorite food to this day.  The Tanzellas [ph.].  They would say, "I've got this extra pot of ziti, you know, would you like it, or would you like to come on over?"  So it was my first introduction to real diversity, that my block, and you know the school that I went to, P.S. 78 [Anne Hutchinson School, New York, New York], was not just a black environment any longer, but I had to learn to get along with everyone, and so initially there were some fights in our backyard.  I remember some of them jumping over the backyard, and you know, saying some of the words, the N words and stuff to my brother [Charles Johnson], but because my mother brought those kids home every week from Harlem [New York, New York], he'd have his posse, and so they're like, who you're going to fight?  And I remember, you know, initially, it was a lot of contention, you know, because it was new.  Here's a black family on an Italian block.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This was, because I was three, so we're, about 1960.  So you're in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement, you know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is marching, my parents are organizing buses to go to the March on Washington.  We're living on this Italian block and Jewish block and then they're going down to the March on Washington on these buses and they're taking us to Freedom Schools.  I remember being in Freedom School at Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] in the basement.  I remember Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  I was, you know, three or four, but I remember him as this wonderful figure in Harlem and that people were just enamored by him, and when he died, which maybe I was six or seven, how the lines were around the block for days to see this man.  So this was this wonderful black history and black pride.  My mother taught in this predominately black elementary school [P.S. 194, Countee Cullen School, New York, New York], with Jewish teachers, and so they were involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  They brought home all these encyclopedias.  I remember the first, I think they called it the 'Black Encyclopedia' [ph.], or the colored, at that time, but filling our library with books and I saw, I had black dolls and I had pictures that looked like me that I was just very proud of, and my parents and my balanced it with yes, you, you are in a world that not just black, but you also are black and to be proud of that.  And so I grew up with this wonderful sense of who I was and who I am and very proud of it.  And that carried me through life.  I was able to really go in and out of different cultures easily.  It was my goal to be part of Operations Crossroads Africa because in the Presbyterian church, a pastor named Reverend James Robinson [James Herman Robinson] started this program called Operation Crossroads Africa where college students would go to the motherland and live in the villages.  And I just saw a glimpse of a brochure when I was about seven or eight in the Presbyterian church [Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church, New York, New York], and it became my goal that once I got to college, I was going to Africa.  And so going through the Civil Rights Movement as a child, then going through the Black Power era as a teenager, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis and Huey Newton and the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and I'm in this white prestigious prep school, Riverdale Country School [Bronx, New York], and I had my afro like, you know, Angela Davis and people not understanding why I wanted to have my hair natural, and then going into college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts], post all of those eras.  When I finished college, I went to Africa, to West Africa for eight weeks and I lived, backpacked through the villages and I lived as a villager in Operation Crossroads Africa.  But all of that was because of the genesis that was sown into me as a beautiful black woman.  You know my southern grandmother saying when I went south for the summers, "You are a beautiful black girl, and you go back to Riverdale and you let them know that you're beautiful, you're different but you're beautiful," and then my parents, you know, having a black church experience and teaching in Harlem, also saying, "We are wonderful people," exposing me to the Adam Clayton Powells and our history makers, and the Rosa Parks.  I met Martin Luther King.  You know my parents took me, I was about third grade, just before he died actually.  I was about third grade, they took me to Hunter College [New York, New York] because they said, "You need to be in the midst of this, you need to know who this man is."  And getting to the stage and shaking his hand, and then writing a letter to Coretta Scott King, who handwrote me a letter back saying, "Thank you so much, you know, you're a bright third grader," and then now she's like my other mom, you know, and having that whole bit of history saying she claims me publicly as her other daughter.  And so seeing all of that history and black pride is a wonderful experience and my home was the base of this, you know, the parties, the exposure to the lectures and assemblies that we went to, the trips we took.
Speaker 2: What kind of things did you see your parents reading at home?  Like what type of newspapers, magazines?
Speaker 1: They read, mainly the Daily News [New York Daily News], because that was the pictorial one.  You could get through that quickly.  You didn't have a lot of time as a civil servant and particularly when you're starting your own business, so you had lots of pictures and captions, you kind of got the headlines.  They didn't do a lot of New York Times [The New York Times] reading I will say.  But they also read that black encyclopedia and there was name for them, I think like 'Who's Who in Black America.'  Dr. Wyatt Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] used to come around and sell encyclopedias, you know, the first volume of those.  And then they read the Amsterdam News, the New York Amsterdam News, pictures of us with who was heading in our community, you know, that the white media really didn't capture.  Who were the movers and the shakers that mattered to us, and so you know, I went recently to the thirtieth anniversary of the Amsterdam News celebration and I thanked Mr. Tatum [Wilbert Tatum], the publisher, and his daughter [HistoryMaker Elinor Tatum], because it's been the continuous line of who we are when others may have ignored what we were doing and our achievements--
Story_ID: 308343
Speaker 1: So when you look back at that community that your mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] and father [Wilbert Johnson] created, who were some of the leaders, and I mean, we know who they were in Harlem [New York, New York], but I'm talking about in the Bronx [New York], that you saw every day, who were the role models, who were the leaders?
Speaker 2: They were people like the first black cops, you know, they didn't, one was named Mr. Jefferson [ph.], you know.  He was the black police officer that had our beat, you know, up in the northeast Bronx and he would come in when he was called to our home, and have to use the bathroom or have to get some coffee or something. It was people like Mr. Jefferson who were men that were of valor, men of honor.  Some whose names we didn't know, some were other business owners.  There were three other black men that started security agencies when my dad did, Mr. Lance [ph.] and Mr. Johnson, and there was another man, but they, as young businessmen together, would have their families together at gatherings, and there were many times they were in our home, learning this business, you know.  That there was enough for each of us.  We're, yeah, we're competitors, but there's enough business in New York [New York], enough crime in New York for each of us to have our piece.  And seeing them work together, seeing the men who were guards for my father, who were very loyal.  You don't see that same work ethic today, who literally came in our house.  I mean you have your two children, I'm five years old, and you know, now you would say, "Would you have all those men in somebody's house with a five year old girl?"  But just seeing them as they became extended family, and they wanted to work for my parents, you know, because my parents were fair to them, they never held their paychecks.  They always got paid, and so their families would come over for parties, you know.  My parents did these big Christmas parties for the business [Johnson Security Bureau, Inc., Bronx, New York], you know, like we value you, and so people were very, very loyal to them.  There was a man named Gene Graham [ph.].  He was like the first West Indian man that I met, you know, and he worked for my granddad for years and he just, it was an honor for him to work for Mr. Johnson, and hear them call him Mr. Johnson, you know, and so, of course, the respect we got as the children of Mr. Johnson, the daughter of, was incredible.  And so I was paying, giving out paychecks, you know, when they came to the door and having them sign that they received it, or writing the check number, and understanding what all of that really meant, that we had to have an income stream, but we also had to have an accountability, and we had to have documentation and recordkeeping, so even though I'm not in that same business, I have to use it in my own church, you know.  Where are the receipts, you know, don't just order these chairs.  Where are the receipts for them?  How much did they cost?  Do we have enough to cover them?  And understanding the business side of church business which a lot of people kind of think that it's this spiritual experience and you preach and you sing, but no, you better have your business together or you'll close up very quickly.  So seeing that, and my other earliest remembrances were we always went into Harlem.  Even though we lived in the northeast Bronx, my maternal grandmother was in Harlem and my maternal aunt had now moved to Harlem from the South, and various people that they helped get from the South, north.  My parents sent a lot of money south, and many times people would stay with us until they got on their feet.  It was very much like the Asian community now, and the Latino community.  We would stay in one house, and when they had enough money to move, then they would do that, and they would then bring another family up, so it was very much this process of we've made it, we've got to bring others.  So I remember going back to Harlem almost daily, because even though we finished school at three o'clock, we would take the bus for fifteen cents and a token, down to Harlem, and meet my mother who would be doing afterschool programs with the children here, so that they could be equipped and ready for, you know, competitive enrollment in other schools.  And I remember two things, one was I always got this bag of French fries for ten cents on 144th Street.  I mean they just made the best things.  We always had these corn muffins that this Korean woman on the corner of 144th and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] made, my mother introduced me to.  But when we were really small children, my parents would, the house, the apartment that we had moved from, to the northeast Bronx was now my grandmother's apartment, and I remember they had these big chairs and so when we didn't have enough beds to sleep in, they'd put two chairs together and that would become our bed.  And just the coziness of being tucked in, in your grandmother's home, who is your mother's mother, and the love that would happen in these small little walk-up apartments was a special feeling.  I still can feel what that feels like as I speak about it forty years later.  I can still feel that experience of joy and comfort and safety and pride.
Story_ID: 308344
Speaker 1: How was faith introduced to you as a child?
Speaker 2: I was born into a family of faith, which I am so fortunate.  Everyone was a believer, everyone was a churchgoer, and so Sunday mornings, no matter how much we hung out Friday and Saturday, Sunday mornings we dressed for church.  We went as a family.  Because we had moved to the northeast Bronx [New York], my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] wanted us to know the neighborhood children so we would go to Sunday school where we lived, but we'd take the bus down to Harlem [New York, New York].  We would go to my mother's church [Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church, New York, New York], which was Presbyterian, and you know, they're out in an hour, and by the time we left and walked up the avenue to my dad's church [Union Baptist Church, New York, New York], which was on 145th Street, the Baptist church, we would sit in his church, or stand outside of his church and we had these two wonderful communities that embraced us.  So faith was extremely important.  It was also where the emerging black middle class worshipped together.  We sat next to the first black judges, the first black doctors, the first black lawyers, and they would ask us questions in our faith community, "So young lady where are you going to school?"  It was never a matter of do you plan to finish high school, like some people ask today.  Are you getting a GED [General Educational Development]?  That was not even part of the lingo.  I didn't hear what GED meant until I was an adult.  It was where are you thinking about college?  This is like fifth and sixth grade, and you're like, "Well I'm looking at Boston [Massachusetts] and Atlanta [Georgia]," you know, and they would tell us about some historically black colleges [HBCUs] that many of them attended, or they'd tell us about the Harvards [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the Princetons [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].  They'd ask us what our goals were.  So what it was doing was strategic planning and goal-setting at a very young age.  We didn't know that's what it was called, but they were getting us to have a vision that was larger than 144th Street, larger than the village of Harlem, larger than the world in which we lived, and because of that, when programs came up in the summer, it was our faith community that would say, "You know, this is a camp that we think Suzan [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook] would like.  This is a program Suzan might be interested in," and so my parents would either by reputation or by having experienced it themselves, would channel us into these.  So I went to a faith camp, Incarnation [Incarnation Camp, Ivoryton, Connecticut], which is still in existence today, and my children [Samuel Cook and Christopher Cook] now go to it, so it's, you know--
Speaker 1: What's a faith camp?
Speaker 2: It's called Incarnation Camp.  It's up in, where they actually worship on Sundays, you know, it's a Christian camp, but they do the regular stuff with, you know, boating and swimming, but on Sundays they stop and give thanks, and so the value system is faith.  My children attend a school that's faith oriented.  It's a private school, but they have chapel and so they, you know faith is very important to me as a parent, as a pastor, as a daughter of, of one who was born into a faith family.  We said grace every day.  You know, the food would be out on the table, but it's, we had to give thanks because we wouldn't have all of this without being connected to God.  And so, we did our--my father [Wilbert Johnson], my earliest remembrance of my father and my last remembrance of my father was that every night he kneeled down and prayed, and he would pray a long time so we could go in and out the room and he'd still be on his knees.  I mean it was serious, and so because you have a praying father, you feel a different sense of faith than perhaps one who didn't because you saw it in action.  You saw the decisions he made for our lives as our provider and our protector, were prayed over, and so you kind of have to, because your first introduction to faith is you mimic the faith of your parents, you mimic their behavior, what they do, and then at a certain point it kicks in that I believe in what they've been teaching me.  You don't know that as a child, you just know that there's a culture that says something affirming about God, and when you hear it enough, and it wasn't a lot of God talk, but there was a lot of praying and there was a lot of churchgoing.  And, so by the time I became a teenager, my faith formation had happened, and it was because of my parents and my grandparents and the people I was around that faith was not a problem for me.  It was actually a joy, and I captured it. I did the same thing in college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts].  We partied all Friday and Saturday night, but Sunday morning, other kids were asleep in the dorm and I was like, "I'm going to church," and eventually a lot of people started going with me.  But it was part of my system, and I have no regrets and I've met some wonderful people in the faith community and that's who I am, I'm a faith leader.
Story_ID: 308345
Speaker 1: First grade, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: P.S. 78 [Anne Hutchinson School], Bronx [New York].  I had finished one of those private schools where you can finish kindergarten by four, so at five I entered first grade.  Miss Munsell [ph.] was my teacher.  P.S. 78 was predominately Jewish teachers, and the children were predominately Italian and Jewish, and I remember my first day on the bus in first grade, I sat next to Mindy [ph.], and I will not say her last name for purposes of this tape, but she was Jewish and she had never sat next to a black girl.  And so as first graders who are excited are, you know, talking about your first day of school, and she says, "I can't sit next to you."  And I said, "Why?" and she said, "because you're black."  And I said, "I'm not black, I'm brown."  And she said, "No, you're one of them," and I remember how ignorant that was.  I couldn't articulate it, but she changed her seat, and I remember that so vividly, on a yellow school bus on my first day of first grade.  Eventually we became friends, but just realizing, you know, in a small way that there was a difference.  I mean that was the first chance I saw the difference between races, I mean, because as a kid you kind of grow up, you see different colors, but they're children.  You jump Double Dutch together, you play ball together, but this was the first person who said, your difference makes a difference in where I sit, and that was a startling memory that I have.
Speaker 1: Did you go home and tell your parents [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] about it?
Speaker 2: I told my parents about it.  I told the teacher that day.
Speaker 1: And what did the teacher say?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, I remember she was, "Basically, we all have to get along," and I ended up having to sit next to Mindy in school, I remember that.  At some point during the school year when they changed the school, and by that time I guess she had chilled out a little bit, but, you know, I remember that I've written about that in a book actually, you know one of my books that I've recorded.  That was a vivid experience, you know.  That was one in racism and I remember going in the South when I was about ten and like I said, blacks lived on one side of the train tracks, right, well, we were in my dad's Eldorado [Cadillac Eldorado] and my dad, my brother [Charles Johnson] was seventeen so he had his license, and we were out like at ten o'clock at night in this Cadillac on the white side of town, and being stopped by, you know, southern police officers who saw these two black kids in a Cadillac and basically said, "What are you doing?"  My brother said, "We're going to the store."  "No, well you're not supposed to be."  And it was just the grace of God my uncle had just become the first black police officer in this town, Concord, North Carolina.  His patrol car pulled up at the time these guys were getting ready to have us get out the car, and he said, "Those are my cousins."  But I remember knowing that had he not pulled up, this probably would not be the interview we would be having right now, because it was that much red venom in his face, sort of like, you are not supposed to be here and certainly not in that car and certainly not at this time of night.  And the story would have been written a whole lot different had my uncle not come at that moment.  So I believe in God.  That was divine intervention and timing without question.  Those were the two most racist experiences I remember, and then probably in seventh grade going to Riverdale [Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] and having my afro for the first time and being proud of it and somebody putting their hands in my hair saying it was Brillo.  And those three, I'm like, "What?"  My grandmother had already worked on my black pride thing, and you put your hands in my hair and call it Brillo.  And so those were the most offensive times for me in terms of really understanding that racism is real in America, and it started as early as when I was five.
Speaker 1: But as that five-year old child, and the class in first grade, you didn't know exactly, or did you have some idea, did you connect that with the reason you'd gone to see Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not at all.
Speaker 1: --the reason Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was--
Speaker 2: This is an adult as you reflect back to just see how racism was.  Apparently her parents had to tell her that because she wouldn't know any other way.  No, when you're five, you're hurt and you're bewildered and baffled by it.  And it's a quick hurt.  Kids get over stuff like this, but you remember those moments that there was one of those awkward pauses that you're like, "Why can't you sit next to me," you know.  This makes no sense.  You don't know that it's racism, you don't know how to articulate.  All you know is somebody's being mean to you.  You know, as an adult when you start to connecting the dots of those experiences that you say, "Someone had to pour that into that child because she wouldn't have known."
Story_ID: 308346
Speaker 1: You talked about Ms. Mun- what was it?
Speaker 2: Munsell [ph.].
Speaker 1: Munsell.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was your first grade teacher [at P.S. 78, Anne Hutchinson School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she someone you looked up to?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you like her?  No?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, at those times you looked up to your teachers but it was fifth grade in the same school, I had my first black teacher.  Her name is Shirley Johnson and she's still alive.  All of my other teachers are deceased.  She's still alive.  She comes to my home, I go to her home.  We're part of each other's family.  She was the first black teacher I ever had.  She had the same last name as I at the time, Johnson, and I was just so excited that there was someone who understood my culture and understood me.  I mean I had done well, I was always in what they call, at that time they didn't call it the gifted class, but that's what it was, but they called it the two class, 1-2, 2-2, 3-2.  And we were also the music class because they introduced instruments to us and academics, and just having someone who I looked up to her.  The other teachers you want to please, because they are your authority figure, but because my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] was a teacher, sometimes they felt competitive because I was so bright, you know, they wanted to skip me like twice, and, just because of developmental differences, my parents wouldn't push me any farther.  But there was always this kind of underlying resentment, like this child is not supposed to be this smart this young, you know.  And so because my mother worked in Harlem [New York, New York] as a teacher and I was up in the northeast Bronx [New York], there was some subtle things that were always done, you know, my homework was never right for some of them, you know, there was always, a couple of times on my birthday my mother would prepare, in those days you used to have those little packages for each kid in the class, and sometimes they wouldn't give them out until like the end of the day, knowing it was my birthday.  You know, those kinds of things that you kind of say, man, if I knew what I knew then, now, know now then, I would have reacted differently, but you're a child and that's the person who your parents put in charge of you and you're not going to buck the system.  But it's very interesting because Riverdale [Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] ended up inviting me back to teach at the school when I became a White House Fellow with Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], and so the world does go full circle, that some of the places where you've had some rough experiences, the cosmos evens it out, you know, and I ended up having to teach there, and actually I'm looking at it for my children now.  So, you know, you kind of go full circle and you mature, and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But from first to fifth grade--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you have any idea what you wanted to grow up to be?  What were your plans?
Speaker 2: No, I mean the church was very much part of my life, but I was, you know, I was, my family would always say, "You are the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] lawyer."  I was the negotiator and I was always a defender.  Whoever got in trouble in the family, adults and children, I was the one, they would look to me at the time, what do you think, and I was, they listened to me.  And I would say, you know, this is not how it really happened, you need to know the whole story and these adults were always saying, she's precocious, there's something different about her.  In the South they used to say she was born before her time, or she's older beyond her years.  I mean they'd have all these sayings, you know, but, so they were trying to push me towards this lawyer.  You know you go to school, and you, I said I wanted to be a doctor at one time.  I said many things.  First to fifth I wasn't really sure.  I liked sports a lot.  I was very tall, and it was before women's sports but I was, so I was called a tomboy which was, you know, and these days we'd call it an athletic girl.  But, so I was outside all the time playing punch ball, stickball, anything with a ball.  We'd be in the middle of the street and we'd have co-ed teams and I'd play as hard as the boys, so I knew athletics was going to be important to me.
Story_ID: 308347
Speaker 1: It was about seventh through tenth grade [at Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] that I began having my formation.  I felt called to ministry.
Speaker 2: At thirteen?
Speaker 1: At thirteen.  I met the first woman minister I ever met in my grandmother's home in Concord, North Carolina, Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon], who's a history maker, and she was a Presbyterian minister from the South, and this was a time when women in ministry were not talked about at all.  I had no idea that she would become my role model.  I had no idea but I knew that there was something inside of me.  We wrote letters her entire time of college. I, as a teenager.  I pulled some out recently, you know, saying, I'm feeling this some, God's doing something in my life so I became very active as a youth leader in the church.
Speaker 2: But I don't want you to just gloss over this, so at thirteen?
Speaker 1: I felt a sense, you know, that God was doing something tremendous in my life, that I wanted to preach.  My father [Wilbert Johnson] had had an Aunt Augusta [ph.] in Brooklyn [New York], very poor woman in the projects, and the family talked quickly about her.  They said, you know, "She's a preacher, she's in the Pentecostal tradition."  And, but she never really, you know, got a pulpit, and what I know now is that because of the sexism in the church she never got a chance to, and so rather than make it a table conversation, they would just gloss over it very quickly, so I was always drawn to this Aunt Augusta.
Speaker 2: Did you know her?
Speaker 1: We went to her house a couple of times for dinner, you know.  Her children were a lot older so, you know, in those days you kind of visited families who had kids your age, 'cause the kids would all go and play and the parents would talk, so I didn't know what it meant then, but when I met Katie and I would be able to ask my questions because she was in my grandmother's home.   Just as my parents had brought kids from Harlem [New York, New York] home, my aunt and grandmother would bring kids from the college home, which was Barber-Scotia College in Concord, North Carolina, kids who may not be able to go home for the holidays for whatever reason, and they would kind of teach them how to be ladies, you know.  My aunt was this wonderful elegant woman, as was my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson], and they would teach us all the things about how to dress and how to wear your hair and how, you know, and so Katie was in our house, and so she became really like a sister and I could ask her all my faith questions about what it's like to be a minister and not knowing what the world was going to really be like for women in ministry.
Speaker 2: But you were thirteen at the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you, because that church experience had been so wonderful for me here in New York [New York] with Harlem being my mother's church [Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church, New York, New York] and my father's church [Union Baptist Church, New York, New York] being so affirming, I was asked to be a speaker early, you know, eleven and twelve I was speaking at youth days.  I was heading the, I was a leader, you know, I was heading the youth ministry because everything was still brand new, and so we were introducing youth services to the Presbyterian church.  I was like, "We're wearing blue jeans and we're gonna have guitars and afros," and they were like, you know, the Presbyterians would say, "Oh my gosh, no."  I was like, "This is the new generation, you have to hear from us," and so when you have these young preachers now, I can't, that's who I was, you know, they're doing their own style with their own interpretation of what the gospel means.  That's what I was doing at thirteen.  So I knew there was gonna be some leadership role in the church, I didn't know what.  I didn't know how to form it yet, and it took another ten years before I acknowledged my call publicly.
Story_ID: 308348
Speaker 1: It's July 24 [2007].  We're here with Reverend Suzan Johnson Cook [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook], and this is tape number three.  Good morning.
Speaker 2: Good morning.
Speaker 1: When we left off speaking with you before, you were talking about having the opportunity to write letters to Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon] while you were a junior high school student [at Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] and she was a college student.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Who is Katie Cannon, and what were those letters about?
Speaker 2: The Reverend Dr. Katie Cannon is the first black Ph.D. out of Union Theological Seminary [New York, New York].  She's the first black woman ordained in the Presbyterian church, and she was the first woman minister I really ever met.  When I was in, the summers I spent in North Carolina in the summer she was in college at Barber-Scotia College [Concord, North Carolina].  We lived in the town Concord, North Carolina, where Barber-Scotia was, and so she was very close to my aunt who was an assistant to the president at that school, and so she would come home on weekends, you know, to hang with my aunt and kind of get another sense of home, and I got to meet this big sister.  So through junior high, high school, college, graduate school, as her journey was progressing, we were in touch about growing up, you know, things I was mad at my grandmother and my aunt about, things I wanted to talk about that I couldn't say to my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson], just life things.  And then when I started receiving the call to ministry, kind of trying to interpret that, because she had gone to ITC, Interdenominational Theological Center [Atlanta, Georgia], and I was kind of feeling God doing something. So I was trying to figure out what that was about, and then, you know, when I went to Boston [Massachusetts] I had this wonderful experience in Cambridge [Massachusetts] at the St. Paul AME Church.  I was seventeen years old.  I went to this A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  I had never even heard of the African Methodist Episcopal church.  I was Presbyterian and Baptist.  And there was this dynamic preacher there, Reverend John Bryant [John Richard Bryant], who is now a bishop, John Bryant, and his wife, Reverend Cecelia [Cecelia Williams-Bryant].  And it was the first place that college students were flocking.  We would hang out all Saturday night, but we were in this church all day Sunday, and we could use our gifts.  Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], the late astronaut, who died in the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger], he was there and he had karate as a gift, and science.  And he would tutor kids, and he would also teach us karate.  You know people who had dance ministries would teach us dance.  I had a drama ministry, and so I was able to be as creative as I wanted to in this church environment and it was Afrocentric.  People wore African clothing and I saw women in the pulpit, so I was trying to put all these things together.  Katie Cannon, I'm feeling something that God is doing, I'm in this place where I'm coming alive, what does this all mean?  So I sang in this choir called the New Temple Singers at St. Paul's.  There were about sixty of us in that choir.  About eighty of us in that choir and sixty of us have become pastors across the United States, and are leading pastors.  So there was something special that was going on there.
Speaker 1: Can you name a few of the pastors that have emerged from there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can.  The Reverend Grainger Browning [Grainger Browning, Jr.] and his wife, Joann [Jo Ann Browning], who are pastors of the Ebenezer A.M.E. Church now in Fort Washington, Maryland.  The Reverend Floyd Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Floyd Flake] and his wife, Elaine Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Elaine Flake], who are now at Allen Cathedral [Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, Jamaica, New York] in New York [New York], and have done a tremendous job.  The Reverend Kenneth Robinson, Reverend Marilynn Robinson, who are now co-pastoring in Nashville, Tennessee.  You know all of us were single and not married then, and many of them hooked up as a result of this wonderful experience, and they have built ministries and lives together.  And we're in touch, Reverend Frank Reid [Frank M. Reid, III], who's now at Bethel A.M.E. Church in Baltimore [Maryland].  I mean just giants in the faith.  And it was all kind of, you know, it was the germination of it was started there, you know, and we kind of said, "Wow, so what is this?"  So I'm still writing Katie about life, you know, puberty is over now, I'm full grown, becoming a woman, how do I deal with my parents now, and I said, I feel this call to ministry.  But I also had gone, my passion was television.  I had gone to school for television production, speech and theater.  It was either I was gonna be on television or I was gonna produce television shows and be in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], so I had this drive as I was trying to put it all together.  So I went to Africa the summer after I graduated with a program called Operation Crossroads Africa.  And I kind of just, you know, we had no TVs, certainly there was no DVDs and IPods and stuff back then, so it was really God, nature and myself.  Here now where you had time to think and pray and while I was there I wrote Bishop Bryant, who was then Reverend Bryant, and I wrote Katie and I said, "I'm feeling called to the ministry, you know, and I don't know how to share this publicly but I really feel that I'm called to the ministry."  I went for five more years as a TV producer.  I got a job right out of college.  They hired me over the phone at WJLA-TV in Washington, D.C., where my best friends still are today, and so I did television production.  That's what I had gone to school for, I had got a job, you know, as one of two black producers around the country, who could write my ticket anywhere, but at night I was taking these seminary courses, and I'm like, you know I worked and the television hours were sixteen hour days.  So you do sixteen hour days and then I would still go to school at night at Howard Divinity [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.], and I was like, "God is still calling me."  It took about five years.  I finally came back to New York.  I was about to interview with '60 Minutes' and 'Good Morning America' was just starting then.  I had this prime interview and I got stuck in this traffic jam.  I had a preaching exam, I had this interview and I had to be at this hospital [Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, Bronx, New York] where they had hired me for public relations, all in the same day.  Couldn't get either place because I was stuck in this traffic jam, and it was as though God was saying you have to make a choice, you cannot straddle the fence.  What's it gonna be?  So I finally, I mean, if I could have taken my blood pressure that day, it would have been off the hook.  Finally, got off of the 155th Street viaduct in New York and I called the hospital, said I can't do the PR [public relations] today, and all the TV cameras were there.  I called 'Good Morning America,' '60 Minutes,' I'm not coming in for the interview, went back to seminary, finished my preaching exam and from then, the rest is history.  Within a month of that, I was ordained.  Within a year of that, I got my first church.  So it was as though God was waiting for me to say yes.  He had already said yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 308349
Speaker 1: Can we take you back to Riverdale [Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --for just a moment.  Who, where was Riverdale in relationship to where you lived, and why did you chose to go there, and did anyone else go there with you?
Speaker 2: Riverdale [Bronx, New York] was exclusively an upper class predominately Jewish community, but it was a private school there.  They called it one of the three Hill Schools.  Do you need me to do that again?  Riverdale was a predominately Jewish, upper scale Jewish community, but it had three wonderful schools which they called the Hill Schools.  They were private schools that many New Yorkers knew about.  I did not because I was in the public school world, but my parents [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] did, and they had Riverdale Country School, Fieldston School [Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York, New York] and the Horace Mann School [Bronx, New York].  My mother, who was a school teacher in the public school system, zeroed in on Riverdale Country School.  I took the test and I got in.  We went there and I saw this place that looked like a country club, nothing as I had ever experienced.  You had a big sister to take you on tour, you know, just these lounges that were just phenomenal, and I got in and got a scholarship there.  So it was my mother's insistence, as a public school teacher, she saw the decline of the public school system through adult eyes, and was able to kind of foresee a future for me that I would not be able to see as a child, and so she also saw some gifts of acceleration in me and academically and said, "You need to get off the streets of New York [New York] because you're not going to end up as one of those statistics."  She was down in Harlem [New York, New York] every day.  We were living in the northeast Bronx [New York] and as a young woman becoming a teenager, she was not gonna leave me, you know, prey.  And she says, "You're going to Riverdale."  I went there and it was the experience that changed my life.
Speaker 1: What was your focus there?  What did you study, what did you think that you wanted to do once you left Riverdale when you were still there?
Speaker 2: While I was there, you know, I mean I was one of two black children from seventh grade through graduation so, it was during the Black Power era, so first--
Speaker 1: What years would you say that you went to Riverdale?
Speaker 2: I went there from '69 [1969] through '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know you're trying to make sense of what's happening nationally, the riots and, you know, the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  You're trying to make sense of what's happening in your body as a teenager, and then you're faced really with racism for the first time in your life because, you know, when there're only two of us, there were all kinds, and we were not upper scale, we had to face discrimination, which now I know it is discrimination, then you're just kind of navigating through life and you think people may be mean or whatever.  What it did was though, it taught me life's lessons, and I was prepared for either United States of America at a very early age.  What it did do for me though, it exposed me globally to a world that I would never have experienced going to a local public school.  In tenth grade, for example, the kids who studied Spanish went to Spain.  The kids who studied French went to France.  My father sent me to Spain at fourteen years old.  He didn't have his own passport, got me mine, and so I learned how to negotiate and navigate, not just, you know, my block, but the world.  And currency, and having to make decisions about how much you drink, because you know they drink wine in Europe every day with the meals, how much you hang out.  All those kinds of things, and so my family values had to kick in.  I had to make some wise choices at fourteen, and what I see now is that my parents placed me there because they saw, foresaw, a global leader.  So I don't think it's an accident that I'm a leader.  I think you're prepared for it. You're not born a leader but people can track you in places that help expand your horizons, and that's what my parents did against great odds, with no money, but big vision and a big God, and so I was a grounded young woman who had travelled the world, so I was bit now by the travel bug, which would be a mark that would follow me the rest of my life.  That's why I travel so much now, and I'm comfortable doing that.  I had my nine-month old baby [Samuel Cook] and went to the White House [Washington, D.C.].  He knows how to travel.  My younger one knows.  So that is part of my spirit now and so I'm not afraid of any situation.  I adapt easily.  I can do the black scene, I can do the white scene, I can do the integrated diverse scene as the call it now.  I can do the southern and I can do the northern.  And so what happens you become a very balanced person so when something like, you know, I was elected the president of the Hampton Ministers Conference [Hampton University Ministers' Conference] in 2002, you know, the first female in a hundred years, youngest president in a hundred years and so you were faced with twelve thousand people who are leaders who say, you are now our leader.  I was very ready for the challenge, you know.  I wasn't afraid.  Of course, you kind of nervous about a new position.  You're out of your comfort zone, but I wasn't afraid of leadership, and I think that Riverdale experience, my family's groundedness in the faith and allowing me to fly.  They never, they never kept me back.  And I just want to say one other thing.  So when Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon] was part of my life through that whole evolution, and every stage that I went to I wrote her.  Every stage that she went to, she wrote me.  And so in a sense God was preparing me for being a female leader because I had a female leader who was pouring into me.  We talk still now about once a month, or email once a week, because she's still very much a part of my life.  Our worlds are very different in terms of, she's in the Presbyterian church, she's a scholar, you know.  She loves that Ph.D. stuff.  I'm the practitioner of the faith.  I'm the orator, the one who loves travel, the one who, you know, just really works with the people in the inner city, and those are the things that I love, but we're still so bonded, you know.  We're like sisters and it's a wonderful, wonderful relationship.
Story_ID: 308350
Speaker 1: How did you choose Emerson [College, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Emerson.  I was at Riverdale Country School [Bronx, New York], we had study hall, mandatory study hall, tenth grade, when you're starting to think about colleges, you know, when you're in one of those schools they start tracking you very early, in the library in study hall, had finished my homework, went to the section on colleges and there was this catalogue that fell out with this.  It had a child being helped by a speech therapist. That was the cover.  And so my compassionate side was not driven by the academics at Riverdale, but I still had that compassion that my parents [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] had instilled in me, and that picture drew me to this catalog and I started flipping through the pages.  And so what I went to Emerson for initially was speech pathology.  I was going to help people with therapy, but when I got to Emerson and the courses you had to take in speech as a speech major were the same ones for oratory, so I had to take this course called oral interpretation, and we had to do this different scenes.  It was one scene but it was like three or four characters, and you had to be all of those characters and convince people they were in that scene.  And Mrs. LaSchotto [ph.] was the teacher, and I did a scene from 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], Walter [Walter Lee Younger], Mama [Lena Younger] and Beneatha [Beneatha Younger], and I was all the characters, and when I finished my teacher stood up and the rest of the class was mesmerized, and they started giving me a standing ovation, and I realized I had this gift, and I said, right at that moment, I said, I wanna make my living speaking, using my voice.  Didn't know how that was going to manifest itself but that was the change, so I switched from speech pathology to just being a speech major, and then drama was my minor, and mass communications.  So, you know, I started using this mouth.
Speaker 1: And you were clear you wanted a career in television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was clear.
Speaker 1: Was that your thought?
Speaker 2: Well my thought was I really wanted to be an actor, and really be on the stage and on television, in front of the screen.  My parents, because they were risking really all of their savings, felt that was a little too liberal, you know, that you couldn't be guaranteed a job in drama.  But at least communications was close enough to show business, but it had a little more security.  And when you came from the background my parents did, they were like, "You go for the security."  In fact, when I finished Emerson, even though I had a job in television, they, my mother made me go to Teachers College Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] because she had been a teacher and she was like, "All of it's show business, you know, and you always have to have something to fall back on," so I had to get a teaching master's [degree].
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from Emerson?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].  I was nineteen years old--
Story_ID: 308351
Speaker 1: And what year did you go to Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I finished at twenty-one with my first master's [degree].
Speaker 1: And during this period while you're in college and doing your master's, are you maintaining your attendance in church?
Speaker 2: Always.  I never, I never, you know, I never stopped going.  In fact, I think I multiplied the amount.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend and what activities did you participate in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Boston [Massachusetts] I attended the Cambridge [Massachusetts] church, St. Paul AME [St. Paul AME Church], the whole time I was there.  It was my community.  We were all celebrating each other's, you know, evolution and graduations.  When I came back home I was still part of my mother's [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] church, Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church [New York, New York], but because I had had this charismatic experience in Boston, I joined my father's [Wilbert Johnson] church, which was the Baptist church now.  I finally understood the clapping and the movement and the motions, emotions, and so I joined Union Baptist Church [New York, New York] and was baptized as soon as I came out of college.  My father died this last semester of college, and the pastor of that church had come to our home, and it was really his mannerism in terms of dealing with us, how he dealt with us that attracted me to the church.  I felt that he did such a remarkable job in terms of that time of need for us, and so now I had this charismatic experience.  I had a pastor.  I was back in New York [New York] and then I began to see my world separated because the college educated, for the most part, the college educated African American who I hung with, most of them did not attend church all the time, and I was very much, you know, rooted and grounded in the church, and so I began to see this little divide.  They were like, she's really serious, you know, I mean, it was one thing to go to church, but she's like in the church, and so you began to see that it was more of a class issue that the up higher the economics strata, the less they went to church.  And here I was in a higher economic strata, and I was very much in the church, and so it has always been a very awkward mix, so it's no accident, I think leaders are always in awkward places.  I don't think you ever in a comfort zone.  You're always trying to find, you know, which is going to be my community, and I don't think there is one community that contains us.  I think, you know, there's several.  And I think that's the call and the mark of a leader that you're not ever gonna be comfortable in any one place.
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] and, not from Emerson, from Columbia Teachers College?  How soon after that did you travel to Africa?
Speaker 2: I traveled right after--the summer between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right after Emerson.
Speaker 2: -the summer between, right.  I graduated--
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: --I'd say May 20th, and I was in Africa June 1st.
Speaker 1: And then you went to Columbia Teachers College upon your return to New York?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, the fall of '76 [1976] and I created an independent study where I could go on the road with this company called Voices Incorporated, which was a theatrical company, but they used theater as an educational tool.  And so we would go into classrooms and teach young people reading and writing and arithmetic using the stage.  And so I was right there.  I was gonna find a way to get through this master's, you know, without it being boring and, you know, I was like, "I'm not relegated to a classroom," and it ended up, so I finished in a year and a half, so I had my master's at the time most people were finishing up their undergraduate degree, and I went straight from there to WJLA-TV in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 308352
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  How long were you there and--
Speaker 2: I was at WJLA [WJLA-TV, Washington, D.C.] from '78 [1978]--
Speaker 1: What were you producing?
Speaker 2: --to '80 [1980].  I went in as a floor director.  That's your entry level position if, in the production end, you actually cleaned the studio, set up the studios and prepared the talent to let them know how many minutes they have left in a segment, and you know, when it's time to wrap up.  So you start on the floor crew, and then I won this award called Seven's Best.  It was Channel 7, and I had been really great at it and people really liked me, so I got this Seven's Best award as the employee of the week, of the month.  And then they promoted me to producer of a public affairs show called 'Headliner' [ph.].  And I remember standing next to this cameraman, 'cause you know, it was a very small studio then, and all of us were really a family.  It was maybe like sixty employees in the whole place, and so I learned a little bit of everything.  I remember standing next to this cameraman and he said, "One day you're going to be a headliner.  You're not going to produce it, you're going to be a headliner."  And I looked at him.  He was like, "You are."  And so I never forgot that moment.  I could see we were in Studio B.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one.  And the talent there was really nice.  This guy named [HistoryMaker] Paul Berry, who was the anchor for the five o'clock news, you know, and most of them just really celebrated.  He would, whenever we'd have a studio audience, he would say, "Come here Sujay [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook]," you know.  He said, "This young lady is twenty-one years old, she's got her master's degree.  She's not staying here long."  And it was always these forecasts of kind of where you're going and, but I had a wonderful experience, so I stayed there 'til '78 [1978]--
Story_ID: 308353
Speaker 1: The summer in between I went to West Africa with Yolanda King, who's now the late Yolanda King.  It was our first time meeting.  She wanted to go to Africa, I wanted to go.  I had been that summer before.  She was in drama, you know, I wanted to be in drama, and so we connected.
Speaker 2: And she was in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area?
Speaker 1: No, she was up at Boston [Massachusetts] at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] and so Emerson [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts] wasn't far.  We had known of each other, we had written letters.  Here's my letter writing again.  I introduced myself, but you know, she was Mrs. King's [Coretta Scott King] daughter, so the first thing I had to do was convince Mrs. King that I got your daughter, you know, I've been to Africa, I know the continent and we're gonna be fine, because we backpacked for eight weeks.  This was not like a tour bus flyover on first class.  I was like, we had shoes for hiking and backpacks and she's like, "And who are you?"  I said, "I'm like Sujay [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook]."  And it ended up being the best relationship.  We had a thirty-one year friendship that lasted from the age of twenty 'til, you know, just this year she passed, and, she passed in 2007, and I had celebrated her fiftieth birthday.  She came to celebrate my fiftieth birthday, and so we had this wonderful friendship, but it began and that whole thing, we were attracted to drama and Africa.  We wanted the mother, we were longing for those places in our lives that needed to be filled, the motherland, the stage, you know, television, and so we had this wonderful bond, and it was like Felix Unger and Oscar [Oscar Madison] though.  I was the early morning riser, you know, miss prep.  She was the late night, you know, miss whatever, and so we'd have to meet in the middle of the day, so this friendship wouldn't rub the wrong way.  And we just learned to kind of know each other's rhythm and it was just the best, it was almost like a sister.
Speaker 2: Where did you go?
Speaker 1: We started in Ghana because that's where I had gone with Crossroads Africa [Operation Crossroads Africa], and so some of my friends were still there from Africa, and then she, you know her mother had called ahead, of course, and there were a couple of contacts she had, but she didn't really want to play the King card, you know.  And then we backpacked through nine countries, so we went to, at that time it was called Upper Volta [Burkina Faso], Ouagadougou [Burkina Faso].  We went to Mali, Bamako, Mali, where they had just filmed 'Roots,' a part of 'Roots' had been filmed there.  We went to Senegal where the slaves, the isle of Goree [Senegal], and we stayed with John Hope Franklin's [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] son, John [John W. Franklin], who's the great historian.  She knew John Franklin, and so we stayed in his house.  And so we had these contacts, and so we got to this part of Nigeria, we traveled all the way to Nigeria, nine countries, and like seven little countries between Ghana and Nigeria.  And we finally got to Nigeria.  We got stranded.  They just dropped us off on the bus, the local bus, like in this desert, and we had all of these things and they just were like, "Get off."  And we were like, wait a second, you know.  And she's like, "I don't want them to know who I am." I'm like, "You let them know who you are."  I said, "If you don't want to be Yolanda King, I'll tell them I'm Yolanda King."  I said, "We gotta use your name on this one," and so we finally hooked up with one of her mother's friends, Chief Fernandez [Antonio Deinde Fernandez], who found us, took us to his home and then flew us home on the Concorde to Paris [France], and then from Paris home.  I was like, "We're using the King name today," and we laughed about that story for such a long time, but it was a wonderful, wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 308354
Speaker 1: What did you do upon your return?
Speaker 2: I had, while I was gone, because I had gotten burned out from television, from WJLA [WJLA-TV, Washington, D.C.] I went to WBZ-TV in Boston [Massachusetts].  That's where Yolanda [Yolanda King] and I reconnected.  And it was a very painful experience. It was not the WJLA warm and fuzzy kind of atmosphere.  It was very much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it more corporate?
Speaker 2: --more corporate and actually I encountered some major racism on the show I was producing.  I had been promoted to a daily live show.  And--
Speaker 1: And what year is this and what city is that in?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-one [1981], this was Boston, Massachusetts.  I had an Irishwoman who, we were not feeling each other, you know.  The more I worked, the worse she got, and so I finally just, I went to the station managers and they kind of moved a little too late, you know.  They finally, when I decided I was going to resign, they were like, "Well, let us change your show."  No, I've been telling you this.  So I, that's the summer we went to Africa.  So while we were there, I was in a healing mode.  I was like, I don't want to see anything yet.  And I think it was part of my call, you know, but I was in the healing mode and I got an e- no it wasn't an e-mail in those days, I got a telegram from someone who had left WJLA-TV and moved to Florida as the head honcho of production and said, "We'll offer you, you know you were wonderful with us at JLA.  We'll offer you a job."  So I telegraphed her back about six weeks into the trip, you know, 'cause I said, I really got to think about whether I even want to go back into this business.  It was so cruel and so painful.  And I telegraphed her back about six weeks back into the trip, and said I will accept, I won't be back until I think, you know, Labor Day.  If you'll hold the job for me then I'll be there.  And they held the job.  And so when I came back I went to Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: What was the title and where were you?
Speaker 2: I became a full producer of public affairs, WPLG-TV in Miami, Florida.  They had just had the Miami race riots in Overtown [Miami, Florida].  This was like 1981, '82 [1982] and they needed some black faces, and they needed some people who were professional and successful.  So she brought me in, doubled my salary, you know, brought me in and, you know, I was in Miami for about a year and that's when my call really came alive.  I went, I was going to a local church there and they were southern and they were, they didn't know me and didn't owe me anything, and so the male chauvinism was like, you're not called to preach here, you know, and I, so that was the first sexism, like downright, outright sexism I faced, like because you are a woman, you can't do this.  And I was like, oh no, then I better go back to New York where they know me, not knowing that sexism is everywhere, and I left Miami after a year, came to a hospital here in the Bronx [New York], Bronx-Lebanon Hospital [Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, Bronx, New York], as their PR [public relations] director, and with my healing came back and, you know, I was back home and that's when the interview for, you know, 'Good Morning America' came up, '60 Minutes' came up, so I started attending seminary at Union [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York].  So you know I was back home, I was trying to put these, this media and this ministry together--
Story_ID: 308355
Speaker 1: So when did you start seminary at Union [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], and why did you choose Union?
Speaker 2: I started at the end of '81 [1981], when I left Miami [Florida], and I finished in '83 [1983].  I didn't know why I chose Union.  Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon] was attending there.  It was the school of reputation and rapport where scholars went.  I didn't have a clue. I knew I needed a seminary degree because that was your club card, so you know, I knew how to get through school early and quickly, so I was like I can master this.  I had one master's [degree].  They accepted twenty-one of my master's credits from Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] so I only had to do two out of the three years at Union because, you know, I had like a year's worth of credit from my other master's right across the street.  And all of a sudden now, I'm in seminary full-time and I'm working full-time, and God's calling me full time, and I'm trying to say, "Whoa," you know.  I was young and vibrant, twenty-three, you know, now, single and like, I'm like, "I can do this," and then there were places I just hit these walls where men would tell me, "You gotta prove to me you're called to preach," and I'm like, what, you know, I'd go to conference, the Hampton Ministers' Conference [Hampton University Ministers' Conference] and I became president of them.  I go to conferences, they're like, they would treat us like the lepers, like, we can't even touch your hand.
Speaker 1: Well how does that translate into what's happening for you when you're studying at Union?  What are you studying and are you having some of that debate about women being in the pulpit while you're there?
Speaker 2: We definitely were having the debate.  They called it at the time, not women's liberation, they called it liberation theology.  James, Dr. James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone] was one of the scholars there.
Speaker 1: So liberation theory (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was about, God is not a God of the oppressed, and so women and black people are liberated in Christ, and so that was the beginning of the scholarly discussion.  I must tell you though, I wasn't really there for a whole lot of scholarship, I was there to get this degree.  I mean the discussions were happening around me and, you know, the feminist movement was happening, so at the same time, black women were saying, "Well this movement doesn't represent us because we're not white women."  So it was the birthing of the womanist movement, but I didn't know that because I was clear I was not going for a Ph.D.  I mean I was clear.  It was an M.Div., do it, spit it out, give them what they want, get this degree.  So there was some discussion but, and I had gotten called to Mariner's Temple [New York, New York] while I was in seminary.  So here I am twenty-three years old, ministering, now, you know, full-time job, seminary and I had to make some decisions.  I could not be everywhere and that's when I kind of, the pieces started falling together.  Now because I was in New York [New York] and I started in my hometown, again I wasn't really aware of the sexism as much as perhaps I should have been, and so going to Mariner's Temple as the first black woman in the whole American Baptist Church [American Baptist Churches USA] to be elected as a pastor, opened a whole 'nother can of worms, because now my media friends, who I knew from JLA [WJLA-TV, Washington, D.C.] and BZ [WBZ-TV] in Boston [Massachusetts] started saying, "Well we've got to feature you," so I'm now on the cover of The New York Times.  I'm in New York Newsday, and they're like, "Well who is this woman?  We gotta pay attention to her," and so I had like behind the scenes sexism, but at the same time I had this wonderful visibility, and so I was just rolling with the flow.
Story_ID: 308356
Speaker 1: So, if we could just take you back to Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York] again.  What church were you attending while you were attending seminary?
Speaker 2: While I was at Union Theological Seminary, I was at Union Baptist Church in Harlem [New York, New York], my dad's [Wilbert Johnson] church I had joined right after college.  It was a very interesting time.  My pastor was the late Reverend Ollie B. Wells [Reverend Dr. Ollie B. Wells, Sr.].  He was a man from Richmond, Virginia, who had come to Union around the time that my father died, and so his, our connection came when my father died, he came to our home as this new pastor, really ministered to us, really felt, I felt, you know, his embrace, and I said, "When I come home from college, that's where I'm going to join, my dad's church."  Well, that in itself was an experience, you know, people were very excited.  This was Wilbert Johnson's daughter.  They knew me, but I had not been a member of that church, and so I started getting the privileges though that everyone else had.  So they had scholarships and they had things, and so there was a little woman, Miss Peete [ph.].  She's like, "You're Wilbert Johnson's daughter and so whatever the other kids get, you get."  And then I began to see that there are benefits and privileges of the way your parents walk in life, so then it's also up to me to keep that honor, you know, because I was really the beneficiary of my dad's kindness.  He had been an usher at this church for forty years, just a good wholesome man.  Everyone knew him, everyone loved him, so now his daughter comes.  So when I joined and I was baptized, not an issue.  I was still in theater, you know, they knew some days I would be leaving to try to do my little auditions and things like that or go for my television shows.  Then I said, you know, and I met with him and I said, "I feel called to ministry," and he said, he was the one who encouraged me.  He said, "You got to go to seminary," and he says, you know, "We've got to take it through the ranks."  The deacons have to approve and the church has to approve, and it's never been done with a woman.  I didn't understand, I was like okay, give me the date, the time.  It was there that it was very interesting because I was Wilbert Johnson's daughter, so there was favor clearly on my life in that church.  It was a full deacon board of males who were traditional, and so the question comes from the pastor, "Can we license Sujay Johnson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook]?"  So it was the first time these traditional men had to deal with, wow, the tradition's going to change if we say yes, but because I was Wilbert Johnson's daughter, even though, and I could tell they would never let me know the behind the scenes conversation, but there had been some full conversation.  Even though there was some people who said, "Ah, we're not ready for that," because of Wilbert Johnson's daughter's favor, they said, we've got to give her a shot.  And I am very clear on that.  I am very clear on that.  And so voted for me to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To the seminary?
Speaker 2: --no they voted for me to receive my license in ministry, which is the first step.  In the Baptist church you have to be licensed, and then you have to be, serve for some time, and then you have to be ordained, presented for ordination, and then you can be a pastor that way, you know.  And so here I am breaking ground, not knowing, so I become the first daughter of Union to be licensed to preach.  And Reverend Wells was my pastor, and he was exceptional.  He was very open-minded.  He took the blows.  Lots of his friends pulled away from him because it's like, wow, you were, you know, you dealing with a woman.  The only other woman in town was a woman named Carolyn Ann Knight and she was at Canaan Baptist Church [Canaan Baptist Church of Christ, New York, New York], Dr. Wyatt Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] was the first to break the ice in New York.  And he had a woman on his staff, so now I was this second woman in town.
Story_ID: 308357
Speaker 1: And are you being ordained while you are attending seminary?  How does that work exactly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you're being, you're licensed, you preach a sermon, you get your license, they vote for your license on the same day.  The congregation, first the deacons approve, then it has to be taken to the congregation so that you can get a date for licensing, you preach your sermon and at the day of your sermon the congregation, which has already approved your licensing, votes your license in.  So they have to hear you before you are received into kind of the fellowship.  And then, I'm in seminary now.  I have enrolled in Union Theological Seminary [New York, New York] as a licensed preacher.  I am still working full-time though in the media because, you can't be paid by ministry yet, and so I'm going to seminary full-time, and Union is a full-time day student kind of seminary.  So I had to juggle a lot of worlds.  I mean I was kind of doing lunch hours and right before work and right after work and trying not to tell either world where I was.  I wasn't telling the hospital [Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, Bronx, New York] and public relations that I was in seminary and I wasn't telling the seminary I was working full-time, because your attention is supposed to be there.  And at Union was this wonderful--Union Seminary--was this wonderful group of black men.  There was Dr. James Cone [HistoryMaker James H. Cone] who's the father of black liberation.  There was Dr. James Washington who was the church historian.  He's now deceased, who wrote on prayer and he was wonderful in history, and then there was Dr. Cornel West, who was my professor of philosophy, and then there was Dr. James Forbes [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. James A. Forbes] who was my professor of preaching.  So we had these Jameses and Cornel, you know, the three Jameses.  It was a fabulous time to have these minds, who I had only heard about, because I hadn't been in the church well at the scholarship level, but everybody was just like flocking to Union, you've got Dr. Cone, you've got Dr. West, you know, you've got Dr. Forbes, and I didn't realize what kind of significance that was.  I was fascinated by it, but later, you know, now in retrospect I realize I had, you know, I was in the midst of greatness.
Speaker 1: And did you have any sense about how the Jameses and Cornel felt about your being a woman?  What other women were there, and you know, how did that relate to Dr. Cone's analysis of--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were very excited.  All of them were very open.  They embraced me from the first day.  At that time the seminaries were filling up with women.  I mean, the denominations hadn't accepted everybody yet, but the seminaries were almost 50 percent women.  I was on the younger side.  Most of the women coming in were second career women, and so, in my class, most of the women had children my age, which was another dynamic, you know, you're this young thing, you know, and so, but those were my colleagues and friends now.
Speaker 1: And who were some of them?
Speaker 2: The Reverend Laura Sinclair [Reverend Dr. Laura B. Sinclair] who's now pastoring in the Bronx [at Parkchester Baptist Church, Bronx, New York], the Reverend Julia Quinlan [Reverend Julia Mayo Quinlan], who's now in the United Methodist Church pastoring in Florida [at Parkway United Methodist Church, Pompano Beach, Florida].  She may be retiring soon.  Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon] was there as a Ph.D. student.  Dr. Delores Williams [Dr. Delores S. Williams] was there as a Ph.D. student, and so she was what they called a tutor for the classes.  So you know, and Dr. Kelly Brown Douglas.  At the time she was Dr. Kelly Brown, who was one of Dr. Cone's students and so she was clearly being mentored by him.  I, you know, I flocked to Dr. Forbes and Dr. Washington the most because I knew I wanted oratory, you know.  Forbes was my first class in seminary and to this day he's still my favorite professor and friend.  Dr. Washington was his best friend, so I got kind of the overflow of their love, and then Dr. Cornel West was just in a class all of his own.  He just, I didn't understand a thing he said.  He was so brilliant, but I was just fascinated.  I was like, he is somebody.  I didn't even know where he was going, but I knew he was not going to stay there long, you know, he was going to big places.  And they had this fraternity.  They were so close and so wonderfully tight that the students' modeled that, and so we became very close and very tight.  Dr. Mark V.C. Taylor, you know, Dr. Oscar Brown [ph.], all of us were, were there, Dr. Oscar Owens [Oscar Owens, Jr.], we were there together, kind of liberation theology was being birthed, so women were a part of it.  There was an exciting time for it because, what it was, was the answer to white theology, you know, you know, we hadn't separated it into womanist and anything else.  It was like, this is a voice for black people and so it was a wonderful time to debate on that.
Story_ID: 308358
Speaker 1: And did you feel that your church [Union Baptist Church, New York, New York] at home, or your church [St. Paul AME Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts], and seminary provided you with the kind of support that is being discussed when black theology is coming about?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I didn't think the churches, in fact, most the things I learned in seminary I could not easily translate into the context that I was in, and that's where my pastor [Reverend Dr. Ollie B. Wells, Sr.] was very helpful.  He was like, "Just because you learning about womanistic theology doesn't mean you come and start preaching that, or changing the hymns here into he to she," because what he taught me was how to respect the tradition while finding my own voice, and you have to be that bridge and I think when I became the president of Hampton Ministers' Conference [Hampton University Ministers' Conference], that bridge was very important, because here I was a forty-something woman in between these older men who had built the conference who were eighties and nineties, and these younger men whose voices were now emerging, who were saying, you know, move the old guys over, we're here, and here I am right in the middle, a woman and forty-something, between the eighties and the twenty and thirty-somethings.  And I became the bridge.  I was like, "We have to respect the tradition and the shoulders we stand on," and to the older gentlemen, it was, "and at the same time, you have to give them a chance and a voice because their voices are gonna be heard whether they're heard here or not."  And so now we've created this slot called New Voices Emerging, so that a young person who would have never gotten on the stage sixty years ago, could usually you had to wait until you were about sixty to get on the Hampton stage, now could have a slot, a major time period, women could now get on the stage because you have a woman president, and then the older guys are saying, "Well this is our daughter Sujay [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook]," you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that sounds very much like what you did in high school [Riverdale Country School, Bronx, New York] with the youth ministry, where you said we're gonna come with afros and we're gonna come with jeans and the person said oh, no, but suddenly it works out because--
Speaker 2: Because everything is about relationships and the trust level.  People can hear the gospel and see the gospel when they feel it's someone that has integrity in whom they trust.  So that I could break some walls down because people knew that I was not gonna be a male basher.  I might say some things that are different than what they've heard, but I wasn't gonna pounce on everything that went before us.  In fact, I would celebrate that, and say, what else can we celebrate that new that's coming.  And I think that that's what happens, that the key to leadership and ministry in particular is that everything is about relationships in life, you know, whether you can call a local politician to help your church is because someone I know in this city is going to pick up the phone when I call because they know me, not as necessarily the reverend doctor, but they know me as Sujay, they've seen me grow up, they've seen my family, they've seen me walk, you know, with integrity.  So when I call now, it's like, "What do you need Reverend?"  You know, we've got the emissary right there.  Tomorrow it's done, or sometimes today.  And I think that that's the wonderful place, having had all this balance in my life, I think that's a wonderful place to be in ministry, and so going into Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York], although it was a very new world, you know, this scholarship world, I was a smart girl, you know, I was a smart young woman coming in the school, had aced everything, now I get Dr. Phyllis Trible in Old Testament, who sends my paper back for the first time I've ever gotten a rewrite on my paper.  And I'm like, whoa, you know, you're called to think in this thing.  It's not about just memorizing and spitting it back out and writing wrong answers, but it's about theology, asking questions of God, asking questions of your faith, and then answering them, because you're gonna have people's lives entrusted to you.  So that was my wake-up call, that this ministry is very serious, you know, it's not just another degree, it's a calling.
Speaker 1: And were there any other hot topics that were being debated within the ministry at Union?
Speaker 2: Well, the gay issue was really emerging at that time, but you know, you had to make a determination how many issues you could be about, because it was one just being a female in ministry, straight or gay, you know, just emerging as a female.  As a young person, the ageism, you know, everyone who I pastored would always say to me, "Well my children are your age, why should I, you know," so I had to deal with that coming in young and bubbly and miss I can do it all, and then, so you had to decide how many issues you could face.  And there was the black/white thing, and in our community, it was not that people were homophobic, it was just that homosexuality wasn't the priority, it wasn't the hot topic at the table.  Sexuality, in general, was not discussed in our homes.  That was just a traditional thing so that you didn't bring that necessarily to the front burner.  For me it was how can I in this skin that I'm in and with this voice that I have, with these gifts and abilities and exposure, how can I bring what I have to God for his glory.  And it was about trying to find a place, trailblazing is not easy, you are blazing a trail, a road that's never been walked on before, and so it's very isolating.  Most people don't understand you, although there are some who are cheering you on, most people didn't understand it.  And even in mother's home church [Rendall Memorial Presbyterian Church, New York, New York] and my dad's [Wilbert Johnson] home church where they loved me, you know, the prevailing mood around the country was that women were not called to preach, so when I think about it, my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] had to endure, you know, people saying, "Suzan going in the ministry," you know, "Suzan's preaching?"  And then it was a long time before there was this comfort level where they were like, the Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook.  I mean it took a long time to get there where it was like Rev., but you know, you stay in it to win it, and now it's twenty-six years later, and, you know, I'm established, I'm respected, I'm comfortable in my world, confident in it, and now I'm mentoring others, that's my new calling.  Who do I pass it onto?  Who, what's the next legacy that I leave, so it's not about me, it's about a generation of women who follow me.
Story_ID: 308359
Speaker 1: Talk about your arrival of Mariner's Temple [New York, New York] church.  How did you receive that assignment?  And when did you arrive there?
Speaker 2: I arrived at Mariner's in March of '83 [1983].  I was in my last semester at Union Seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York].  I was finishing up my final thesis.  I had just gotten ordained to the ministry in March of '83 [1983] and this, and I was in the American Baptist Churches [American Baptist Churches USA], so as part of my field placement, my part-time work, I worked in the American Baptist Churches' office.  They called it ABC Metro New York [American Baptist Churches of Metropolitan New York].  It was right across the street from Union Seminary, and a man named Reverend Carl Flemister was our executive minister.  In our non-connectional church he would be like our bishop, although we don't have the same kind of level of, you know, reporting to him, but he would be the one who pastors pastors.  And so I worked in his office, and we developed a wonderful relationship, and so pastors would come through ABC Metro who were going on vacation and, you know, that was our headquarters.  And so one was a man named Reverend Neville Braithwaite, and he was from Jamaica and he pastored Mariner's Temple and he says, "I'm going on vacation and I need somebody to preach for me," and so I'm sitting there, and then they called out all these names about, you know, males, you know, Preston Washington can do it, maybe we'll call so and so, and then somebody looked over at me and said, "You free?"  And I was like, yes, and so Reverend Sujay [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook] can do it.  There was a little pause and they said, "Oh, why didn't I think of that?  Can you do vacation relief for me?"  Yes, the next Sunday.  I didn't even know how to get to Chinatown.  I'm from New York [New York], got my directions.  We didn't have MapQuest.  You gotta call and say, "What highway do I take and where do I turn?"  Got to Mariner's Temple.  I preached.  So it was about ten people there, and then I went back to Union the next Sunday.  The end of the month something happened at Mariner's where he decided not to come back from vacation to that church.  And how God would have it, people said, "Well the last person we heard as a guest was this young preacher, Sujay, Reverend Sujay.  Let's see if we can have her be interim."  So Rev. Flemister worked it out, whatever the legal arrangement is for, you know, an interim to be there.  I went there as an interim pastor.  That was my second time at Mariner's.  Well Mariner's started growing, and they asked me to stay there for six months and it started growing from this ten people--
Speaker 1: Did Mariner's start to grow or did you perhaps put a bit of energy into Mariner's (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I put some energy in there.
Speaker 1: What kind of energy did you put into Mariner's which resulted in its growth from the ten or fifteen?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, my brother [Charles Johnson] had been in politics.  That's a way of life and relationships all matter.  My brother had been in politics.  He was an assemblyman, and so when he was twenty-six, and it's interesting, I went to Mariner's at twenty-six, he, we had to do the door-to-door, you know, the subway stops, all the campaigning things with him.
Speaker 1: And he was running for which office?
Speaker 2: For the state, New York State Assembly.
Speaker 1: And about how old were you when you were working with him on that?
Speaker 2: He was six years older than me so I was about nineteen, twenty.  It was my last year of college [Emerson College, Boston, Massachusetts], coming out of college, and so we had never done a campaign before.  The community where we lived was changing from all Jewish to now black people were moving in, and this Jewish assemblyman, his name was Sy Posner [Seymour Posner], said, "You know what, I'm moving on," and he kind of anointed my brother as the candidate, and so he had this twenty-five-year old, at the time before he was elected, running in this predominately Jewish changing neighborhood.  He wins against the machine.  Nobody knew who the Johnsons were and nobody knew who this young man was, and so it was, I actually quit my job at the New York phone company out of college to start campaigning for him.  And it was there we learned how to campaign, we learned what politics, so we did door-to-door (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you use that same campaign method--
Speaker 2: And that was the same campaign.
Speaker 1: --at Mariner's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you went door-to-door.
Speaker 2: Door-to-door and I did subway stops.  I mean it was the exact same order.  We just changed the literature from Vote for Johnson to Come to Mariner's Temple.  Same leaflets, same pictures, you know, pretty much, you know, showing some compassion, some outgoingness and people said when we came to their door, cause mainly it was the Smith housing projects [Governor Alfred E. Smith Houses, New York, New York] right down the block from Mariner's, seventeen stories, seventeen apartments on a floor, housing projects, and people said, "If you took the time to come to my house, I will take the time to come to your church."  And that's how Mariner's--and the subway stops.  Some of them would throw the leaflets on the ground rushing to work, but some would keep them in their hands and said, "We got to check this young lady out," and that's how the lunch hour service was birthed, because the people who worked in downtown Manhattan [New York, New York] didn't really want to come on Sunday.  They're not going to come back on their weekend.  So we created this lunchtime--so now I had these two viable, growing congregations and all kinds of things changed, the denomination had different respect for us, my male colleagues had a different respect, politicians had a different respect for us--
Story_ID: 308360
Speaker 1: Talk about each of those, each congregation, the Wednesday and the Sunday and what kind of literal changes happened in terms of intentions and attitude toward you as a result of this growth?
Speaker 2: Well three things happened.  One was I was installed at Mariner's [Mariner's Temple, New York, New York].  After the growth, as the growth was happening (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The interim period.
Speaker 2: --the interim period.  Now there had been a rule pretty much that interims could not be considered for the full-time pastorate.  That's the American Baptist [American Baptist Churches USA] rule, but the people, because we're a Baptist church, the congregation has the final say, and they said, "This young lady, some things are happening here, and we want to keep her," so they voted me in, and the Reverend Carl Flemister was instrumental in making sure that that happened, and securing me there, and so that happened, so now, so then they'd have to, what they call an installation of a pastor.  So now I've been licensed by my Union Baptist [Union Baptist Church, New York, New York], I've been ordained by Union Baptist.  Now I must be installed.
Speaker 1: You were ordained by Reverend Wells [Reverend Dr. Ollie B. Wells, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: By Reverend Wells.  He baptized me, licensed me, ordained me and married me, so it was a full journey.  Yeah, and so Union, now Union Baptist comes down on the big Sunday to install me, because my pastor now makes me a pastor, but then during the week you have all of these services.  It was traditional full-week services, so one of the turning points was Dr. Gardner C. Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] came, who was the, who's now the pastor emeritus of Concord Baptist Church [Concord Baptist Church of Christ, Brooklyn, New York], but he in the world of preaching is known as the dean of preachers.  I called him on the phone, got him on the first ring and I said, "I'm Suzan Johnson Cook [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook], no I was Suzan, Sujay Johnson."  He said, "I know who you are."  He talked very slow.  I was, you know, hyperventilating and I, he says, "What would you like?"  I said, "Well I'm having this installation, and I wondered if you would come preach and bring your congregation."  He says, "I'd love to," and so he came on a Wednesday night, brought three busloads of people from a traditional Baptist church to my installation service.
Speaker 1: Okay, first can you just tell us about what the schedule during the week is like?
Speaker 2: Okay, you go, so you're elected and you set a date, a week date, so you have a Saturday banquet and you have five nights of services, so you have a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday banquet, and then you're installed on a Sunday.  So it's a full week of what they call, and what you do is you bring in various churches and leading pastors so that they're celebrating with their congregation your new leader.  So everybody brings their own flavor.
Speaker 1: And so you chose Wednesday as the day--
Speaker 2: For Dr. Taylor.
Speaker 1: --for Dr. Taylor.
Speaker 2: See I remember the other pastors and I don't remember what the order was, Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], who had this other woman, and he was one of the famous preachers.  He had marched with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so everybody knew him, at Canaan Baptist [Canaan Baptist Church of Christ, New York, New York]; Reverend Nathaniel Tyler Lloyd, who is now the late reverend, and Trinity Baptist [Trinity Baptist Church] in the Bronx [New York], another kind of father figure in the faith, and he had helped so many seminarians have preaching opportunities while we were in seminary so he had to be there.  Did Dr. Gardner Taylor on Wednesday, right in the middle of the week, with the three busloads of Concord, Reverend Preston Washington, who is now the late Reverend Preston Washington, Memorial Baptist Church [New York, New York], and there was one other who I can't, but then at the banquet on Saturday, I had Katie Cannon [Katie Geneva Cannon] and Reverend John Bryant [Bishop John Richard Bryant], because they had been the most influential in my life, for my life, and then Union Baptist came to my luncheon.  So I had my home church, I had the leading pastors, and they all said yes, and they came and packed my church out.  So what it does is two things.  One it says that we affirm her and we're gonna support her.  It shows and encourages my congregation.  This is how full this church can be.  You know at this time we were maybe a hundred members, and now so you're seeing, you know, three hundred other people coming to celebrate your pastor.  You've got to grow to this level, so that when she goes out you can, and so it just becomes this wonderful week of celebration.  Now for the family, it wears them out.  By the end of the last day, they were like, oh, this is the last day, thank God.  But it was, it's a wonderful affirmation so when those leaders came and the press came, my media friends came, and they're like, click, click, and it was in the newspapers, then what was happening was like, we can't ignore this women's thing and we certainly can't ignore this woman, you know, whether we concede to the women in ministry piece, now we can't ignore this woman--
Story_ID: 308361
Speaker 1: --Talk a bit about, you said you were ordained by the American Baptist--
Speaker 2: Churches.  You're ordained by your congregation under the denomination of the American Baptist Churches [American Baptist Churches USA].
Speaker 1: And is the American Baptist Churches a black organization?
Speaker 2: No, nationally, it's historically white.  There are about three million American Baptists.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in this region it's very diverse, and the black church is probably the leading church.  In this region there are about 192 churches, and I'd say 132 are African American or Caribbean.
Speaker 1: So within that, and then, also observed by the black, not congregations, I want to say--
Speaker 2: Conventions?
Speaker 1: --conventions, thank you, you're earning this respect--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at Mariner's Temple [New York, New York], so how does their relationship to you change?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I mean, it becomes the buzz of not just the town, it becomes the buzz of the nation.  So one thing is like when I go back to the Hampton Ministers' Conference [Hampton University Ministers' Conference] now, I'm no longer just this seminarian, but I'm pastor, so you have to at least treat me on the pastor level.  There is a difference, so that, so now we like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And let's just for our listeners, what year are you installed?
Speaker 2: I'm installed in October of '83 [1983].  I went there in March of '83 [1983], I'm installed in October of '83 [1983], and that's around the time I had just started going to the Hampton Ministers' Conference the year before, as seminarian, now I'm Pastor Sujay [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook], so they're like, "So you wanna go out to dinner?"  You know, you wanna go out and so, it was very awkward because it was very clear that most men had not had a relationship this close with a woman in leadership.
Speaker 1: You described this as the golf course of Baptist ministers.
Speaker 2: Oh, the golf course of Baptist ministers, so they were kind of like, how do we relate to her, you know, do we relate sexually, do we relate like our daughter, do we relate, you know, how, because it's just this awkward thing.  They have not had women around and so I'm here, I'm single.
Speaker 1: And were people flirting with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's a lot of flirting going on, there's a lot of flirting going on, but you know how God would work, God would always have this older man right near me, you know because if you're single, you're like, okay well maybe we can go out, and one of these older men would walk up next to me and say, "Daughter, don't go there."  And I'm like what, you know, what.  And so I had these angels, you know, that just were like, and what they were saying to me in their own way was, you've got to walk with your integrity this whole journey.  You're just starting out, and no matter what, the perception of you leaving with someone by yourself at night after the conference, is not one that you wanna have.  So they said, "You walk with me to the parking lot."  What, what.  And, but you know what, I am so thankful because I could not see down the road twenty-four years later when they would elect me as their leader.  So what it was when I stood there, I am now a married woman with family, I have not been with any of the men, I am their leader and their sister and their daughter and their friend with integrity.  And that is such a liberating feeling that you can leave with your integrity and your values and your ethics, not knowing whether I would have made a mistake, but the opportunity was certainly there, and so you know, just God, then you have to kick in again those family values, you know, what would my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] say, what would my father [Wilbert Johnson] say, and just, you know, and so we had to learn how to be friends and colleagues in ministry, and that took years of, because I was athletic I would say this, that was the one place that we would play tennis or swim or basketball, and so people were like, Sujay can play, she can play, and so happened was relationships were developed, and so as some of them got married I was invited to their weddings.  As I got married, they were invited to my wedding.  As we had children, our children were now vacationing together and what happens now, its twenty-six years later, we have this family called Hampton.  We have this family of colleagues, where, where if I call, you know, a male pastor the wife is like, "Sujay's on," you know, or like if one of them calls here, it's like, "Sujay, so-and-so is on."  And so happens is the relationships really matter and relationships of integrity really matter, so the Hampton relationship changed.  Politicians in Chinatown [New York, New York], now we were this black church in Chinatown, so when we first came, they were like, we got to take her seriously, right.  Twenty-three years old, right.  When you start having three and four and five hundred people pack your church at lunchtime, and they're leaving your office to come to this service, and they're coming back saying, "My gosh, you gotta meet this woman, or you gotta hear what we heard today," or, "We're inspired, we feel better for work."  People at the Police Department [New York City Police Department] who used to have attitudes would go back and say, "Wow, we're a block away, you need to come," and so they started bringing the rank and file, and so all of a sudden I have commissioners and captains and chiefs in the front row at lunchtime, and I'm like, "Oh my goodness, this is really, really happening," so the lunchtime service is growing, the Sunday service growing, people are being inspired and Mariner's is now on the map.
Story_ID: 308362
Speaker 1: Would you mind telling us about the Wednesday Hour of Power [Lunch Hour of Power]?  What did you do there, and is it important for people to be inspired in the middle of the week?
Speaker 2: The Wednesday Hour of Power was a half an hour mid-week pick-me-up lunch time worship service [at Mariner's Temple, New York, New York].  That was primarily targeted to the city workers who worked in the downtown, Foley Square [New York, New York], City Hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] area, because the key to the lunchtime service, the key to the lunchtime service was that you had to be able to walk there and get there within five minutes because most city workers and state workers are on a fixed clock, and you cannot make them late and you have to really respect that.  If they have a job, which is hard to get, you have to help them to keep that, so I'm all, ministry is meeting the needs of the people, it's not about your ego, what works for you.  It's about what works for them.  So doing those subway stops early in my ministry, I listened, and I rode the subways.  I would listen to people as they got off and most people were hardworking people but they were living paycheck to paycheck.  They had the same wants and desires my family had, to help get their kids through high school and then to a college, to perhaps buy their first home, but I also noticed this great apathy and almost depression, that people worked because they had to, but they really didn't want to, so they would get off the subway, aw, you know, kind of like, "Time to make the donuts, I got to do this again," and I kind of said, you know, to myself, I didn't have any discussions, that's kind of a hard way to exist, you know.  Where's the joy?  And so I cleared this lunch time service, I had heard about one in Baltimore, Maryland, where a church was near, you know, the downtown harbor, and they had tried it at lunch time, so I just said, "You know what, we're gonna try it," and so we did.  We would have our senior citizens prepare a bagged lunch.  So they would go out shopping for bologna or they would fry chicken or some ham, whatever was on sale, and what was developing is now I have a ministry for my seniors who were home all day who had nothing to do.  This was the best thing since sliced bread for them.  They made it a project.  All they asked me was, "What's our budget and we've got the rest," you know, and so it became a ministry for them, and then the people started coming.  Our first Wednesday we had sixty people.  It doubled the next week.  I said go tell someone.  After that we never had to advertise again.  It was just flyers at the subway for about six weeks, just like the campaign.  Six weeks is the magic number.  When people caught on to it, they knew it Wednesday.  So you would see at twelve o'clock the sanctuary, which holds eleven hundred, with like twenty people in it, and they're like, "So this is what everybody's been talking about?"  You turn around at ten after twelve and the sanctuary's packed.  And people were like, and when you go outside and see the people just coming because in New York at the end of Manhattan [New York, New York], all the streets kind of converge together.  So you see people coming from the north and the south and the east and the west to this one church, and then coming en masse, because they're on their lunch hour and people are like, oh, my goodness.  So it became like the preaching station.  People are like, "When are you having me down there to preach?"  I mean it became like very competitive.  When you gonna invite me to preach?  That also broke a lot of the sexism barrier.
Speaker 1: Who did you have to preach?
Speaker 2: I preached most of the beginning ones, and then I would have just friends who had been friends in ministry.  Reverend Carl Flemister, my pastor, Reverend Ollie Wells [Reverend Dr. Ollie B. Wells, Sr.], and then I started having some of the big names, "Dr. Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] will you come?  Gardner Taylor, will you come at lunchtime?"  Sure.  And I said, "You only have ten minutes," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For how long?
Speaker 2: That's what we said, ten minutes, because the key is it's a half an hour service.  We do a hymn, we do an offering, because you have to let the people participate in worship.  You do a ten minute sermonette and then you bless them and they go back to work, and they get their sandwich on the way out.  So the key was, whoever came had to understand it was ten minutes.  I had Congressman Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] there because at that time Major David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] was mayor, so here we now have Mayor Dinkins and we have Commissioner Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] and you have me, so you have this whole kind of citadel.  The police commissioner, the mayor and this black woman, all down in City Hall together and we were all friends, you know, and I'd have them, so one day we were doing this celebration for Reverend, ah, for Mayor Dinkins as he was about to end his tenure, and I had Congressman Rangel and [HistoryMaker] Adelaide Sanford who was the regent of New York, and a lot of famous people came to say, bid him farewell.  I had become a White House Fellow and so some of my White House friends were there, and Congressman Rangel was going to go on.  I told each of the guests you have literally two minutes, and he was going to go on, so I stood up and pulled him down.  He was so, he tells people now publicly, she pulled a congressman down.  She means, when she says two minutes, she means two minutes, because you really have to honor that time.  Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton], I mean, whoever was, you know, kind of the headliner at that time, came through there.  And I would preach almost like every other week, and so it became this wonderful thing.  So police brass started coming, front row, the managers, the captains, the chiefs, the heads of community events, would sit in the front row and they were like, that's our girl, you know.
Story_ID: 308363
Speaker 1: And so what happened was the women of the department [New York City Police Department] went back to whoever, at the time, our commissioner, Ben Ward [Benjamin Ward], was the first commissioner, and he--first black commissioner, and under his administration, a lot of these people went back and said, "You know what, we've got this woman who's our pastor during the week, so we should just make her a chaplain of the police department." I had no idea there were police chaplains in the City of New York [New York].  I didn't know.  That wasn't my world.
Speaker 2: Is there more than one chaplain or is there one?
Speaker 1: There are eight.
Speaker 2: There are eight chaplains?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, but they did not have a woman ever.
Speaker 2: And what does a chaplain do?
Speaker 1: The chaplains are there for the whole department.  Now they're fifty thousand.  At that time there were thirty thousand employees, both the cops and the civilians.  Anyone in the department who needs counseling, stress management, blessings of their children, any of the ceremonies, and then we're there for the inspectors' funerals when there are police officers killed in the line of duty.  But we're available particularly for counseling to anybody in the department.  People who need a religious, what they call religious waivers, like if they're observing on a particular day and they were assigned to work that day, and it's their high holy day, then a chaplain can become the person, so that the system doesn't run them, but that we have care and compassion in honor of people's, you know, religious observances.  So here I am.  They have no women at this time.  It had been predominately Catholic priests, and there was a Jewish rabbi when I came.  And that was pretty much all they had, and it had been, and it was, you know, had been pretty much older men who were in their sixties and beyond, and here I am now maybe twenty-eight at this time.  And so I get a call from police commissioner Ben Ward's office.  Hello sir, and he's on the phone, "I need you to come in," okay, "we're going to ask you to be police chaplain."  I said, "Okay, thank you."  What do, tell me, you know, I asked the questions, what do chaplains do?  How did this happen?  And he, there were all these women, black, white, Latina, Asian, sitting around smiling.  "We asked him for you to be the chaplain."  Well, there's a ton of paperwork that has to go through and lots of systems because there are, it has to be approved by the mayor's office, you now, lots of systems, and although the police commissioner has the final appointment, and so I filled out tons, hundreds pieces of paper.  I had to bring in ID, I had to be fingerprinted, all the things that the police, if you gonna work for the highest, you know, office in New York City, they have to know who you are for security reasons.  The paperwork took so long, so now it's like eight months later.  I said, "Well maybe it's not gonna happen, that's fine."  So in the meantime Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] had started this program called President's Administrative Fellows [President's Administrative Fellows Program], and I had interviewed maybe two years prior for this position and professorship, and I didn't get it, but I wrote the dean, who was Ronald Freeman, thank you for taking the time to interview me and seeing my resume.  Well, I get this call in August now of '90 [1990], and he's in Paris [France].  Ronald Freeman is the dean and he calls me in August, and says, sorry to disturb you, but I'm calling from Paris.  I'm like it's not a disturbance.  He says, "I got your thank you note and I really appreciate it."  He says, "But Harvard has created this program called President's Administrative Fellows, and we're looking for minorities who we can assign to each of the schools, and you'd have to leave your church for a year, on sabbatical.  We'll pay you a full salary, and I thought of you.  Would that be something you're interested in?  And you'd be an officer of Harvard and you'd teach here."  And I said, "Yes sir," but I said, "but I have to ask my congregation [at Mariner's Temple, New York, New York], you know, it's a year, and when do you need an answer?"  "You need to be here September 1."  We are in August.  So I called the congregational meeting, and for whatever reason my congregation thought I was going to resign, so when I asked just for a sabbatical.  They were like, "Yes go, you're a black woman, go represent us."  So they released me to this year sabbatical.  I was burnt out so it was the perfect timing.  I needed to change from the inner city day-to-day environment.  Still hadn't heard from the police department.  I get a call, I'm literally on my way to Harvard.  I'm packing, I'm driving up, and Commissioner Ward calls me personally and again and says, "We got the papers approved, so you ready to begin?"  And I said, "Sir, I hadn't heard anything, I didn't know."  He said, "Well it takes a long time."  I said, "I'm sorry, I really would have loved to, but I have to go to Harvard. I just accepted a position there, and thank you."  Still kind of just blowing it off, not knowing the magnitude of it.  The women behind the scenes in the department froze the position for a year.  I don't know what they did, I don't know what they said, who they talked to, all I know, I did my full year at Harvard, came back in August of the next year, I guess it was '90 [1990] and they, I left in '89 [1989], came back in August of '90 [1990] and they said, "So Commissioner Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] is now the commissioner, Ben Ward retired, and will you be the chaplain?"  I was like, "I can still do this?"  And they say, "Yes, Commissioner Brown, all he has to do is sign off on it."  His first month on the job, he said, "That's all I have to do?"  He interviews me, "Please come," so I become the first female chaplain of the police department and that opened up a whole new world of law enforcement, and it was just a tremendous, tremendous experience, and I'm still am a police chaplain.  It's my seventeenth year and it's a phenomenal place to be because what it is, you're pastor to the city, you know, you're pastor to those who protect us--
Story_ID: 308364
Speaker 1: And can you feel the calm that you stimulate in officers [at the New York City Police Department] and the surrounding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Without question.  I can, I can remember people coming in my office, you know, I mean, crying or stressed out, whatever the job or life, what I call Life 101, has done to them, and they leave and I pray with them and we join hands and then we hug.  I mean not just Christians, I've had Jewish persons.  I've had women, I've had men, I've had every persuasion come in, and there is a calm, there is something that happens.  We call it the anointing in the Christian church, but there is something that happens when in the privacy, and the great thing about being a police chaplain is that you don't have to do it right at headquarters.  We can meet them anonymously anywhere in the city, so if someone needs me to meet them in a bar, if that's their comfort level until they're able to kind of talk it through, I'll go, no one will know it but that person and myself, but when we leave there, it's not the bar that's the dominant factor, it is, the power of the Lord has spoken in this place, and so they are able to leave a different way than they came.  The most prevalent memory is 9/11 [September 11, 2001], because we were the chaplains who had to respond.  There were twenty-six police officers who were lost in the line of duty, in that horrific, and the city [New York, New York] was paralyzed, you know.  We had never experienced war and terrorism on these shores, and even internally, I was experiencing, you know, my gosh, but we had to rise to the occasion because we had to be the leaders for the leaders, and I think, if I can think of a time that God really used me and I knew it, it was during that time, because after I had done the Wednesday lunch hour services [Lunch Hour of Power] and I left Mariner's [Mariner's Temple, New York, New York], I created a new service called Wonderful Wall Street Wednesday, ten blocks south of where Mariner's was, people who said that they couldn't have made it in ten minutes to Mariner's were asking me, "Can you do something at lunch time?"  So I created this for the Wall Street community and the small United Methodist Church, called John Street United Methodist Church [New York, New York] and we had been in our fourth year of doing it, every Wednesday, and I was like, "God why am I coming from the Bronx [New York] every Wednesday down on the subway, for a half an hour."  And then 9/11 happened on September 11th, five years ago, what was that, 2002, 2001, 2001 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]?  I thought it was 2001.
Speaker 2: --and we were scheduled to open our Wall Street service on September 12th.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Speaker 2: Because we would take a break for the summer, so it was going to open the next Wednesday, the next day.  And 9/11 happened and so New York City stopped, and we had to respond to the police families in the whole department.  The next Wednesday, however, people were ordered to go back to work.  They gave them a couple of days off to get yourself together, but New York doesn't just stop forever, so people had to go back to work and that next Wednesday, now which would have been September 19th, this Wednesday service that I did was right down the block from the World Trade Center [New York, New York].  It was the only structure not hit on the entire block.  You could see dust and fumes and fire flames and evidence of 9/11 every other building surrounding it.  This church stood there with nothing on it.  So the people were able to come physically into this church, packed.
Speaker 1: What did you talk about that day?
Speaker 2: Well, there, first let me, their description was, their eyes were filled with terror and the tears were streaming because they were afraid.  They were not ready to go back to work.  They needed a job, but they weren't ready.  The trauma that had happened, and there's a scripture that came to my mind as they came in, that is in the Bible that says, God is a refuge in a time of trouble, a very present help in the time of need, and that's the scripture that bubbled in my spirit as they came in.  This place is the refuge.  This is the shelter, and God said to me, that's why you come down every Wednesday, because you were supposed to be here.
Speaker 1: You asked.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you asked.  You were supposed to be here for this moment.  And it wasn't even about the message.  We actually had a guest preacher that day.  We had Dr. Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Calvin O. Butts] that day, and the press was there, of course, to cover, you know, these people coming back to work, but that was, it was what I call a ministry of presence.
Story_ID: 308365
Speaker 1: Well, when 9/11 [September 11, 2001], the last thing I wanted to say was that there's, what I call a ministry of presence, and for right then, there were, both when I met the families of those officers who were missing, and when the people came into our church [John Street United Methodist Church, New York, New York] for that Wednesday service, both times I said relatively little.  It was really they needed to squeeze my hand, cry on my shoulder, feel the confidence and strength that it was gonna be all right.  They needed to feel the presence of God.  And I think that's been my biggest lesson in ministry.  Sometimes you don't have to say anything, just be, and be the presence of God in the midst.
Speaker 2: And do that consistently?
Speaker 1: I do that consistently, whether a person's coming into me for counseling, you know, they not always looking for the answer, you know.  They have what they want in their mind and in their spirit.  They're looking to know that through this storm God is present, and you're here for us, and so that's why the consistency is so important.  That's why if you answer a pastoral call, you have to know that you're called to pastor, because people aren't necessarily dependent on you, but they are depending on you to be their guide, you know.  Someone said on Sunday, don't tell God how big the storm is, tell the storm how big your God is.  And that's what you have to learn, that we've got a big God, and we're God's representatives here on earth as it is in heaven.  So it's a serious calling--
Story_ID: 308366
Speaker 1: You had asked about my husband [Ronald Cook].
Speaker 2: Well, when did you meet your husband and how did you decide to start a family yourself?
Speaker 1: I always wanted one.  I came from a very, I always wanted a family.  I came from a very strong loving family.  Not big, at all, but, you know, my, my parents [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson and Wilbert Johnson] and our aunts and uncles and cousins, you know, we kissed, we hugged and so family was a pleasant experience.  I had great, both my parents were present growing up, and so we had a wonderful childhood and wonderful entry into adulthood, and so I wanted, biologically, I wanted to be a mom, you know.  My mother always would, you know, I was such a, in those days they called us a tomboy, but I was an athletic female.  So I was always out, jumping and running and they were like, "Is she ever gonna settle down?"  Yeah, but I just have to do it my way, you know, my style.  And so it was never a question of whether I wanted family for me or not, it was about finding the mate that could relate to the spirit of God that was within me.  It wasn't easy to date a minister, you know, and there weren't many catchings as you say, people who really understood my calling.  So when I came back from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '90 [1990], I had just finished my doctorate and I'd been through a number of dates and relationships that did not work.  One even with another preacher who I met in seminary [Union Theological Seminary, New York, New York] and everyone thought that that was going to be the power couple.  It wasn't the couple God intended, and so I asked God after perhaps like the last, you know, fizzled relationship, kind of like if you want me to be single, then you help me be single.  But if you want me to be married, then I need you to send the mate.  I wasn't going on another bad date.  I wasn't going on, you know, another break my heart hotel kind of thing.  I was like, God, you have to send the mate.  And so in January of '91 [1991], I started this thirty-day fast.  I had seen all these people who talked about fasting, and of course, it's scriptural, fasting was not my greatest gift, you know, but I said, "I'm going to be serious, I'm going to eat one meal a day, but from six a.m. to six p.m. nothing, and I'm going to spend that time talking with, hearing from God."  And I said, "At the end of thirty days God, I need an answer from you.  I need to hear what your decision is."  Well, February 7th came up, and that year Holy Week came in February.  It was early that year, how Easter falls.  And on the Monday of Holy Week, Dr. Gardner C. Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor], who was now one of my fathers in the faith and mentors, always preaches the Monday preceding Easter at the Baptist Ministers' Conference [Baptist Ministers' Conference of Greater New York and Vicinity] in New York [New York].  So all the preachers flock there.  I mean this is like, you know, the giant has come home.  And so on the Monday of Holy Week, I'm right up there taking my notes for Easter and at the end of service, there was this man in the back taping the tapes for people to purchase of Dr. Taylor.  And I was going out to dinner with a female colleague in ministry, and she went to that church, Convent Avenue Baptist Church [New York, New York], and so I looked over, I'm talking to her, we kind of making our plans, you're gonna drive, I'm gonna drive, whatever, and I looked over and I said, "Who's that man?"  She said, "That's Ron Cook, and I think he's single.  You want me to invite him?"  And I was like no, no, no, no.  She said, "Maybe I'll invite him for dessert."  I said okay, okay, 'cause I was like, how do you hit on a, you know, here's a preacher hitting on this man.  I don't know him.  She said, "I know him, I'll find out if he's single, you know, I'll check everything out."  So she comes back, he's single, he's going to meet us for dessert.  Let's get going.  So we go to the restaurant, we eat and about an hour later here comes this man in and we look at each other and say, oh my gosh.  He was handsome, curly hair, wavy hair, and he says, "I've seen you a lot of times."  He says, "I've always wanted to ask you out, but I didn't know if I could approach you."  And I was like, telling her I was like, can you kind of excuse yourself for a minute.  Can you give me a minute here?  And so she finally, bathroom, I was like, don't you have to go to the bathroom, and so she left and I was like, well this is the moment.  So we, kind of really instantly hit it, and so after dinner I had to drive her back to her car.  She's like, "I'll sit with you."  No, you getting out now.  There's something going on here you know.  And so we sat in the car for about two hours in front of Kentucky Fried Chicken, and we talked and so he started talking this way.  I had never heard a man speak before in New York City to a woman who was flirting with him.  He said, "You know I've been fasting for a month," and I'm sitting there saying, is he a mind, you know, is he a mind reader, what's going on.  He says, "I asked God to send me the wife I was supposed to have."  And I'm saying to myself, this is the exact thing I just asked God for.  He says, "And if you're the woman that God sent me, I promise to be the best steward over this gift from God."  So I'm like, black men in Harlem [New York, New York] just don't talk to women like that.  There is something here.  I said, "You won't believe this, but I've been fasting for the last month, and I asked for the same thing."  So he said, "That must be a sign," he says, "but we won't even go out until," he says "let's fast again this Wednesday."  This was Monday.  He says, "This is Holy Week, let's fast until Wednesday, and let's ask God specifically if I'm the one and you're the one and then we'll go out on our date."  He called me Wednesday afternoon.  He said, "What did God say?"  I was like, "He said yes to me (laughter)."
Speaker 2: What's your address again?
Speaker 1: What's your number?
Story_ID: 308367
Speaker 1: You know, we didn't have cells [cell phone] then, so we were at the pay phone trying to, you know, and really from that point, so we, that was February of '91 [1991].  We got engaged June of '91 [1991].  We married October of '91 [1991].  So six months, you know, I was thirty-three, he [Ronald Cook] was forty-four.  At that time you know, you know you're not trying to wait another thirty-three years.  We knew and we, all of our dates had a prayer component, a spiritual component.  We actually went to the church we were gonna be married in on one of our first dates and kneeled down and prayed and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What church were you married in?
Speaker 1: Riverside Church [New York, New York].  And so we were married by his pastor was the late Reverend Clarence Grant [Reverend Dr. Clarence P. Grant] at Convent [Convent Avenue Baptist Church, New York, New York].  My pastor was the late Rev. Ollie B. Wells [Reverend Dr. Ollie B. Wells, Sr.] at Union [Union Baptist Church, New York, New York], and Dr. Forbes [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. James A. Forbes], James Forbes, was the pastor of Riverside, so we got married by all three of them.  So Dr. Forbes became like our family pastor.  He counseled us.  Dr. Wells being my pastor, and Dr. Grant being his pastor, married us to one another.  So we, it was like the three kings.  The police department [New York City Police Department], I was their first chaplain to ever get married. Everybody else had been a priest, you know.  So they pulled out all stops and like all the police forces was like, we coming to this event?  We invited?  And it became, we had 2500 people at this wedding.  Just royal, it was almost like Lady Di [Diana, Princess of Wales], you know.  Just wonderful, lots of love.  Both his church and my church was huge and so it was fitting that we did it in a neutral place.  It wasn't my wedding, it wasn't his wedding, it was our wedding.
Speaker 2: And Riverside is a nice sizable place so everyone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you feel--
Speaker 2: --can be accommodated.
Speaker 1: --and you feel majestic and royal.  It was perfect.  Nobody felt squeezed in, so we had the mayor calling, Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] like, "You're not going to ask me to participate?"  Yes, well, he said, "I'll read the scripture."  So we had the mayor, we had the police commissioner [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown], we had the Kings, you know.  It just ended up being all these people like we wanna just be there and celebrate this, so we, I got pregnant the first year.  I was like I'm thirty-three, you know, and I remember we had a New Year's Eve service, which Watch Night is a big popular service in the black church, and I left my staff and I said, "I'm going home to make a baby," and do you know, nine months later I had my child, so I kind of know the moment, but it was wonderful and so now our sons [Samuel Cook and Christopher Cook] are twelve and fourteen, and so we've got an interesting household.
Story_ID: 308368
Speaker 1: When you were at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], what were you teaching there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was teaching preaching.  When I was at Harvard I was at the divinity school [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  My administrative fellowship assignment was the divinity school, although we, there were fourteen administrative fellows and we had access to all of the schools.  There was one for each of the schools, but mine was the divinity school, so I was the associate dean for field education, helping students get placed in placements.
Speaker 1: And what year is this?
Speaker 2: This is '89 [1989], '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm finishing up my doctorate at United Theological Seminary [Dayton, Ohio], which is kind of a, you know, we go back and forth, and then I was teaching preaching in the urban context, so I was teaching my gift and I was helping young people in ministry.  Young, not chronologically, but in terms of experience, be placed in a place that would match them, and I think I had had enough experience at that point to say, "You know, you may wanna look at this, you may wanna look at it differently or find another kind of placement."  So it's hooking people up.
Speaker 1: And that was called the executive fellowship?
Speaker 2: The President's Administrative Fellowship [President's Administrative Fellows Program].
Speaker 1: The President's Administrative Fellowship.  Did that have anything to do with your later White House Fellowship [White House Fellows program]?
Speaker 2: No, there were two separate, this one emerged out of the president's office of Harvard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of Harvard.
Speaker 2: --who felt, you know, however, it came to him, that there needed to be more diversity in their rankings and it did.  And so the idea was that the end of the year, if you liked it and they liked you, you would stay, and you'd be an officer of Harvard.  I was offered the full-time officership, but at that time I had left Mariner's Temple [New York, New York] on a sabbatical, you know, with a month's notice and I had a mission, you know.  People said, you're crazy, it was Harvard, you know, but I also feel you have to complete your mission.  And so I came back home (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your mission that you felt you--
Speaker 2: I felt that the work that I had started at Mariner's wasn't completed, that when you leave you leave certain things in order and you leave it at--
Speaker 1: And you had asked for that year's sabbatical?
Speaker 2: Right.  So it was the thing that--
Speaker 1: --presumed that you would be back.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  You honor kind of what you asked for.  Then if you leave again it's different, but you at least go back and you kind of, you know, make sure things are in place.  It was not much later, however, that was my seventh year, and it was in that year I also wrote 'Too Blessed to be Stressed[: Words of Wisdom for Women on the Move,' Dr. Suzan D. Johnson Cook] because it really is an answer to burnout.  I was so burnt out when I got to Harvard that I needed to be away that year.  God, God called it a fellowship, I called it a sabbatical, selah, rest, because I was exhausted.  Inner-city work is tiring, trailblazing is fatiguing and when you put all of that together, having been single, you know, I didn't put many boundaries on my time.  I was like, "I will be there for everyone," and you really realize you can't be, but you don't know that until you're on the other side of it.  So it was in that year I asked God.  He sent me to, I lived on the business school campus of Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], and it's right by the Charles River, and so that scripture where it says, He leads me beside the still waters and restores my soul, was a year of restoration for me.  As I walked everyday around the Charles River, just trying to get my healing, get my rhythm back, and I wrote 'Too Blessed to be Stressed,' and I shared very clearly where I burnt out and how to not get there for leaders, particularly women leaders, you know.  If you're feeling these symptoms, seeing these signs, you know, that's a sign, to stop.
Speaker 1: You know your books generally, and that book in particular, seem to use storytelling to sort of reach out to people.  Is that something that you do generally, and just tell us about how you did that in the book?
Speaker 2: I'm very anecdotal.  I usually very anecdotal.  I tell a lot of stories because I feel like, you know you share the truth because I don't want anyone to get to the place where I was, you know.  Burnout is not a fun place to be.  You have a job, you don't want to be there.  You wake up, you don't wanna really go anywhere.  And so I think that's become a ministry for me, you know, when I do my women's conferences now for leaders, it's because I want, self-care is the first law of preservation.  And so yeah, storytelling wherever I am, whether it's in the pulpit or whether it's with a group of girlfriends, relate, let me tell you what I've been through, you know.  And someone else says, "Can you walk me through that?"  Like one of my friends in television and I'll end here, you know, you know, her parents are aging and she's going through a whole lot of stuff, the dementia, that I've already gone through.  And she was like, "Anybody here at this table gone through this," and, yeah, you know, and this is what, how I approached it, this is some of the things, the reactions to people around them.  She's like, my brothers are doing the same thing, so it's in the sharing of stories that people get their healing or at least get the answers they're seeking and I think you have to do that.
Story_ID: 308369
Speaker 1: Met Mr. Cook [Ronald Cook], got married, got pregnant my first year and it was in that first year literally I had just had my baby boy, Samuel David [Samuel Cook] was born October 4th, and I called the White House Fellows office and said, kind of, "What's the deadline?"  I think that year was December 14th, and I am literally still in stitches from the hospital and I said to my husband, "This is my time to be a White House Fellow."  He's like, this is a new bride, she has a new baby, I know he was like, who did I marry?
Speaker 2: What's the genesis of your wanting to be a White House Fellow?
Speaker 1: Okay, when I worked for WJLA-TV, my first job in television in Washington, D.C., when I came from graduate school from Columbia [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York], I was playing tennis with this woman who was a White House Fellow, and I thought it was the coolest thing.  I was twenty-one, she was thirty-three.  What is a White House Fellow?  She told me.  I applied that year, you know, 'cause I always kept a resume together.  I applied and the White House Fellow director, wrote me a handwritten note on my application, says, "Nice job, but get a little more life experience and apply again."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So she said, you know, apply again at another time.  This was under a Republican administration.  It was under Daddy Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], I believe, or Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  I don't remember the order.  And then it was like '78 [1978], '80 [1980] so whoever was the president.  So then I applied again when I went up to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the divinity school [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I applied.  That was under Daddy Bush, and it was a really Republican regime, and I came in in this purple outfit and with my hair in braids and you know how you get there, and you say what was I thinking because this is red, white and blue country.  And I said, I didn't make this one, so they invited me to the reception and then I got my little note saying thank you very much but you're not a White House Fellow.  But in that experience, I wrote my thank you notes, that's something my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] always taught me to write.  And I met George Bush's sister, lived in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, and we stayed in touch for years, and I kind of would write and say you know, kind of, what does a White House Fellow really need to be about?  And she would write very nice little light things.  But I stayed in touch and that's when I also found out, it doesn't really matter what your political affiliation is, you need to know everyone, particularly if you're a leader.  You need to be able to talk to all sides of the world, and so here I was, you know, with the sister of a president, and I had lunch with her.  I would fly up to Boston and have lunch regularly with her and keep little notes going.  When Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] got in, there was something in my spirit that just said this is your time, you have enough life experience, you're not too old to be a fellow, 'cause you know there's a certain point where you can't be a student forever, you can't be a fellow forever, but I was thirty-one.  I applied and I went down and literally when I walked in the room I knew I was a White House Fellow.  I mean, it's a yearlong process, but I had had a coach.  I met this woman Meg Armstrong, who's a white woman who, older than me, who prepares women leaders around the world when they become prime ministers or governors.  She had worked in the governor's office in the Midwest for years, so she knew what women in that high-powered world needed to read, needed to look like, needed to know.  She coached me for a year.  I became her student.  What earrings are you gonna wear?  What suit are you going to wear?  What skirt are you going to wear?  Pants wasn't even the question.  Where's the slit going to be, you know, and so there were four different interviews.  One where we were eating dinner and they wanted to see if you could talk to the person on right and your left, and use the right utensils, and you still, so that was one of the interview processes.  Then we had to spend two days together with all of these high-powered people, and they'd call us into different rooms, different scenarios, because they wanted to see how you worked under pressure, how you would be, you know, next to the highest persons in the world and sitting president of the United States, how you would represent the United States of America.  And when I got to the interviews, every question she thought they were going to ask me, they asked.  Every book or every magazine or every headline that they wanted to discuss, she had coached me on.  How are you going to respond?  At those times, it was healthcare reform and Hillary Clinton.  And, you know, what they call consolidated states.  You need to be up on the issues and this is what, so when I came in, it was like, where's my desk, you know.  I'm sitting next to Bill Clinton, and, you know what, I ended up being on the Domestic Policy Council in the White House, ended up being a speechwriter for the president of the United States because he was very much into religion.  And he would go to a lot of the black churches.  So even though I went for policy, they would send his speeches over to me, saying, "He's going to this Baptist convention, you know, read it, is this what he should say?"  And so I got in with the speechwriters and I'd say, "No, cut this out or he should add this."  So I ended up being, so one day we're walking down the hall and, you know, he meets thousands of  people every day, and he says, you're the Baptist preacher from the Bronx [New York], come over here.  And he walks down the hall with me, and I'm like oh my goodness, I am here, embraced by the president of the United States, he knows my name, he knows who I am, and that's when I just gained so much respect for him, and so I've been in his circle for a long time.  He just came to my fiftieth birthday party, you know, and it was just a wonderful experience that even broadened my broader experiences, and, once you in, once you're a White House Fellow, you're in the fraternity for life, whether it's a Republican or a Democratic.  It doesn't matter, you're in the center of what happens politically, and I still get calls for advice from both sides, from all candidates for office, you know, kind of let me run this past you, and it's a wonderful place to be, so I have access and influence, but I also have the humility and the integrity to kind of come as a religious leader, not trying to be one of you, but be here for you, and again the ministry of presence.
Story_ID: 308370
Speaker 1: You know, what I, that day that we walked down the hall together and he [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] said, "You're the Baptist preacher from the Bronx [New York]," Suzan Johnson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Suzan Johnson Cook], I was Cook then, yes, Suzan Johnson Cook, what I realized was that he is a remarkable phenomenal man, because in the midst of crowds, he still makes you feel that he's just talking to you and that he's done his homework, and that he cares about you, you know, I mean I was one of thousands, you know, and I was a White House Fellow.  It wasn't like he hired me to be his domestic policy advisor.  I was one of his staff.  And so, that became the trademark.  I began to see in him whether, you know, we would be on the lawn of the White House [Washington, D.C.], and that was the year Mandela [Nelson Mandela] was elected president of South Africa, and he had a statesman's honor parade for him on the White House lawn.  You know to see moments in history see this president walking by, this president, the gun salute and all of that, but in the midst of that, you know, [U.S.] Secret Service of course, have to do their job and they are to guard the president, and for us to honor them doing their job, having been in law enforcement, I understand how important that is, but in the midst of that when he does go to shake hands and there are people pulling on him, again he will say, "I'm talking to Suzan, just a second," you know, like he knows his itinerary, he knows his agenda and he's aware of the time, but he also is very much a people person, and so there were many times the Secret Service would be thronging him and like, you know, we're going here.  And there were two occasions, I remember one was on that White House lawn that day with Mandela, and he says, just a second, I'm finishing with her.  And he finishes his thought and finishes hearing from you and you're like, this is incredible, and so I'm always, I think the world is a classroom.  I'm always learning from leaders because I tend to speak quickly and I tend to move quickly just because I'm a New Yorker and out of the impulse of the rushedness of the city [New York, New York], you tend to do that, even on vacation, and so what I'm trying to do in my maturing years and my mentoring years, is to slow down a bit, take a lesson out of Clinton's book and say, learn their name.  When they ask, how are you or you ask, how are they, listen to their answer, and so when I get business cards because you know you get all these put in your hands now when you're popular, I write on the back of them, met at, you know, the White House.  They spoke to me about, so when I see them again there's a reference, there's a relationship if we drop each other a note, there's a relationship.  And so I think he's the most phenomenal man, you know, leaders have all kinds of things happen to them in their lives, but he, I think he's one of the greatest leaders ever on this earth.
Speaker 2: Who else was on the Domestic Policy Council with you?
Speaker 1: The domestic policy advisor who actually hired me, was Carol Rasco.  She had come with him from Arkansas, and had been with him through all of his years as governor, and so because of that I got to meet then first lady Hillary [Hillary Clinton], because she was in the East Wing, I was in the West Wing, and, you know, we would speak regularly enough for her to know my face and my name, but there was really no reason for me to really interact with her on a regular basis because she had a staff and she was doing healthcare reform.  I was on domestic policy, and they gave me three issues to deal with, consolidated states, which was really trying to make the government more family friendly where there would be one application as opposed to twenty thousand people had to fill out, and I was, these were two states that were modeling it from, and so I would, I was head of that, homelessness, and violence, and so whenever there were interagency meetings, I was chair of them.  And I'm like, "This is a long way from a Baptist church in the Bronx."  This is a long way.  And he gave me a lot of entree into some worlds that I never would have had the opportunity to.  And so, all of that was just important, just being able to kind of walk next to a president.  My office was on the same floor with Vice President Al Gore and Tipper Gore and so I shared the bathroom with Tipper Gore.  Really it was her bathroom.  I know she must have said, "Why was she always in here?"  But it was the closest one to my office, and as a result, a wonderful relationship with the vice president and Mrs. Gore developed.  In fact, she's the godmother of my youngest son [Christopher Cook], you know.  I was, I got pregnant on the way home from the White House.
Story_ID: 308371
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you work that with your family respon- your new family, now you're moving to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] suddenly.  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was very hard.  My son was nine months old, my firstborn was nine months old when I actually began the White House Fellowship, and they had a White House [Washington, D.C.] day care center.  I could not find day care for him, and for this fellowship to work, I had to have day care, you know.  My husband [Ronald Cook] stayed in New York [New York] because it was only a one-year fellowship, and we made a decision that it was better for him to keep his job rather than uproot, you know, nothing was guaranteed after this year.  We had no idea.  It was a twelve-month commitment.  That was on paper, so I'd gone around to all the places I had been given in the White House area.  All were filled.  The White House day care center on the day before I was to leave from New York to go there, I called one more time. I said, "Is there any opening?"  They said, "We have one opening for a baby who has started walking."  My child started walking that day.  He took his first steps.  I said, "I've got a baby who walks, and it was," so the White House day care was a block from the White House, so now, and I moved ten blocks from the White House because I didn't want to get out into the suburbs and not be able to get there, and I told my nine-month old, I looked him in the eyes, now this boy didn't understand me, but I looked him in the eyes and I said, "You cannot get sick, we do not have a backup plan."  I had no family there, you know.  We do not, and we had the best year.  My child didn't get an ear infection, he didn't get strep throat.  I had him in those little suits, those snow suits.  It was the year of the seventeen winter storms in Washington, but baby we got out, I put that little plastic over the stroller, you all right Sam [Samuel Cook].  He would smile, walked him to the White House day care center and we would get on and off of planes and that boy learned how to travel.  And we had the best year.  So my husband and I commuted on weekends, and the White House, I must say this as my closing statement for today, they were very sensitive and very family friendly.  Carol Rasco and the president, because Chelsea [Chelsea Clinton] was a child then,  you know, and Carol had a daughter somewhere between my child's age and Chelsea's, so when I came into the interview, in fact, with her, I had a picture of my Samuel, which is my firstborn, on a little lapel pin, and I thought she was going to ask me all these questions about healthcare reform and did I know my issues on domestic policy, and she looked over and she saw the pin on my, she said, "Is that your baby?"  And I said yes.  She said, "Is he with you," and I said yes.  She said, "That's the most important thing of this whole year," she said.  "At the end of the day," she said, "a lot of people tend to stay here all night long, you go home and connect with your baby."  She said, "That's the most important," and it was, I got this feeling of such a release and relief.  Thank you that there's someone human in the White House, and so what they did was they tried to, with all my travel, they tried to really keep me on the East Coast and they sent me to as many New York conferences as possible, and so I was able to take my child and my mother [Dorothy Cuthbertson Johnson] was alive then, and, you know, to see my family, and do my business, and my baby was with my family, you know, and with my husband, and I could sleep in the bed with my husband for a few nights, and I just felt, God thank you, you know, you've really smiled on me, you've given me one of the best jobs in the world with one of the best people in the world who I can learn from with the compassion that I needed, because otherwise I couldn't have made it so I'm very thankful, I have, I've been blessed, I am blessed and because of that I try to be a blessing.
