Story_ID: 402678
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, the videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns, it is October 16, 2006, and the interview is being conducted at the Sacred Heart Medical Group hospital [Sacred Heart Hospital Pensacola], on the 9th Avenue, North 9th Avenue, in Pensacola, Florida.  Madame HistoryMaker, would you give me, state your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Alexa, A-L-E-X-A, Irene, I-R-E-N-E, Canady, C-A-N-A-D-Y hyphen Davis, D-A-V-I-S [HistoryMaker Dr. Alexa Canady-Davis].
Speaker 1: Thank you, and Dr. Canady, your date of birth and location of your birth, where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born November 7, 1950, in Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  How do you describe your profession, your occupation?  What, what are you, what do you do?
Speaker 2: I'm a pediatric neurosurgeon.  In that I take care of problems having to do with the nervous system which includes the brain, the spinal cord and the nerves in primarily children.  So it involves treatment of trauma, it involves hydrocephalus, which is what most people know as water on the brain.  It involves brain tumors, congenital problems of the spine, like spinal bifida, as well as abnormal problems of the skull and how the skull grows.
Story_ID: 402679
Speaker 1: Before we get into your family background and your socialization into medicine, we have a few warm-up type questions--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --or personality questions that will give the viewers of your interview another slant on you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: All right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Dr. Canady [HistoryMaker Dr. Alexa Canady-Davis], what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I never thought of favorite food, probably leg of lamb.
Speaker 1: Leg of lamb, okay good, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Red, okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?  Where do you like to escape away?
Speaker 2: St. Thomas.
Speaker 1: St. Thomas, okay.  And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, something philosophical that you use on a day-to-day basis with friends, colleagues, or something that guides you every day?
Speaker 2: It's about the work.
Speaker 1: It's about the work.  Okay, it's about the work, all right, very good.
Story_ID: 402680
Speaker 1: Before we get in depth about your work in neurosurgery and your medical career and the places that you've been, in order for us to understand how you got to where you are today, we need to go back to the beginning.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so we'd like to go back, and talk with you about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: About your parents--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your grandparents, your brothers, you have three brothers I understand?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so we'd like to, to start with that so that we have some kind of a background.  Would you give me your mother's name, her full name for me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and where--
Speaker 2: My mother's--
Speaker 1: --where she was born?
Speaker 2: --name is Elizabeth, which nobody ever uses, Hortense, H-O-R-T-E-N-S-E, Golden is her maiden name, and then Canady [Hortense Golden Canady].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois actually.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927].
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-seven [1927].  Okay, and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Well she grew up in Chicago, for the first ten years of her life, then her father [Alexander Golden] became very ill and ultimately died--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and so the, she, her mother and brother moved back to Jackson, Tennessee, which was my mother's, both my grandparents were from Jackson.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then actually, interestingly enough my grandmother had been a social worker in Chicago, and my grandfather had been a pharmacist, and she needed to get some additional training, another master's degree if you would, to teach at the college.  So she and my, went to Washington [D.C.] to get a degree, in education, and actually my mother ended up joining her at fourteen and worked in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] during (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your grandmother's name, this is your--
Speaker 2: --Essie Mae Perry.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Actually Essie Mae Golden Perry [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry], Perry is her second husband's name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she was the educator?
Speaker 2: She was an educator, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, where'd she teach?
Speaker 2: At Lane College in Jackson, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And actually lived right across the street.  I had the privilege of spending a summer with her and I called it the summer I went to college.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: And because I would go to her class at eight o'clock, at nine o'clock she must have had a really good friend because I took Spanish at nine o'clock.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, wow.
Speaker 2: And then after that, the students who would kind of watch me when my grandmother taught was free.  So it was the summer I went to college.
Speaker 1: What do you know, what has your mother, has she told you about her growing up years?  What was childhood like for you, for your mother?
Speaker 2: I think she divides it into the, before her father died and after her father died.  I think that was a defining part of her childhood because they lived in Chicago and lived a fairly urban kind of life, you know theater and movies and things in Chicago and they ended up back in Jackson which was not as urban a city and I think that that was not the place she ever really wanted to live or wanted to stay much.
Speaker 1: Has she told you stories about her growing up years?  Any anecdotes or things that?
Speaker 2: Well, the main thing is how old, before my grandmother had gone, as I said, to Washington, to school and how she found it really intolerable to be there without her (background noise) and she got into some conflicts with other family members, you know?  She was at, being an adolescent as well.
Story_ID: 402681
Speaker 1: Your mother's [Hortense Golden Canady] still living?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: She is, yes.
Speaker 1: How would you describe her?  What is she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Oh my mother's very dynamic.  She was the national president of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], she was--
Speaker 1: For how long?
Speaker 2: Four to five years.  Actually longer than normal because it turned on the cusp of an anniversary so the, her term was extended a year so they could have the seventy-fifth anniversary be a convention year.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So she was president for five years and has been extremely active in Delta for forty or fifty years now in a number of capacities.  She was the chairman of the, and actually the creator, I think of the public service-group in Delta.  And had steered that for many, many years until just recently, at seventy-eight she retired for that one.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Are you a Delta?
Speaker 2: I'm Delta, yeah.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry] was also.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was on the school board when they integrated the city schools, and so she's been very much--
Speaker 1: Let's pursue--
Speaker 2: --of a prominent figure.
Speaker 1: --just briefly her election to the school board.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Or appointment?
Speaker 2: --election.
Speaker 1: --election?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When was she elected and why did she run for the school board and where was this now?
Speaker 2: In Lansing, Michigan.  She was elected, I don't know exactly when but, I started back in school in '71 [1971], so I would say she was on the school board in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Now how long did she serve?
Speaker 2: She served until she was recalled along with everybody else who integrated the schools.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And that would have been in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: So they had school integration in Lansing?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now where would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The plan they put in, they couldn't get rid of her.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.  But you had finished high school [Everett High School, Lansing, Michigan] by then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So actually I'd finished high school, my youngest brother [Mark Canady], who's eleven years younger, went to prep school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He didn't go to public school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah for high school.
Speaker 1: All right.  We'll come back and talk about public schools a little bit later.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Let me stay with your family if we can.  Any other things you want to say about your mother and her personality?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's very dynamic--
Speaker 2: --she's very dynamic, she's--
Speaker 1: --very involved with people?
Speaker 2: --right.  Right, and she's a leader.  She's a leader.
Story_ID: 402682
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  His name and where and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's Clinton--
Speaker 1: --when he was born?
Speaker 2: Clinton Canady, Jr.  He was born in, November 6, 1921, in Detroit [Michigan], or probably Hamtramck [Michigan], which is a small city inside Detroit.
Speaker 1: What is it called again?
Speaker 2: Hamtramck.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: H-A-M-T-R-A-M-A-C-K [sic.].  It's a, now it's a surrounded city within Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a Polish enclave at one point.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: It no longer is, but it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where his family lived.  The earliest that I recall, but it's always, somewhere either Detroit or Hamtramck he was born.
Speaker 1: And he grew up where?
Speaker 2: He grew up in Detroit.
Speaker 1: He grew up in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was his growing up years like as a child?  Did he, has he shared stories with you about his?
Speaker 2: Yes, his father [Clinton Canady, Sr.] worked in the forge at Ford, what they called Ford's, down at Ford Motors [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan].  So he was a, you know, coal man basically, stoking the fire.  My grandmother Jessie Smoot Canady, worked in a small plant factory, you know, in a probably an auto supplier company.  I don't know.  She worked actually when they were young children though, I think she was home then.
Speaker 1: Now what was her name?
Speaker 2: Jessie, Jessie, Smoot was her maiden name, Canady.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  How do you spell Smoot?
Speaker 2: S-M-O-O-T-H [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Speaker 2: S-M-O-O-T, S-M-O-O-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, his childhood, he loved movies, his grandmother apparently loved movies and so he and she always went to the movies and double features and triple features, so he talks about that very fondly of the time with her.  And he, one of his favorite stories is when he was, had come back from the [U.S.] Army for a visit and he said, my mother said to me, he was getting dressed to go out with his buddies, and she said, "You know, you ought to go over there where your father plays with his buddies on the weekends and let them see what your father's been paying for."  'Cause apparently, his father had been getting a lot of grief from his buddies for sending my dad money for school.  He had gone to dental school and then he was an officer.  I mean, you know, in those days, as you know, that was very rare.  So, and he, and the point my father made was, my mother rarely made or said anything or directed me in any way and she said that was about as directing as she ever got.  Which was, it might be a nice idea if you'd go and let 'em see.
Speaker 1: Your father became a dentist studying where?  Where did he?
Speaker 2: He went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And actually I--his years at Meharry, I think were some of his favorite years.  I mean, apparently, it was a very small school then, everybody knew everybody, everybody lived within a few blocks of the school 'cause nobody had any cars.  Everybody was single, pretty much at that time and it was a camaraderie of friends that have remained his friends his entire life.  And what happened though, interestingly enough, was the draft boards back home started trying to draft these guys as the war [World War II, WWII] went on.  So they, the Army didn't want that, 'cause they wanted some dentist, so they essentially, called them all up and made them, put them in the Army and paid for their, for their schooling.  And so, he said after that, everybody was rich, I mean they'd never had so much money in their lives as they had after the Army came.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what motivated your father to go into dentistry?
Speaker 2: I don't know what prompted that.  He comments about how when he went to school, I believe junior high school, he met some people whose families were much more affluent than his and he saw a different kind of life.  And he, they became his good friends.  Again, Waldo Cain was one and been his friend all his life and he saw, you know, and it changed his life in terms of his desire and his ambition to go and make something of himself.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did his career, his study, his career in dentistry influence you in any way to go into medicine?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, other than the idea of being independent which is vast--rapidly leaving medicine, but the idea that you could work for yourself and be in charge of yourself was something that he very much emphasized, the importance of that.
Speaker 1: And so you kind of valued that?
Speaker 2: I valued that.  Right.
Speaker 1: But you say that's not true anymore, or what?
Speaker 2: I think in medicine it's becoming more corporate and you're less and less likely to be in charge of yourself.  And I think it attracts a different kind of person to medicine.  But my uncle was an obstetrician down in Atlanta [Georgia], my mother's [Hortense Golden Canady] brother, Howard Golden, and--
Speaker 1: Howard Golden?
Speaker 2: And actually my mother's father [Alexander Golden] had graduated from Meharry way back, I think we looked it up once, like nineteen something, as a pharmacist and had gone to Buffalo, New York, but never successfully got a job as a pharmacist, that one didn't work out and so in Chicago [Illinois], he actually didn't end up being a pharmacist.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, so there's a long tradition of medical related--
Story_ID: 402683
Speaker 1: How long did your father [Clinton Canady, Jr.] practice dentistry?  Is he still practicing or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's not practicing now, he practiced until his seventy-fifth birthday, which was the end of his fiftieth year in dentistry.  And he left at three p.m. instead of five and felt a little guilty (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) His practice was always in--
Speaker 2: Always in Lansing [Michigan] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Lansing?
Speaker 2: In Lansing, right.  He'd been recruited to Lansing by some people there.  He had originally planned to go back to Detroit [Michigan] and practice dentistry, and when he got back, or towards the end of his dental school, somebody had already put an office where he thought he'd put one, so he ended up in Lansing.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?  What is he like as a person, his personality?
Speaker 2: He's a, he's solid, in the most impeccable way.  He has a sense of who he is, doesn't care what other people think about it much.  He has a sense of what's right, doesn't care what anybody else thinks about it much.  And so he is directed by his own integrity and his own sense of what's proper.  Which I find very good.  And I think the other thing is, is a sense of responsibility.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean, he sent four children through undergraduate school and professional school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  We're gonna come (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Speaker 1: --back to it, we're gonna come back to that too and talk about your, your siblings.  Any other stories that you recall him telling you about his growing up years, his childhood, teenage years, that?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, he was in a club of these guys, these childhood friends who went off to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] together and most of them are physicians, but they're still friends.
Story_ID: 402684
Speaker 1: Looking at your grandparents, none of them are living today I guess?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Well, was there any one particular grandparent, either maternal or paternal that especially influenced you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say, first, I didn't know any of my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's father [Alexander Golden] died young and my dad's father [Clinton Canady, Sr.] died when he was in dental school [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee].  So I don't, never knew either of them, so grandfather doesn't have much emotional connection for me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry] in Tennessee had tremendous emotional connection.  She was very bright, she was fluent in Greek and Latin and looked like me, or I looked like her, I suppose one would say.
Speaker 1: When was she born?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o'three [1903].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  How did she learn Greek and Latin?  What did, was it?
Speaker 2: Well lived, she went to Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Oh that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But interestingly enough, my mo- grandmother and her sister were both college educated.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, what do you know about her parents?
Speaker 2: Her parents--
Speaker 1: Your great--
Speaker 2: Yeah, her father was my mother's [Hortense Golden Canady] favorite person, Daddy Joe, she called him and he was a Pullman porter and so, he would take her and they'd get fried chicken and get on the train and they could travel all over, and he used to take her traveling with him for the weekends and she loved tra- she loves to travel still.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Of course the chicken got eaten before they got out of Jackson.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother was a small, smaller woman and a little bit, and ran a cafe in town, the Atwater cafe.
Story_ID: 402685
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories as a child growing up?  How far back can you remember in your life?
Speaker 2: I can remember being about three.  I can remember, you know, my brother [Clinton Canady III] going to school and me not going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other very early childhood memories that--
Speaker 2: Well, we used to live on Main Street, in Lansing [Michigan], and I remember the circus coming past, I remember when the street flooded.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, flooded from?
Speaker 2: Some kind of storm.
Speaker 1: Storm?  Okay.  Tell me about the beginning of school life for you.  When you started public school, and what school you went to?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the Kalamazoo Street School [Lansing, Michigan], when I started there for kindergarten.  And then we moved, that was a major move, we moved basically from the inner city to the suburbs in--to a piece of land that my father [Clinton Canady, Jr.] got because the man that wanted to build a gas station, the county wouldn't rezone it for that, and he said, fine, I'll fix you, and he sold it to an African American.
Speaker 1: And what suburb was this?
Speaker 2: It was just a block of land out in southwest Lansing.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay.  How far was that from your Lansing address?  Was it?
Speaker 2: Oh it wasn't, it's not that far, it's fifteen, twenty minutes, but at that time, it was, you know, we went to county schools, we came out of the Lansing public schools and actually went to county schools.
Speaker 1: So what grade did you make that transition?
Speaker 2: First grade.
Speaker 1: First grade?
Speaker 2: The summer before first grade.
Speaker 1: I see, oh okay.  How do you remember kindergarten and first grade, what was, what was school like for you as a, as a youngster?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot about kindergarten, I just kind of remember the graham crackers and the milk, and I remember the school.  And I think I remember, first grade, I remember quite a bit about it, I remember the teacher, I think it was Mrs. Barry [ph.], and I liked school, I always liked school.  I mean, I was punished by not being allowed to go to school, I mean that was the ultimate punishment.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  When you went out to the suburbs--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pleasant Grove Elementary [Pleasant Grove Elementary School, East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Pleasant Grove Elementary.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how long were you there?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were there through the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: How do you remember those grades?  Was anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember them fondly actually.  But it was, there's a lot of turmoil that I wasn't, I mean we got called a few names.  My brother and I were the only black students there and that, but it didn't bother me much, I was a kid, I didn't think much of it.  But actually it turned out to be a big to do, because the, my second grade teacher Mrs. Cotton [ph.], that's when you take, we used to take this California reading test, I don't know if you remember those.  And I apparently scored very, very well and the scores that she assigned to me were not those scores which got found out because my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry] came for the summer to take a course at the college and actually, I'm sure, to spend time with the grandchildren and my mother [Hortense Golden Canady].  And, the course she was taking was a psychometric testing course, so she needed subjects and she had grandchildren--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so she offered us up.  So, I ended up being tested in that and was found to be very bright and so, in fact, I ended up, and one of my interesting childhood memories was I actually went before the class to be tested and it was at night time and in those days, you know, children didn't do much at night, so the concept of actually getting in the car and going someplace at night was incredible to me.  And the instructor there thought, was concerned about my education, so he talked to the principal at my school, Mr. Duncan [ph.], and in the course of that, they found out that the, they found the score among the roster that was probably the one that was mine and she assigned it to someone else.  So the teacher ended up getting fired.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, very interesting.
Speaker 2: And the only other thing we had there was, two things, one, we had a family history and I tried to explain that my grandmother had gone to college [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee] and my teachers didn't believe me and then we had, I told stories about a trip 'cause my family always traveled a great deal because my parents both love it, and she just called me a liar and said I didn't travel, so my mother had to come to school and say, yeah she really had been there.  But you know as a kid, those things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 2: --didn't really bother me.
Speaker 1: So you liked school and you did well?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I, in reading some of the background material that we received on you, you were described as being very opinionated, were you or not?
Speaker 2: As a kid, yeah probably.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, what were you opinionated about, I'm just?
Speaker 2: Whatever.  Though I had very strong opinions, I wasn't too much influenced by other people.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, independent.
Speaker 2: Inadequately so, actually as a youngster.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So how did you and your brother survive those early years in this, this totally white school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember it as being a problem.  I mean, all these things came to me later, I wasn't aware of what was going on.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: And then at the end of fourth grade, the area where we lived was annexed for the city.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So we went back to the public schools and actually we ended up being bused to the best school in town, which was by the co- in the country club called Lewton [Lewton School, Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay now, was your mother on the school committee at this point?
Speaker 2: She was not.
Speaker 1: She was not.
Speaker 2: She was not involved, no.
Speaker 1: At this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, and you came back to Lansing because of the annexation, then you had desegregation?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: We just went to Lewton, Lewton was our school, assigned school.  Then they evened it out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Pleasant Grove and Pleasant View [Pleasant View Elementary School; Pleasant View Visual and Performing Arts Academy, Lansing, Michigan], which was up the street, were annexed to the city schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.
Speaker 2: And the districts were withdrawn--were redrawn, and we were out of those districts.  We were on the edge of the dis-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know we were on the edge of that school anyway.
Story_ID: 402686
Speaker 1: I want you to take me into grade five and through middle school and high school in a minute.  But before we do that, tell me a little bit about your neighborhood?  Your neighbors and the nature of the street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: I grew up on a street of blacks, you know, this block of land that he wanted to develop, he sold and so, as my brother [Clinton Canady III], and all our neighbors were black, and the immediate house, I suppose there were in the neighborhood of, at the time, there were probably ten houses, eleven houses and some filler land, that's filled in now, and a small street called Starlight Lane, which at the time was blind, a blind street.
Speaker 1: What do you mean blind?
Speaker 2: It didn't go through (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a through--
Speaker 1: --dead end.
Speaker 2: --street, so it was a wonderful play street because there weren't very many houses--now it's open, so it's not so available, but there, it was, so the only people who came up the street, were people who lived there and there weren't a lot of houses then and so it was our street and we'd have bicycle races, and roller skate down it and do whatever we wanted, it was our playground.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What did the adults in this neighborhood do occupationally?  What were the children's parents doing?
Speaker 2: Well, our neighbor to one side was, who's my, actually my brother's godfather, Johnny Cullers [John Cullers], was a cement mason, most everybody else worked in the factory accept for Mr. McConnell [ph.], who was a probation officer, actually a little higher than that, I think in the probation system.  But it's Lansing [Michigan], and Lansing was Oldsmobile in those days, so most people worked at the factory.
Story_ID: 402687
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: The fall, the smell of the fall.  And there's a smell to the fall in Michigan that's just, I find wonderful.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, any sights that are still in your image of growing up?  Any places in the city [Lansing, Michigan] that you used to visit?
Speaker 2: We just, you know, just our yard.  I mean we, we were in the generation that actually played outside, so I mean, we had a ball field.  My parents [Hortense Golden Canady and Clinton Canady, Jr.] had two lots, the corner lot was empty and the house was on the second lot, so we had a ball field, a football field, whatever kind of field you wanted it and we played football or baseball depending on the season, almost every day.
Speaker 1: So you were athletic too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you enjoyed the competition?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As much as an athlete as a girl could be in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 402688
Speaker 1: Let's go back to school, grade five through middle school, tell me about those years and how you remember?
Speaker 2: We were at Lewton elementary [Lewton School, Lansing, Michigan] then, which was a really, an excellent school, it was near the country club so it had a different clientele.  Pleasant View [Pleasant View Elementary School; Pleasant View Visual and Performing Arts Academy, Lansing, Michigan] and Pleasant Grove [Pleasant Grove Elementary School, East Lansing, Michigan], where we'd gone to elementary school had, were a much poorer population.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  How do you spell Lewton?
Speaker 2: L-E-W-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And, so it was a good school.  I mean it, and we had good teachers, interesting classes and, actually at fifth grade I was in a split class, there was a fifth [grade], sixth [grade] class so I was in the fifth side of a fifth, sixth class.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And you stayed there for how many years?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just repeat that.  What we need to do, restate that last one.
Speaker 1: So at Lewton, I was in a fifth, sixth class in fifth grade and then in sixth grade, and I enjoyed it, I had fun, I was feeling my power, you know?  As you do, as you grow older.
Speaker 2: Did you have any favorite subjects in school at that point?  Was there anything?
Speaker 1: I always liked arithmetic, mathematics, and I loved to read.  I used to, to read, you know tons of those, I don't know if you remember, they used to, in our school they were covered in blue but they were biographies of famous people as children and I read them all.  I liked to read 'em five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten a week.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And actually I'd--remember we used to go to the library, my parents [Hortense Golden Canady and Clinton Canady, Jr.] liked to read also, and so we used to go to the library and, and I had a major accomplishment in it, I wanted to go--so at the library I tried to go into the older kids' part and they wouldn't let me go, so my mother fought for me and said I could read whatever I could read.
Story_ID: 402689
Speaker 1: You said that you very much enjoyed reading biographical material.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Biographies.  Were any of the bios that you read of people in science and medicine?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: I read the book about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Carver [George Washington Carver] as a boy.  I read a book about Florence Nightingale, and 'I Was There with Florence Nightingale' [ph.], that was the name of that book.  My mother [Hortense Golden Canady] used to, when she traveled, bring me books back, and my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry] used to bring me books.  So yeah, books have always been a comfort thing for me.  And I read about everybody and it, and I realized a few years ago that I didn't read biographies anymore.  And it's only then that I realized that I was reading biographies to learn how to make a life.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, all right.  Staying with school just a little bit more, the Lewton School [Lansing, Michigan] took you through what grade?
Speaker 2: Through, it was a true elementary, so we finished at the end of sixth grade.
Speaker 1: End of sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, where did you move onto then?
Speaker 2: Then I went to West Junior High School [Lansing, Michigan] which was back downtown, next to the Kalamazoo Street School [Lansing, Michigan].  They were in the same complex at the time.  So I was back into a predominant--not predominately black, but significantly black school for seventh and eighth grade.  And it was fun, we had fun there.  We were bused again, we were on the bus, that what I remember because we had to get up early.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think we caught the bus at six (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are there any--
Speaker 2: --or 6:30.
Speaker 1: --teachers at the junior high level that you remember as being somewhat influential in your socialization in growing up?  Or any teachers that stand out in your memory?
Speaker 2: I think not so much, except we had one teacher who was our history teacher who was really a printing teacher and just kind of taught one history class and that, and, and he had lots of eclectic interests and he was a very interesting guy.  And then I, my Spanish class was important.  In Spanish a group of friends who are still my friends to this day, we all went through Spanish all the way through high school [Everett High School, Lansing, Michigan] together.  So that group formed from Spanish.  And then, I had a science teacher, Mrs. Hornsby [ph.] who was just tough and I liked that, she demanded your best.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, oh yeah.  Before we move into your high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: --years--
Speaker 2: --in ninth grade we changed--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that was still junior high school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And they built a new junior high school [Dwight Rich Junior High School, Lansing, Michigan] out by where we lived, and so I ended up going there for my ninth grade year.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 402690
Speaker 1: Before we get into grade nine and up, let me come back to your family again.  How many siblings do you have?  Would you give me their names, and there professions and where they are today?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is Clinton Canady III, and he is a lawyer and lives in Lansing [Michigan], actually Okemos [Michigan], but it's a suburb, he practices law in Lansing.  My middle brother is Alan Lyle Canady [Alan Canady], and he is a lawyer, and he lives in Lansing, and my youngest brother is Mark Howard Canady [Mark Canady], and he's a lawyer and he lives in Lansing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  How'd they all become lawyers?  And what was going on there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My dad's [Clinton Canady, Jr.] best friend was a lawyer and who shared a building with my dad and--
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: --Stuart Dunnings.
Speaker 1: Dunnings?
Speaker 2: And I think that became attractive, so my older brother became a lawyer, he wasn't very interested in medicine, my middle brother, I think followed him, and then my youngest brother said, "I looked at how Joe lives, I look at how you live, and I think he lives better, so I'll be a lawyer too."
Speaker 1: Okay, so three brothers and you were the only daughter?
Speaker 2: I was the only daughter.
Speaker 1: Only daughter, okay.  What kind of things did you and your brothers do together as, as you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fight.
Speaker 1: --grew up?
Speaker 2: Fight.
Speaker 1: Fight, over what?
Speaker 2: Everything.  (Laughter) Anything, all things, I mean basically that's what we did, I mean, we played sports together, you know as I said we had, always had some sport game going, and that's you know, other than that.  The--we actually were kind of two families in a sense.  My oldest brother and I are two and a half years apart and then my next brother's five and half years younger and then eleven years younger.  So they were young boys, so they were kind of the boys.  And we were the older children.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What was family life like for you?  You with your sibling, your mother [Hortense Golden Canady] and father, what kind of things did you do as a family?  How do you remember your family life and your home?
Speaker 2: Well we, on the days that my father was home, we all, you had to be home for dinner.  So, he worked a lot, but on Tuesdays and Thursdays, he was home early, actually Thursdays he didn't work in the office so we had a family dinner on those days as well as Saturday and Sunday.  And then we went to the football games at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and did lots of sporting events, I mean he took us to lots of sporting events down to Detroit [Michigan] and we even, he even took us to a hockey game which was almost unheard of in those days.  And then we traveled, we traveled extensively.
Speaker 1: To where?
Speaker 2: Almost every place in the country.  I mean we went to California several times, we went once by train when I was about seven or eight years old.  We'd go to Tennessee of course, to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry], we went to the dental convention, the National Medical--the National Dental Association, we went to the convention every summer, where ever it was.  We took, one summer we went for three weeks to Europe.
Speaker 1: What countries (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so we--
Speaker 1: --did you visit?
Speaker 2: --we went to England, France, Italy, Switzerland, and we ended up in Belgium because they were on strike at De Gaulle [Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport, Paris, France] and we had to fly out of Belgium.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Were there any particular holidays that you and your family celebrated in, in ways that you especially remember or holidays were?
Speaker 2: Christmas was always a big time, you know, everywhere.  Thanksgiving was a big time in our family because in our family everybody had to say a prayer.  So if you had twenty-six people for dinner, you had twenty-six prayers.  You know you didn't have one blessing of the table, it was, the family tradition was everyone said a prayer.
Speaker 1: What was your prayer?
Speaker 2: By the time, you know, it was by age--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So by the time you got to the bottom you were down to Jesus wept (laughter).
Story_ID: 402691
Speaker 1: Let's come back to your public education.  You started talking about going into grade nine?
Speaker 2: Right, in grade nine they opened a new high school, a new junior high school called Dwight Rich [Dwight Rich Junior High School, Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I, we ended up going there, that was our district.  And we didn't have to be bused to that one, but that was a predominately white school and so it was back into the other milieu again.  And, but it was fun because it was a new school, so, and we got to choose the mascot, choose lots of things, so I enjoyed it.  And actually I experimented that year, I wanted to see if I could take two languages at one time, so I took Spanish and Latin.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, does it work?
Speaker 2: Yeah it works.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't hard at all actually.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, well that's good.  Well tell me about the high school years, grades ten through twelve.  What high school and what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I went to Everett High School [Lansing, Michigan], which was about three miles down the road, predominately white school, I think there might have been fifteen, sixteen black students in it and I had fun, in high school, I was president of the junior class and, the, you know, a student government person and a debater.  I debated all three years in high school.  That was my main activity.
Speaker 1: What subject, or subjects perhaps were your favorite subjects at that point?  Were there anything that you were leaning towards?
Speaker 2: Oh, mathematics was my favorite.
Speaker 1: Math still is.
Speaker 2: I was planning to be a mathematician from the time I was quite young.  And actually that year, the second year I wanted to take calculus, I thought it would help me when I went to college, if I took calculus in high school and they didn't have AP [advanced placement] courses like they do now.  So what I arranged to do was, I took geometry in my ninth grade, tenth grade year, and then I arranged to take Algebra 2 myself, to do it by myself, with just some tutoring.  So that allowed me to take, to do my second year of mathematics myself and so then I was able to take trigonometry and advan- analytical geometry by the end of my junior year, which caused one problem and then I ended up in my brother's [Clinton Canady III] trigonometry class and since I'd already skipped a grade, I don't think I mentioned that.  I skipped a grade from second to fourth grade, I didn't, I was never in the third grade.  That was after all of that testing stuff.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So they put me in the fourth grade.  So, I was two years younger, but I has skipped a grade and then I had skipped a year of math by doing it on my own, so I ended up in his class.  So, as you might imagine, I sat in the right front and he sat in the rear left.  So he felt the, some aggravation at my always pushing in his tail I think.
Speaker 1: So mathematics was your thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At the time?
Speaker 2: I had planned, I had absolu- I had every intent on being a mathematician.
Speaker 1: You did not, did you start to major in math in college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did--
Speaker 1: Or not?
Speaker 2: I was two courses short of a math major.
Speaker 1: Well, before we get to the college, and finishing high school, by 1965, you were fifteen years old.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 402692
Speaker 1: The civil rights years, the mid-'60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right in the mid smack of the, how did that affect you?  Were you aware or conscious of the Civil Rights Movement?  Did you participate in any activities around civil rights at that age in Lansing [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my parents [Hortense Golden Canady and Clinton Canady, Jr.] were very active in that, we had demonstrations downtown that we participated in and they were, had lots of meetings and activities that they were involved in.  So, we were very much a part of that.
Speaker 1: And the protesting then was for, in what areas, schools, employment?
Speaker 2: No that was in the city government at that time.  We, I remember marching for access to jobs access at city hall, it was a big protest at city hall.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now what period was your mother serving on the school committee (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Beginning in probably in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: The late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she hadn't quite gone.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you did participate in civil rights?
Speaker 2: As me--I mean not, you know, as a kid, you mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I, we were very, I remember going to my [maternal] grandmother's [Essie Mae Atwater Golden Perry] house in the South after integration and all of the cousins getting together and going down to the bus stop and sitting at the counter.  And having him unplug his jukebox so we'd leave.  But it felt tremendously empowering.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, we felt powerful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you mentioned that your parents and your brothers did a lot of traveling to Europe and to California, these were probably summer time trips?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they, my parents always took a summertime trip with the children.  And then they always took a wintertime trip with their buds.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So they'd go to South America and some other things.
Speaker 1: During your teen years, going through grades nine through twelfth and graduation.  Did you work during the summers?  Did you have summer jobs at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, I worked, amusingly actually, for my father, had a really good friend who, who owned a clothing store and I worked for him one summer and--clothing and I are really not related, so that tells you how good a friend of my father's he was.  And then the summer--
Speaker 1: You were a salesperson, or what did you do?
Speaker 2: I was a salesperson.
Speaker 1: Stock person?
Speaker 2: You know, yeah it was a, it's a really, it was a family owned store, so there were only three or four employees.  So we did whatever we were told and I wasn't good at any of it.  But it was a fun summer, you know, a sense of work.  And then, I'm trying to remember, if it was the summer after my freshman year, or the summer before my freshman year, oh, it had to be the summer after my freshman year in college, I worked for Oldsmobile as a secretary.
Speaker 1: Worked for?
Speaker 2: Oldsmobile as a secretary--
Speaker 1: Oldsmobile?
Speaker 2: In products engineering.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother insisted everybody learn how to type, so we had all learned how to type as, in summer school, we were in summer school and learned how to type.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in what year from high school [Everett High School, Lansing, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In 1967.
Speaker 1: And on to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well actually I had a wonderful summer.
Speaker 1: Oh, tell me about the summer.
Speaker 2: I had a wonderful summer.  I went to Europe for the summer, I took a tour of Eastern Europe and Russia for eight weeks.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Through the American School in Switzerland [Montagnola, Switzerland].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So you were with a group of students?
Speaker 2: I was with a group of students and we went to Switzerland and had a week of instruction, and then we went to Romania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Soviet Union, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, we went to Yalta [Soviet Union], we went to Georgia, went to Armenia.  What used to be Yugoslavia, it was a wonderful trip.
Speaker 1: And, so you returned from that great experience to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And went straight--
Speaker 1: --the university--
Speaker 2: --to college--
Speaker 1: --to the University--
Speaker 2: --like three days--
Speaker 1: --of Michigan.
Speaker 2: --later.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.  I did also, during the summer, in junior high school [Rich Junior High School, Lansing, Michigan] go to a national music camp in Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan], which was also very good.  It was wonderful for my ego.
Speaker 1: Good, good.  Were you a vocalist, instrumentalist?
Speaker 2: I was not, I was really not much of any of them.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But, I did theater and did piano there but I'm not a pianist, my theater was probably my best.  But I saw a bunch of people there who were seriously accomplished.  And I think that was a very good perspective for me.  I thought much less of myself when I was done than I had when I went.  It was, it was very important in that regard to see people so dedicated and so, working so hard at what they do and nobody telling them, I mean they'd practice 'cause they wanted to.  They had to make them, some of them they had to make stop practicing.
Story_ID: 402693
Speaker 1: University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  You're gonna be a mathematician.
Speaker 2: I was, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Tell me about entering college.  What were those early years like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I entered--
Speaker 1: How did--
Speaker 2: --college young, I was sixteen.  And, it was actually good, because I had wanted to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and did not get in.  And so, I had also applied to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got into their honors program, but my parents [Hortense Golden Canady and Clinton Canady, Jr.] were very wary about me going to Chicago [Illinois], as a sixteen-year-old.  And, because of my brother's [Clinton Canady III] issues, they had said I couldn't go to the University of Michigan.  So, when I didn't get into MIT, they changed that, so I called up the University of Michigan, this was like in April and said, "You know what?  Look, you know, I was wondering if--could I still apply?"  And I applied and was accepted within a day, and it was a tremendous ego booster after being crushed and it was probably the best thing ever happened to me, not going to MIT.
Speaker 1: Tell me about those college years and what were, how do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, in college, it kind of divides into periods.  I was a debater the first two years, and we traveled quite extensively actually with debate and that was lots of fun, and it was intellectually stimulating.  And I wasn't much of a student, and--
Speaker 1: You said, you weren't much of a student?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What do you mean?
Speaker 2: I didn't put much effort into it at all, went into debate.  And then beginning of the summer of my second year, I was, got involved with a newspaper and was involved with the newspaper for about a year or so and then at the end of my third year--
Speaker 1: What did you do with the newspaper?  What was your role?
Speaker 2: --I was in the editorial page, and one summer I was the editorial page editor.  I was a reporter for a while and this, for the city beat, and it was interesting, city beat at the time, because the mayor of Ann Arbor [Michigan] was a law professor, so he loved students and he'd sit and tell you everything.  So, you learned a lot about how, you know the old story of what they say and why they really are doing what they're doing and how they're divergent.  And, then my last year, the summer I went to, they had a, I actually wanted to buy a car and because I wanted to buy a car, I needed a job, and I had a job, at the newspaper for the summer which paid four hundred dollars a month, which was a lot of money then.  And my brother said he'd heard about this program for, interesting, for minorities in medicine, a summer program that also paid four hundred dollars for a summer, and because I was on the editorial page, we did our work in the afternoon.  And so, I could do both jobs, and so I did.  And that's how I got involved in medicine.  And obviously, I liked it, and I went that road from there.  So, the last year I spent most of my time actually working part time for a genetics lab.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, you move from mathematics to pre-med then, you took?
Speaker 2: Right.  Not 'til my senior year though.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Had you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But fortunately--
Speaker 1: --taken--
Speaker 2: --because I was in mathematics, the distribution requirements for mathematics were almost the same, I only had to switch from mathematics to zoology, I had to take three courses.  A genetics course, comparative anatomy course, and one third course 'cause I had to take the physics and the science for my math degree.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So, you lived on campus, you lived in Ann Arbor?
Speaker 2: I lived on campus.  And that's wh- until my junior year, I moved off campus, but I lived a block away.
Speaker 1: When did you become a Greek, i.e., a member of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]?
Speaker 2: Actually I became a member of Delta very early in January of my freshman year.  We were one of the first classes to--and probably one of the few to actually be pledging our ju- freshman year.
Story_ID: 402694
Speaker 1: So you went to the medical school at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And that was nineteen--
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] to '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971] to '75 [1975].  Tell me about the medical school years, what were they like for you?
Speaker 2: They were fun for me.  I loved medical school.  'Cause I hadn't been a student for a while and so it was fun being a student again.  I really enjoyed it.  So, I put all my effort into it and I did very well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How large were--
Speaker 2: --in medical school.
Speaker 1: --the classes at the medical school?
Speaker 2: Two hundred and thirty or forty students.
Speaker 1: In each class?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was pretty, pretty good.  Were there other black African American--
Speaker 2: Yeah there were--
Speaker 1: --medical students?
Speaker 2: --we had the largest class of African American students to ever go to the University of Michigan.  I think there were maybe thirty of us.  No more.  So it was quite a, you know, group of people for support.
Speaker 1: And so those were good years, there were no obstacles or road bumps along the way?
Speaker 2: No, they were good years.  You know, I was, I used to laugh that everybody else was kind of tired from gunning so hard in college and I was rested since I hadn't worked too hard.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, any other memories of medical school that stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the only other medical school issue I had was with the chairman of the department of neurosurgery who didn't really want me to be in his program.  And so, I had to, I had spent every co- like you, I spent all my time in neurosurgery once I was in the clinical years, so I'd come to their Saturday conferences, I'd come to whatever conferences they had that didn't conflict with my other responsibilities.  And I spent two months on their clinical service, so I knew everybody.  I mean, I was like a neurosurgery groupie.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now how did you come to select neurosurgery as your specialty?  What, of all the specialties out there, what led you to that?
Speaker 2: Well I went to medical school with the idea I'd be an internist, just because I'd thought of medicine as internist and we had a two-year course in, two year course interdisciplinary called Neurobehavioral Sciences, and it was just my favorite.  I love neuroanatomy, and I, and it was well taught and the subject matter was interesting and I enjoyed it.  So I think that was the flicker.  Yeah, I grew up in the 'Ben Casey' era, and you probably remember 'Ben Casey,' and you know, I would think that has some influence on you.  You know, he was kind of the guy who just did what he thought was right.  And, and I didn't like the heart and the lungs very much which rules out much of medicine.  I didn't, was not interested in the anatomy or physiology of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was a four year experience right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The medical school.
Speaker 2: So I actually--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --spent time my, at the end of my second year, a friend of mine in St. Louis [Missouri] had knew a neurologist and I precepted him for a month because I was trying to decide between neurology and neurosurgery.  Once I decided that I wanted some neuroscience.  And then my father [Clinton Canady, Jr.] had a good friend who ran the emergency room in Lansing [Michigan] and knew the neurosurgeons and they agreed to let me preceptor them for a month.  So that was a fun wa- and I just liked neurosurgery better.  I liked the honesty of it.  You know, if you say this is what it is, at the end of the day, you're right or you're wrong.  And you have to live with that.  But, you're right or you're wrong.
Story_ID: 402695
Speaker 1: Now you had to go on from there of course, and into a internship?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Where did you do your internship?
Speaker 2: At Yale New Haven Hospital [New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: And how do you remember that experience?
Speaker 2: I had a good time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Actually I think I, and I in fact now know that I was their designee for a residency.  At, if those days you didn't match for the residency and the internship, you matched separately for them and I thought that I probably had their job because I'd spent time there as a medical student, but no one knew for sure, and Shelly Shue [ph.], who was the chairman at Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] where I ultimately did my neurosurgery, called me up about six weeks into my internship and said, "I'll offer you a job for the next year if you'd like it."  Excuse me.  And I said, "Well, let me talk to the people here."  So I went to see Bill Collins [William Collins] who was the chief at Yale, and said, you know, "They've offered me a job, but I'd like to know if I have a job here?"  And, it's interesting, a difference in culture, he didn't understand my position.  So, his thing was, if I really wanted his job, I'd wait 'til October, when he normally announced it and my position was, I'm a black woman, I'm thinking, who's coming?  And so, that's what I did, so I accepted the position in Minnesota, they were very disappointed, they say, and I believe that.  There one of the faculty, there's one of my good friends now.  And so, then they spent a year trying to make sure I did everything first at Yale, so it was a wonderful year.  I mean they were very supportive after, you know, we got over that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I explained my position, you know, which is look, I can't turn down a job for a maybe job, in my position.
Speaker 1: Right.  Were there other black men or women in neurosurgery during the time that you were entering this specialty?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Gosh, I'm blocking out his name right now.  Jesse Barber [Jesse B. Barber, Jr.] at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], was one, you know, he was kind of the father of neurosurgery at that time, yeah.  My allergies are kicking up, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, I actually took the pilgrimage to go see him.  I, went to, there was a NMA [National Medical Association] meeting in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A what--
Speaker 2: --Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: --meeting?
Speaker 2: --National Medical Association--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --meeting in Philadelphia, and I took the train from Philadelphia down to Washington [D.C.] to go see him and to talk with him and to see if he thought I could do this.
Speaker 1: This is when you were still at Yale now?
Speaker 2: I was still a medical student.
Speaker 1: Oh, still a medical student?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Deciding to become a neurosurgeon.  Looking for, you know, looking for some validation undoubtedly.  And--
Speaker 1: Were there other African American neurosurgeons that influenced you and helped you during this period?
Speaker 2: No.  That was the only one I knew.
Speaker 1: And there was no women in the field--
Speaker 2: There were no--
Speaker 1: --at that time?
Speaker 2: --African American women at all.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I am the first African American woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who was the first African American male?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I should be able, I, his friend, his son is a friend of mine and I'm blocking on his name [Clarence Sumner Greene, Sr.] right now.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But he was from Howard and he had trained in Montreal [Canada], just like Jesse Barber did.  Montreal Neurologic [Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, Montreal, Canada] trained the first black American neurosurgeons.  And his son [Clarence Sumner Greene, Jr.] is a neurosurgeon as well.  I just, I can't come up with the name right now.
Speaker 1: Well maybe we'll come back to it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 402696
Speaker 1: So you're off to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] to do your specialty.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me about those years--
Speaker 2: It was fun (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and what--
Speaker 2: --being back--
Speaker 1: --what did--
Speaker 2: --in the Midwest.  I didn't realize how much of a Midwesterner I was until I came back from the East Coast.  I'd always thought I was gonna live on the East Coast, but I love the Midwest better, it's my style.  So, walking across the campus I knew, I felt at home right away.
Speaker 1: So what did that training involve?  What did you do year by year, what kind of things were you, did you have to work at?
Speaker 2: You have to learn how to recognize sick people, and then how to do something about it, and then how to operate on them.  So, it's a gradual process.  It's a pretty brutal schedule, in those days we used to start every morning at six and you were on call all night every third night and you had to come on Saturday and you had to come on Thursday twice a month for a conference and then, what else?  You got home about eight o'clock on the nights you were off, so you didn't do much other than neurosurgery.
Speaker 1: This is all training now?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --this is all training and that was how many years?
Speaker 2: Five years.
Speaker 1: Five years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How do you remember your very first surgery?
Speaker 2: First surgery I did by myself.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: I was scared.  I was totally scared.  You know, and you realize that, it's like you and there's nobody standing behind you.
Speaker 1: What was the operation?  What was the condition?
Speaker 2: It was a young girl who was living with an older man and who tried to commit suicide by shooting herself in the head.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Very sad story.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did she live?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.
Speaker 1: What was your next major surgery that you did alone, do you recall?
Speaker 2: The other most impressive one for me that I did alone, or you know, with people watching but not helping, was when I was a fellow, at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I did an arteriovenous malformation, it took us about twenty hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you repeat that again?  It was a?
Speaker 2: And arteriovenous malformation in young boy, that took about twenty hours.
Speaker 1: How old was the young man?
Speaker 2: He was like twelve.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And it was a twenty-hour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --operation?
Speaker 2: Right.  And Luis Schut, my mentor, was like walking nervously in the halls, tried to keep his hands out.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So each one of these early surgeries and I guess maybe all of them were very stressful?  Are they not straining?
Speaker 2: They are I think, but, it--if, you can't really think about it too much, if you do then you need to go do something else.  It has to somewhere along the process, become your everyday job.  Otherwise, you don't survive.
Story_ID: 402697
Speaker 1: While you entered neurosurgery, you decided to focus on children.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're a pediatric neurosurgeon.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Why did you move to the pediatric area?
Speaker 2: As strange as it sounds, I wanted to be an expert and it's hard to be an expert in the entire field of neurosurgery.  And I've had the need to make decisions based on real expertise, rather than, you know, you can make decisions about things you're not expert about that are good decisions, but they're uncomfortable for me.  And I said, and that was the beginning of the time when neurosurgery was beginning to specialize anyway, and so it wasn't, I was one of the first to go off to fellowship, I think I might have been the first to go to fellowship.  But a number of people went into various fellowships after me, so it was the beginning of a change in how things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you say--
Speaker 2: --were organized.
Speaker 1: --you went into a fellowship, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Additional training in a specialty.
Speaker 1: At the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: No, at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay well let's, let's not get there yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I picked pediatrics because it was the most fun.  I said to myself, what do I most enjoy in my work?  And that was what I most enjoyed, probably because the kids aren't, don't have as many preconceived notions about a neurosurgeon, and what it means and how dreadful it must be to be there.  So it's just, you know, another doctor.
Speaker 1: Testimonies from some of your patients, it's in some of the literature, indicate that you are playful.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That people enjoy being in your presence.  Tell me about that?  Does that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's fun.  I mean it makes the day much more fun to be able to play and interact with people in a playful way.  I also try to make the patients understand that they're the patient and not their parents, and it was interesting at my first retirement, one of my patients stood up and said spontaneously, when I went to see her, "I always knew she was my doctor and not my parents' doctor."  And I was very pleased 'cause I really try to do that, to make them understand that they're central.
Speaker 1: So, it's very, very hard work, long work, long hours--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: At the University of Minnesota, going through this--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --this training.  What other kind of things did you do to, outside of your training just to relax or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not--
Speaker 1: --enjoy yourself?
Speaker 2: --a lot.  There wasn't a lot of time outside my training.
Speaker 1: There wasn't?
Speaker 2: I did have a friend who was a pediatric neurologist who had tickets to everything, so I did do some symphony and actually saw Pavarotti [Luciano Pavarotti] when I was there, plus she had athletic tickets so I saw some football games and some basketball games, and I read, I always read.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about yourself at the end of that residency training, and now you're a fully-fledged neurosurgeon, how did you feel?
Speaker 2: I kind of felt pretty good.  I felt pretty good.  You know, it had been a long road, I worked very hard, and it's the mixed feelings of a sense of accomplishment and a sense of well, what am I gonna do now?  And the need to make a new plan.
Story_ID: 402698
Speaker 1: And so what happened next?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Well I, once I decided I wanted to specialize in pediatric neurosurgery, I arranged a fellowship at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is part of the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] system with Luis Schut.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: S-C-H-U-T.
Speaker 1: S?
Speaker 2: And his first name is L-U-I-S, he's South American.
Speaker 1: And the first name again is?
Speaker 2: L-U-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a wonderful year, it was so much fun.
Speaker 1: So that was one year?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the purpose of that year was what?
Speaker 1: To learn (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --pediatric neurosurgery expertise.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So what exactly did you have to learn that year?
Speaker 1: We, I saw only children that year, and we operated only on children that year.  Spent time in the ICU [intensive care unit], time with the radiologist learning all about the specialties of pediatric surgeries, normal development, abnormal development, how that impacts on--and the spectrum of neurosurgical diseases are a little different in children.  We see, you know, obviously congenital abnormalities and spinal problems and hydrocephalus, water on the brain, whereas in an adult population, the things they see are, are atherosclerotic disease, and degenerative spine disease.  So really the disease spectrum is different as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Some of the first children that you've treated and worked on, in Children's Hospital, tell me about some of those early cases, do any of them stand out in your mind?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a little girl with a kind of a tumor called a craniopharyngioma--
Speaker 2: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: C-R-A-N-I-O-P-H-A-R-Y-N-G-I-O-M-A.
Speaker 2: And what was that?
Speaker 1: That's a benign tumor by pathology, but malignant by position, that involves the hypothalamus, right where the hormones are all produced.  So, often removal of that tumor leaves hormonal problems, and this little girl had them, and so her, her fluids, she didn't have the proper sense of thirst that you should have, and so she could get into trouble with her body fluids.  And I loved it because she was just a little girl and she was in the hospital for months while we tried to get everything sorted out in terms of her fluid and electrolytes and finally we sent her home and everybody was very concerned that her poor mother, you know, poor black mother wouldn't be able to handle this.  So the mother handled it by putting locks on everything so that she was in absolute control, she had a lock on the refrigerator, lock on the cabinets and the girl, every time she came in, her electrolytes were right on.  So, in those days we had a research unit, so they brought her back to study her hormones, she came into the hospital and within twelve hours, was in the ICU sick.  Because we didn't manage her fluids as well.  And I thought that was a very important lesson for everybody, who's fairly, often you get derisive attitudes towards mothers who are not very well educated and I thought that was a very important lesson in that case.
Speaker 2: Could you cite another case that you remember vividly when you first went to Children's?
Speaker 1: I took care of another little girl who had very bad meningitis, which we don't see much anymore.  And as a result of that it developed significant hydrocephalus and her mother actually was, is a very famous woman's basketball coach.  And I've had a chance to--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Her mother was?
Speaker 1: Was a very famous ba- is a very famous women's basketball coach and--
Speaker 2: Her name?
Speaker 1: Vivian Stringer [C. Vivian Stringer].  You probably know her from your area.
Speaker 2: I've heard of her.
Speaker 1: And so I had a chance to run across her over the years and that's been fun.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: And I saw actually, a pair of Siamese twins, a pair of black girls who were probably seventeen, eighteen at the time, they're dead now, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you performed a--
Speaker 1: No we didn't, they didn't wish any surgery.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: But we just followed them.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: They were joined at the head.
Speaker 2: So that was your fellow year then.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At Children's Hospital.
Speaker 1: It was very important because Luis Schut really became my main mentor in my professional career.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 402699
Speaker 1: Where does the Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Come into it?
Speaker 1: --Ford Hospital [Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] fit into your--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --program, I wasn't sure whether you were there first or after?
Speaker 2: I was there first.  The chief at Henry Ford at the time was Jim Ausman [James I. Ausman].  And Jim had been a junior faculty member at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So, he left there actually two years before I finished and when he left, he offered me a job when I was done.  So, when I finished I came and worked for him.
Speaker 1: At Henry Ford?
Speaker 2: At Henry Ford.
Speaker 1: I see, what year was that?
Speaker 2: In 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, 1982.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you do there?
Speaker 2: I was the pediatric neurosurgeon for Henry Ford Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you're there just a year?
Speaker 2: Yes because being the pediatric neurosurgeon meant I did all twenty-four pediatric cases and three hundred adult.  Because they didn't really have a pediatric practice.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And then your next step was what?  Where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: Well I expressed my unhappiness with the volume of work as a pediatric person, so Dr. Ausman said, "Well, why don't we have you go to Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] too," which is where the cases were.  And in order, so I said fine.  So I was gonna continue working for him but go down there as well, and it's part of that process of applying to their staff, I had an interview with the chief of surgery and he said, "Well, you know, why are you gonna do that?  You should just come work here.  You know, why would you work there and here?  I mean, just work here.  And in fact, we've arranged a job for you.  You can either work by yourself, if you like, or you can work with our neurosurgeon who's already here and we'll provide you with a salary."  And so I jumped ship.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And did more cases my first month at the Children's Hospital than I'd done in the last year in pediatrics.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Can you describe one of those early cases?  Do you remember one of the first ones you did at Children's Hospital?
Speaker 2: I really don't.
Story_ID: 402700
Speaker 1: So in 1987 I believe approximately, you went to the Children's Hospital of Michigan [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-two [1982], I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually '83 [1983], I went to the Children's Hospital, I went to Henry Ford [Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well tell me about that long tenure, you were there for, until 2001?
Speaker 2: Right.  I loved it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about--
Speaker 2: I absolutely loved--
Speaker 1: --that tenure.
Speaker 2: --the hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I still love the hospital.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a hospital whose mission was taking care of anybody who was sick and they meant it.  And one of the joys of a pediatric hospital is you get pediatric types and by and large, everybody who does pediatrics makes less money than they would doing adults of the same type.  So, that's selects for a certain kind of person, which makes wonderful companions to practice with over the years.  I mean, the people who are there are interested primarily in doing the right thing and it, an environment like the Children's Hospital of Michigan, where the commitment is to doing the right thing.  It's just a joyous place to work.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  You're quoted here in another interview that you did, I don't remember the place or the time.  But, you said that your profession, your specialty allows you to get into the interior of people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, by and large, what I do is involved with the most traumatic thing in most people's lives, and so that lets you in, and because of pediatrics, we tend to take care of people over time, you become part of the family, you get to watch them grow up, you get, you know them intimately.  You know, if you take care of someone for ten, or fifteen or twenty years, you know them, they know you, it's a relationship.
Speaker 1: Tell me about one of the families that you currently are still engaged with, because of what you've just told me?  Are there any families that you still?
Speaker 2: I had a mother just called me last week to tell me that her son died, who I took care of from the time he was a baby.  He had a seizure, and had a problem from the seizure, and was found dead really.  But I thought it--I was very moved that she would call me after all these years, I mean I haven't been in Detroit [Michigan] in five years now, and, and know that I would want to know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And, so I--
Speaker 1: Tell me more about this place that you--
Speaker 2: The Children's Hospital (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you love so much?
Speaker 2: --of Michigan?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a children's hospital in downtown Detroit, it's a good-sized hospital, it's about, it's about a 250-bed hospital, somewhere, 225, 250-bed hospital, it's part of the Detroit Medical Center [Detroit, Michigan] and part of the Wayne State University medical school [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan].  And it is a full service, it has all pediatric specialties, pediatric cardiac, pediatric orthopedics, pediatric neurology.  It has a large intensive care unit, probably thirty beds.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now, you moved up in, quote, the ranks, at this hospital?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the progression of your moving up into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My progression was pretty abrupt actually.  I was there for a few years and my senior partner left and I became chief.
Speaker 1: You became the chief?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was the chief beginning about when I was thirty-five, give or take a little.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I was chief for most of the time I was there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now what new responsibilities did you have as the chief?
Speaker 2: Well I think, you have the administrative responsibilities, which in a small department aren't huge, but you have to set the tone, you, I mean your responsibility is setting the tone and picking the people to match your vision of what you want your department to be.  I wanted my department to be very patient-centered department, where things were easy for the patients, where the patients felt they were part of the team, where we gave them a lot of information and let them participate in the decision making in a meaningful way, and that I think we succeeded in that.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: At my retirement, the families came to the conference.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: So that was very much in keeping with, with my philosophy.
Story_ID: 402701
Speaker 1: Was it a year or so after you were promoted to the chief [of neurosurgery at Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] that you were married?  When were you married?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about the same time.
Speaker 1: You were married, I believe 1988?  I think that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's--
Speaker 1: --right--
Speaker 2: --correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me about who you married and tell me about your husband?
Speaker 2: I married George Davis who is, was a [U.S.] Navy corpsman, who I met actually at a neurosurgery meeting, he was recruiting physicians.  And I used to always go up to the military tables because they never would tell you what your salary's gonna be.  They tell you, we have a bonus, we have this, but you never, ever got a salary number.  So, I actually took a friend of mine to say, "You know, I'd been telling everybody, I've been going to these tables for years and nobody'll ever gives you a salary number, let me show you."  And I took her to show her and I met George.
Speaker 1: And George was doing what again now?
Speaker 2: He was a corpsman in the Navy.
Speaker 1: And what was his work, I mean what did he--?
Speaker 2: At the time he was recruiting physicians for the--
Speaker 1: Recruiting?
Speaker 2: --for the Navy.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay.  And did he continue in that work?
Speaker 2: He continued for, to finish out for about three and a half years, four years, he got out in '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay, where was he from?
Speaker 2: He's from Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  Any other thoughts and memories about being the chief of neurosurgery at--
Speaker 2: Oh it was a blast.
Speaker 1: --at the--
Speaker 2: It was a blast, I loved it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was fun.
Speaker 1: Have you been back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Recently?
Speaker 2: I'm going back actually Friday.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: My, the nurse who was there when I came is retiring and they're having a party.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonderful, that's wonderful, okay.
Story_ID: 402702
Speaker 1: Well, why did you decide to leave Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] in this position [chief of neurosurgery], in 2001 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If I liked it so much?  Yeah, if I liked it so much, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was tired.  I had been working about eighty hours a week for twenty something years and I didn't see any way to carve my job differently there.  I'd become the face of neurosurgery, so there was no way to comfortably draw back in that environment without a lot of unhappy people.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I just decided that I had once been an interesting person, and that I could be an interesting person again, and I missed the other parts of my life, I thought it, the balance had gotten--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In what ways did George [George Davis] help you after you were married to continue through these heavy years of the '90s [1990s] 'cause you continued another ten, twelve years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --after you were married--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --what ways--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --did he help you?
Speaker 2: In his sense of dedication.  I mean he has a military sense of responsibility.  You know, if you have the duty, you have the duty, go do it, you know, I don't, I, I'll be here when you're back.  Which is very much in contrast to many of my colleagues who did not get that kind of response at home.  So, I never had a conflict with my work and home.  He always perceived it as my responsibility and that I should do what I was responsible for.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  When you were able to get away from the hospital, I hope from time to time, what do you and George do together?  What did you like to do together?
Speaker 2: Oh, just wander around sometimes, you know?  Just see, you know it's, I'm a very focused person as you've probably noticed and he's not.  So it's always interesting to--I, when I would plan a day, I would plan a day, and when he'd plan a day, he said, "Well let's not plan a day, let's just see what's gonna happen."  'Cause it was fascinating to me to see that side of the world where, actually you'd have a good day without planning it.  So that was good.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then I have a number of nieces and nephews who I've always enjoyed spending a lot of time with.
Story_ID: 402703
Speaker 1: Let's look at your professional, organizational affiliations.  You're chief of neurosurgery, and these other positions, but tell me about some of your broader, wider professional activities across the country and the world in your profession?
Speaker 2: Well I was a professor of neurosurgery at the medical school, and actually it was acting chief several times, I never did really wanna be the chief.  I was involved, I was actually the person for the last ten or fifteen years that ran the operating room at the Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] and trying to make sure that that ran well and appropriately.  I was the president of the Michigan Association of Neurosurgeons [Michigan Association of Neurological Surgeons] and first (unclear).  I was actively involved in the assoc- the pediatric neurosurgery society [American Society of Pediatric Neurosurgeons] as well as the neurosurgery society.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did you present papers at their meeting?
Speaker 2: Oh, I presented, yeah, tons of papers. I was on the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] as a consultant for neurological devices, and was actually chairman of the neurological devices panel, and then co-chairman of a review committee of the science--of the Center for Devices [Center for Devices and Radiological Health].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Are there any innovative techniques or procedures in your field that you've developed?
Speaker 2: We have a patent on a valve that we designed but it hasn't overwhelmed the world.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Tell me about the patent, and who's the we?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Sandeep Sood, who was one of my partners and associates, and Steve Ham [Steven D. Ham], who was my partner and associate for years.  He and I started together and went together for years.  Designed the valve to try to desi- to resolve some of the problems that develop over time and children which (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about the valve, what did, what was it made of--
Speaker 2: The idea was--
Speaker 1: --what did it do?
Speaker 2: --to make an adjustment, so, when people stand up the valves drain much more quickly and this causes problems with resistance in the brain over time, the brain gets very stiff.  And so, it was designed to give a feedback loop to prevent the over drainage issues so that we might have a better brain function.
Speaker 1: Where would that be inserted?
Speaker 2: Along the tubing for the shunt.
Speaker 1: And you say, you have a patent, or you?
Speaker 2: We have a patent.
Speaker 1: You have a patent?  Other devices and procedures that you may have developed?
Speaker 2: Well I, we did a lot of procedures, I'm not sure we developed any new ones.  I think the main thing we did is our approach how patients are managed, in terms of a very active, we created a patient support group.  We had several hundred parents involved in our department and they felt very much a part of our family, and we tried to create a sense of family there.
Story_ID: 402704
Speaker 1: We were very active probably the last ten years I was there [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] in surgical epilepsy in children, and we operated on a child actually as young as two months of age.  So we did a number of innovative things there in terms of melding images and doing, you know, procedures a little bit on the edge, along with Harry Chugani, who is a pediatric neurologist.  So that was the exciting part of the last few years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Now one of the things that demanded so much of your time and kept you going all those years, you also were the professor at Wayne State [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, tell us--
Speaker 1: --professor of neurosurgery--
Speaker 2: --about your teaching career?
Speaker 1: --well I--
Speaker 2: When did that start?
Speaker 1: I always have viewed myself as a teacher.  I've, it's always been a part of me, I come from a family of teachers, you know?  And, actually when I was at Philadelphia [Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], they wanted to give me the fellow of the year award, but they, it was against the rules to give it to a surgeon, they said they'd never had that issue before.  But in Detroit [Michigan] I got the teacher of the year award and actually here in Pensacola [Florida], this year I got the Golden Apple Award from the pediatric residents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But tell me about your teaching at Wayne State (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I taught--
Speaker 2: --what was your position?
Speaker 1: --residents, I taught residents for twenty years, we had both pediatric residence as well as neurosurgical residents, general neurosurgical residents and then also pediatric neurosurgical residents.
Speaker 2: For twenty years you taught?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I see.  How much time did you devote to that every week and?
Speaker 1: That was the one that made you have to get up from bed every morning at 5:30 so you could go to the 7:00 conference.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: So we had a number of 7:00 conferences, we had a Friday radiology conference, we had a Thursday, basic science conference, we had a Tuesday general neurosurgical conference, so that was the one that was rolling you out of bed every morning, no matter how late you'd been up.  But I enjoyed it.  I think teaching is fun.  It forces you to defend what you're doing, and if you can't defend it, maybe you need to change it.
Story_ID: 402705
Speaker 1: Your teaching has also extended to young people?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You've mentored young people, high school students who've had interest, and tell me about your mentoring of high school students?
Speaker 2: I think it's fun.  Again, they're interesting, life is exciting for them.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Did you work with any particular group of youngsters or teenagers in Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here in Pensacola [Florida] I have 'cause I have more time, I work with the Delta Academy [Dr. Betty Shabazz Delta Academy] girls, which are middle school girls, we have a group of girls that we mentor every year.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then I've been involved with the summer enrichment program where we take several weeks in the summer and hold session, for kids in the summertime doing enrichment activities.  And then we've had a number of students come through or be involved with over the years, in one way or another.  I've actually been pretty active in mentoring some of the medical students who have issues as well, trying to help to guide them through the system and some neurosurgery residents and other places.
Speaker 1: Some of the literature on your background and your work indicates that you have worked to change the perspective of how African Americans, both as patients and physicians, are being presumed and perceived?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Can you say something about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think medicine is still largely an upper middle class for now and probably increasingly so, as it gets more costly.  And I think that there's a misinterpretation of what, what happens.  Just like I talked about the mother who was able to manage her child successfully at home, who were unable to manage successfully in the hospital, or the parent who doesn't come.  I mean people don't understand sometimes the parent doesn't come because it takes three buses to get there, and she has an hourly job, and it she doesn't work, she doesn't get paid.  I mean most people that, who are related to medicine are salaried type of people, so whether they get to work that day or that hour or not, doesn't materially affect their income.  But for that mother who already has a minimal income, she can't get there.  So the fact, she's not there does, by no means, mean she doesn't love her child, but she has, has to make tough choices.  Also, I've had patients whose children are dying, who've been fired from their jobs, I mean it's incredible to me.  I mean, I couldn't believe it, so I called them up, I said, you know, "Look, this guy's son is dying, he'll be dead in just a couple of days, if you just give him a little time, he'll be able to come to work."  And the guy said to me, and I quote, "I need somebody in that parking booth today, and if he can't do, somebody else will."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What about African American physicians and how they're perceived, that's another part of the--
Speaker 2: There, there's still a huge shortage of African American physicians, somewhere in the time span, this country actually had a relative shortage of physicians and so we had a huge influx, like 25 percent over some years, of physicians from other countries, while the average number of African American physicians is really not that much higher than it ever was.  You know, it's about 2, 3 percent.
Story_ID: 402706
Speaker 1: --How patients, African American patients, are perceived and treated, the behavior towards them and so on.  Could you address that also with regards to African American physicians?
Speaker 2: Well I think they're such a small number, relative to the big picture that they're not really a big part of it.  I think, early days, they were fair--fairly marginalized quite deliberately.  I mean surgeons couldn't get privileges in hospitals despite their training.  I mean I was at Wayne State University [Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan] and they finished a neurosurgeon and they wouldn't even give him privileges which is to me an incredibly ridiculous concept.  So, largely they were marginalized, although these days, that's not the case.  Their people are clearly part of the system really in most places, but the numbers are still inadequate to provide, you know, culturally sensitive care, if you would?  The percentage is somewhere in the 2 to 4 percent range and I actually calculated it out, so that if every physician who's currently practicing didn't die or get sick or stop, and they accepted every application for every student to medical school who is Afro-American, it would take forty years to get to 10 percent of the population, which would be representative of the Afro-American population.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And in the meantime, literally twenty-five thousand or so foreign students have been in and admitted and become practicing physicians in this country, so there's no commitment to that concept, despite the urgent concerns about disparity of care.  Which I think is a major disconnect.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Given all of what you just said though, do you have any ideas about how we can begin to change this course or break through these?
Speaker 2: I think it's just the opposite, I think the barriers are huge now, the average medical student comes out owing more than a hundred thousand dollars at a time at which salaries are going down.  So that, I think I have serious concerns, I mentioned that my medical school class was the largest African American class to graduate from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and that was in 1971, and it remains so, that was 1975, and it remains so.  So I think it's a major issue.
Story_ID: 402707
Speaker 1: You retired in 2001?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: From Children's Hospital [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] and you came here to Pensacola [Florida]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Florida, why Pensacola?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Navy wife, Navy wife, Pensacola is a historic Navy retirement town.  It's on the Gulf Coast, it's a nice town, it has all the [U.S.] military facilities to use your military benefits.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And George [George Davis] had already retired right?
Speaker 2: And he'd been here before.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was stationed here early in his career.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So he liked it.
Speaker 1: How was it when you first came to Pensacola, leaving all those years in Michigan?  What did it feel like making that move?
Speaker 2: I thought I might not like it here, but I'd made the commitment.  When my, when we married, my husband came to Detroit [Michigan] and so I'd agreed to go where he wanted when we finished as a fair trade.  And he probably would have gone to Guam, and so I had considered Pensacola as a positive.  But I actually am quite in love with the town now, it didn't take me very long, it's a very friendly place.  George had always complained, being a southern boy, that in the North, people just weren't as friendly, and I see what he means.  In the daily interactions here, I mean, when I called the cable lady to set up the cable she said, "Now my name is Sue, and if you have any problems, you call me," and she meant it.  And so, the daily interactions of life are just much more pleasant, and I don't have to drive forty minutes everywhere.  And so, life's been very good.  And it's a very close knit community and I found, you know, various niches to interest me.
Speaker 1: What had you planned to do when you came here?  When you first arrived in 2001, 2000, what did you?
Speaker 2: Read books, read books.
Speaker 1: What was it you wanted to read that you hadn't read?
Speaker 2: Just any book.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Any, you know, I wanted, I wanted chunks of time that were mine that I could irrevocably say I'm going to be there Wednesday at 9:00 and be there and not have to renege.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I just needed that.
Speaker 1: But here you are at Sacred Heart Medical Group hospital [Sacred Heart Hospital Pensacola, Pensacola, Florida], seemingly working every day.  When did that change?  You're now back in your practice, what hap-
Speaker 2: Well, not really.
Speaker 1: Yeah?  Well tell me what--tell me about your medical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Although I lost the bet with--
Speaker 1: --life here.
Speaker 2: --my partners who said I'd be doing some kind of practice within three years.  I started coming to, before I came here I got a letter actually from the pediatric chief who had heard that I was gonna be moving to town, and I don't really know how?  And invited me to just come to their pediatric conferences, which I did when I first came, starting about December of that first year.  And then I started giving some, and then they said, "You know, we don't have a pediatric neurosurgeon, and we have to send our kids all the way to Gainesville [Florida]," which is, you know, is probably about four hundred miles from here.  And, so then, I said, "Okay, that's interesting," but I began to feel guilty about it because it, you know, kids would sometimes not make it.  So then the hospital approached me about whether I would be willing to think about working?  And, and I did, under certain kind of circums- there's some restrictions, I'm a part time employee, so I don't have to run an office, I just work for them.  I don't operate before 10:00 anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I don't get up and go to the 7:00 in the morning meetings, and I don't work on the weekend, and I don't do trauma at night.  So, it's a very different life.  I've been taking bridge lessons for a year, I play duplicate bridge, I'm active in the sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], I'm active with the Delta Academy [Dr. Betty Shabazz Delta Academy], I mean I have a life.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Outside of medicine.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: So yes, I practice medicine but it's not just the medicine these days.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I of course, had never heard of Sacred Heart Medical Group before.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is my first time in Pensacola.  Tell me about this, this hospital, this institution because I walked around this morning and I really kind of, was grabbed by it.  Tell me about this place, what is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's--
Speaker 1: --Sacred Heart?
Speaker 2: --for, the attraction for me is that it has a Nemours Children's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Has a what?
Speaker 2: Nemours Children's Hospital, which is part of the duPont Foundation [Alfred I. duPont Foundation, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida].  And they had created, they have really a large endowment to provide pediatric services in places that otherwise wouldn't be able to support them.  So, we have here two pediatric endocrinologists, three pediatric surgeons, four pediatric intensivists, pediatric ENT [ear, nose, and throat], and so there's a full spectrum of pediatric hospital, which you would not normally see in a community this size.  And that's why I was able to come and do what I do here because I have the support, I mean you never can be an neurosurgeon in isolation, you have to have supporting services with people, with skills to support the sick kids.  Sacred Heart is now a regional medical center and it's very large, I'm not even sure how many beds there are.  But it, it services much of the entire panhandle, probably from Tallahassee [Florida] west, from Panama City [Florida], much of--from Panama City to the Alabama border and actually reaching into Alabama, like Baldwin County [Alabama] and places along the eastern portion of Alabama come here.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it's in the transition phase, if you would, from being like a local hospital to being a regional power.
Story_ID: 402708
Speaker 1: Well, I think we're coming down to what we call our wrap-up questions.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, we'll spend the rest of the time with that.  Are there any things you'd like to add to this interview about your life, your career, your family that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: No.  It's been fun.  I've had a good ride.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  How do you feel about the way you have led your life?
Speaker 2: I feel pretty good about it.  I feel really good about being able to walk away when I thought I needed to.  People said, "Oh, you can't do that," and I think you have to listen to that voice inside yourself that says, yeah, I do need to do something differently now.  And I felt good that I was able to do it.  I felt proud of myself for that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I've felt, part of it too was that I've lived in a number of places and I was confident I could make a new life that suited me.
Story_ID: 402709
Speaker 1: For young people today, teenagers, college students, black and white, what suggestions do you have for them if they're inclined to and are thinking about going into medicine, what is your advice to, particularly and particularly to black young men and women?
Speaker 2: I think people tend to worry about how long it takes to train, and I think that that's a false worry.  I mean you've been in elementary school and high school a long time, but everybody you knew was doing the same thing you did and it didn't seem so abnormal.  I think in the course of your training, it's the same.  Everybody you know is training and so you're living a normal lifestyle as far as your friends are concerned.  And I think that the work is the important thing, I, as we said earlier, don't try to game the system, try to do good work, and good work is a value in and of itself.  If, even if no one notices it's a value.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Do you ever have times when you thought you might have chosen a different career?  Were there any steps along the way when you may thought of have, maybe going in a different direction?  I mean you went from math to medicine--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was there any?
Speaker 2: No, I actually went from math to I don't know where, and I was lost for a while and I looked for things to do.  I thought maybe I'll be a lawyer, you know I have good verbal skills and my debate skills.  I thought about be a journalist, I was involved in the paper at the time [at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], but none of those things seemed to match my skill set.  Just like mathematics, I mean I was pretty good at mathematics but I didn't like it like those guys liked it.  And I think that ultimately you have to pick what you really like and make a career out of that.  That's the best career.  Because, I mean everybody has lots of skills, and clearly with your skills you can do other kinds of jobs.  But every job has a lot of really unpleasant parts to it, and so the good parts have to outweigh the unpleasant parts.  So, pick what you love and figure out how to make the career out of that.
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of things.  I wanna become a good bridge player, I wanna do good work, I wanna see patients and take care of them and make their way easier.  I wanna be a better wife, better friend.  There's always room for improvement.
Story_ID: 402710
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for African American communities today?
Speaker 2: My concern is that somehow in the concept of black empowerment has been a rejection of intellectualism, in the concept that being knowledgeable and well-read and competent is not a virtue, that, I have a story, I'll give you a story.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: I had a young patient, not so young, eighteen years old, we were taking care of for a long time, who had a job a Burger King, and he had a real job at Burger King, he had health insurance, eyeglass insurance, he had benefits, you know, a real job.  And, the, his employer asked him to go and pick up the Burger King papers in the yard next door, and he said, "The yard next door, that's not Burger King," and he got into a conflict with his employer over this and lost his job, he quit.  He didn't lose it, he quit.  So, he's in my office, I'm examining him, he's saying, "I don't have any glasses, I can't see that."  I said, "Well why don't you have any glasses," and he tells me the story.  And he's proud of it, he's proud of it.  And so I said, "The papers that they asked you to pick up in that yard, were they Burger King papers?"  And the answer was yes.  And I said, "Why would you think it's not appropriate for Burger King to pick up the Burger King papers?"  And he said, "Well, that's not my job."  I said, "Your job is to do whatever your employer tells you to do that's legal."  And I said, "Somebody else has that job, and they have eyeglasses."  This perverse sense of pride is wrong, and it's pervasive, and it very much interferes with your ability to employ someone whose sense of slight is so insubstantial.  I mean, she didn't insult him, she didn't call him any names, she simply asked him to do a legal job and I think that's terribly threatening to the culture.
Speaker 1: Any other concerns that you have particularly in terms of medical care for African Americans today?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think medical care for everybody is changing, I mean it's about to become, you know, McDoctor, you know, you get to changing doctors, you get the doctor of the day, the doctor of the shift, and there is a loss of continuity of care in there, nobody really knows you well, even if you have a primary care doctor, he changes in two years or he changes every three years, or every four years or whenever he decides to move on.  And I think that's, that really interferes with care.
Story_ID: 402711
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, and you may have shared this earlier but let me come back to it again.  When you look back on your life, what stands out the most?  What were the big turning points in your life as you look back?
Speaker 2: Sometimes things that I didn't think would be good for me worked out really well.  And sometimes I went into things with the wrong motivation and it worked out really well.
Speaker 1: Can you give us some examples?
Speaker 2: Oh well, I think you know when I, 'cause I wanted a car, I took this summer program and I found my life.  I didn't get into MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which was the best thing that ever happened for me and I found my life.  I was at Henry Ford [Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan] and they sent me over there [Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit, Michigan] and I found the place where I really belonged.  I mean, I think you have to embrace whatever happens and make the best of it, and sometimes it's the best.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a person of integrity, as a person who deals with everyone with respect, and I wanna be thought of as a smart person.  You know, who studied hard and worked hard.
Speaker 1: You made history, you're a HistoryMaker because you're contributing of course, to this national project, but you're historic because you were the first African American woman to be a neurosurgeon.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Why is that important?  And how have you used that in your life?  You were a pioneer, you--
Speaker 2: I think it's both important and sad, I mean I became a neurosurgeon in 1981, I mean that's long ye- a lot of years later after neurosurgery came around.  So, I think we have to acknowledge that, and I think we have to acknowledge that I'm no smarter than anybody who came before me.  That I, that it's a confluence of circumstances of social pressure and outside political influences that forced the doors open, and not me in particular.  So, it's not a unitary effort by any stretch.  So those things said, I think you change it because it's different.  Automatically day one that you walk in the door, you know, I had a great residency because they didn't know how I was supposed to behave, they had rules for how the residents were supposed to dress, they had rules for how the residents were supposed to behave, and they weren't sure any of that applied to me.  So that made my residency much freer than my colleagues.  Because they were a little afraid, a little scared, yeah or they didn't wanna say, so I was much freer, had a much freer rein.  And then for all the residents who trained under me, neurosurgery belongs to them, to blacks as well, right?  I mean the world that they wanted to join was my world, not me theirs, and so by the definition it changes it.  And I've talked to, I bet fifty or sixty girls who wanna be neurosurgeons, and they won't be neurosurgeons, but they'll be something and wanting to be something is enough.  So that you change that, their perception of what is possible and I didn't realize that until the Brian Lanker book ['I Dream a World: Portraits of Black Women Who Changed America,' Brian Lanker] came out.  And I just was overwhelmed by the positive input that I got from people.  And I realized, in a way that I'd never personally realized how important it was to other people to see that this world was theirs too.  And, I just, I learned that, I learned that.  I wouldn't have thought that it was that important but it is.
