Story_ID: 52433
Speaker 1: Hello, my name is Samuel Adams.  I'm the interviewer for HistoryMakers.  To my right is Ms. Julieanna Richardson.  Behind is Scott Ri--Scott Stearns, our videographer.  And we're here to interview Dr. Cook.  If you could give your name--
Speaker 2: Henry L. Cook, Sr.
Speaker 1: Could you spell your name and your middle initial?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-Y, L is for Lee, L-E-E-, C-O-O-K,
Speaker 1: Today's date and the location?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: March 16, 2002.
Speaker 1: City?
Speaker 2: Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION):  Not the location.  We need to know the location?
Speaker 2: Hilton Hotel, the Magnolia Room, no doubt.
Speaker 1: And your profession, sir.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION):  The address, the address?
Speaker 1: The address?
Speaker 2: It's really on the corner of 9th Street and Front Avenue between Front and Broadway.
Speaker 1: Your occupation, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm a general dentist.
Story_ID: 52434
Speaker 1: Now we open each interview with five general questions and just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --like you to answer these.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food is probably chicken combined with candied yams.
Speaker 1: And you favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that's hard.  Las Vegas [Nevada] probably if I had to pick just one.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Or saying.
Speaker 2: Probably to whom much is given much is expected.
Story_ID: 52435
Speaker 1: And we want to start with you're born in Macon, Georgia, 1939.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little about your parents?
Speaker 2: I was born in a family of seven children.  I was the youngest or the baby they called me--Macon, Georgia.  My stay in Macon was brief.  I'd stay in Macon ten short years basically because my father [Jesse Cook] passed when I was six, and my mother [Annie Cook] passed when I was ten.  And after which we--I moved out to the country--we called it Byron, Georgia--to live with my grandmother [Dora Jackson] and grandfather [John Jackson].  So my stay in Macon was somewhat brief, up to the fifth grade.  I went to the sixth and seventh grade in Byron, the country school with big room, a lot of classes.  And from there I went to high school in the next city over in Peach County, which was Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Can I have your mother and father's names and the names of your siblings in the order of their--
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name, Annie B. Cook; father's name, Jesse Cook; and my siblings, starting with the oldest, Annie Pearl Walton, who's deceased, and Daisy Williams, who's deceased, Ella Cook, who is deceased, and of course the remainder are: Jesse Cook, Jr., the oldest boy; Jimmy Cook; the baby girl, Dora Christopher, and of course myself, Henry L. Cook.
Speaker 1: And your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My grandparents' names: John Jackson and Dora Morriah Elizabeth Josephine Haugabook Augustus Jackson, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Do you have that spelling?
Speaker 2: You got all of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do (unclear) spelled--do you have that spelling--the spelling of her name?
Speaker 2: The spelling?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now that's a, that's a different one (laughter).  Dora, D-O-R-A, and Morriah, M-O-R-R-I-A-H, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Josephine, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, Haugabook, H-A-U-G-A-B-O-O-K, Augustus, A-U-G-U-S-T-U-S, Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N, Cherokee.
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up with your grandparents' rearing?
Speaker 2: It was different, had a more structured life with my grandparents.  As the baby at home up among seven, I had the run of the house.  I did pretty much what I wanted to.  The discipline wa--wasn't what I saw when I got to my grandparents' house.  My grandparents' house was chores, duties, everyone had to do something.  And that is when I start to learn responsibility, and of course, you know, probably did some growing and maturing more.
Story_ID: 52436
Speaker 1: So what, what are your memories of your parents?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, each individually.
Speaker 1: Your father [Jesse Cook] first.
Speaker 2: My first, of course, as I said, my father passed when I was six, so my memory is very limited of him.  He was sick toward the end of his life.  He was employed at Robins Airfield, which is now Warner Robins Air Force [Base in Warner Robins, Georgia] in, in Georgia.  Something happened, gotten involved with some chemical spill, and of course you know subsequently he passed, and that's when I was six.  My mom [Annie Jackson], my memory of her is limited as well except for I can remember the struggle after my father passed with seven kids.  And of course, immediately after my father passed, they were farmed out to various family members.  For instance, my oldest three sisters left us to live with an aunt in Talbotton, Georgia.  And subsequently the oldest boy went to live there as well, which left the three younger children, my brother Jimmy, my sister Betty, and myself with my mom.  There we stayed with mom until my mother passed, which seems to me like five years later; in 1950 mother passed.  And at the time of my mother's death, of course, when I was moving with my grandparents, who got me for obvious reasons.
Speaker 1: Did she--what, what, what did she passed from?
Speaker 2: My mother?  I really don't know.
Story_ID: 52437
Speaker 1: So in your grandparents' home you were saying it was strictly--it was a very strict and disciplinary type household?
Speaker 2: Compared to, you know, when I was home with my my, my, my, my, my mother [Annie Cook] and father [Jesse Cook], yes.  For the first time I had chores.  In fact, after a period of time, I learned to enjoy that, because I got a lot of praise when I did chores.  You know, you did this well; you did that well, so that--(unclear)--of that.  In fact, I call it now a con job (laughter).  But I learned responsibility and probably was the beginning of my real life in terms of developing goals and aspirations.  But my grandfather, John Jackson, I did know a whole lot about him, 'cause, here again, you know, I started living with them when I was ten.  And of course, the--my grandfather as well as grandmother [Dora Jackson] passed while I was in college - my grandfather first of a heart attack I believe; my grandmother passed from cancer. In fact, she passed the year that I graduated from college.
Speaker 1: So did you have a very close relationship with them?
Speaker 2: My grandmother?  Yes, her shadow--apron string, yes (laughter).  Everywhere she went, there I was.  And I learned almost everything from my grandmother, my grandfather, from cleaning the house to cooking, sewing, yard chores, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Did your other siblings come around to visit?  Did--
Speaker 2: Well, when my mother passed, two siblings came to live with the grandparents.  The other of them were older.  They stayed with an uncle in Talbotton [Georgia].  But my youngest sister, Betty, and my younger brother, Jimmy, came to live, but that was in--Jimmy stayed briefly because he was kind of like of age.  So two of us, my, my, myself and my sister stayed with the grandparents longer.  I went off to, went off--I went off to high school, by the way, away from home to high school; that's eighth grade, because, you know, I couldn't go to high school in, in Byron [Georgia], so I had to go--which was only ten miles away.  But I went to live with someone to go to high school.
Speaker 1: What was the community like when you were living with your grandparents, the city like?  What was the--
Speaker 2: It was a small community, a farm community.  Only thing people did was work in the mills and in the fields, fields meaning cotton fields, etc.--it pretty much a close-knit community, very unique, you know, you know, they built their own houses, that sort of thing, but also peculiar that, you know, very few went to high school.  In fact I probably was the first from that community to finish high school.
Story_ID: 52438
Speaker 1: And what was your schooling like, starting with your--the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Hazel Street Elementary School in Macon, Georgia.  It was on Hazel Street, thus, the name Hazel Street (laughter) Elementary School.  Byron Elementary School, in Byron, which was the only school for blacks, it, it--grades from one through seven.  And incidentally, the person who taught me eventually 'came my adopted mom when my grandmother [Dora Jackson] passed.  And that's who I relate to more than anybody 'cause I stayed with her more years, more adult years I should say--years where I have more memories that I can kind of, you know, draw back on.
Speaker 1: And what is her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Elizabeth Richmond.
Speaker 1: And what did she teach you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in, in, in, in, in the country school she, she teaches everything, the English, geography, and the history, whatever, six in--in fact, she taught me two years, sixth and seventh grade.  And of course, you know, after that I went on to high school, you know.  But she, you know, was closely attached to me, and we kind of bonded until she passed, which was like just a few years ago.
Story_ID: 52439
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?  Were you an introvert, were you gregarious?
Speaker 2: Outgoing.  I was a Dennis the Menace, not so much so because be--I had strict parents, so I wasn't allowed to get into too much, but I was active.  I was full of energy.  I liked doing things.  Believe it or not, I liked cleaning around the house; I liked doing house chores basically because I enjoyed pleasing my grandparents.  They made a fuss over me when company came in terms of what I'd--he--Henry made his own bed.  Didn't he do a good job?  And, and from that they kind of encouraged me to do a lot of chores, which I really wind up enjoying.  To this day I enjoy housework, and my wife [Mamie Cook nee Richmond] enjoys that as well (laughter).
Speaker 1: So where there any hobbies that you had or picked up during that time like extracurricular activities at school?
Speaker 2: Not really, the usual hobbies that little boys have, you know, cowboys, Indian, and playing marbles.  There were no toys, no toys, none.  I think I got my first bicycle when I was in high school.  But I got into reading early, and that was precipitated by--in Byron [Georgia] by teachers of, of Bible school.  And believe it or not, probably one of the first book I used to read was the Bible.  It was a kiddy Bible with all the pictures of David and, and you know of Samson and Delilah and all that.  And it got me to reading, and that continued clean through high school.  And it probably was one of the bigger things academically, you know, in terms of me excelling that happened to me.
Speaker 1: The church played a major role in the community and in your life and in your home?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, church was a major part.  That was my social outlet.  I was allowed to leave the house on few occasions.  Church was one of them (laughter).  Other than that, I--there, there were selected friends that I could play with for many different reasons, you know.  Some of the kids were allowed to do anything they wanted to, and my grandparents wouldn't hear any of that, so yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist Church of Byron, Georgia.  That was the first church that I joined, by the way.
Speaker 1: And the pastor's name (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Don't remember the pastor's name.
Story_ID: 52440
Speaker 1: Now you said in the eighth grade you moved away to go--attend high school.
Speaker 2: Yes, there was no high school in Byron [Georgia].  You know that's--(unclear)--that's not true.  There was a high school, but it was for whites only.  And up to that point blacks were not going to high school for reasons of needing field hands in the cotton fields in the summer and peaches be harvest; in the colder months, you know, potatoes as well as corn and pecans at Christmas holidays even.  So normally when many of them finished the seventh grade, many of them dropped out of the fifth grade.  That was it for education for many of them, most of them in fact.  Since the teacher [Elizabeth Richmond] took an interest in me, probably because I was--they said I was precocious, and she insisted that I go to high school.  And the only thing was to make a decision on is where.  My grandparents did not want me to go back to Macon [Georgia], where when I was younger I had the lay of the land.  A lot of my contemporaries from Macon were getting in trouble by now.  That was, that was not an option, so the only other option was Fort Valley [Georgia].  They went and found a lady that I could stay with.  And myself and another girl went off to high school together.  Her name was Catherine Hill.  Well, actually there were three--two girls, Catherine Hill and Betsy Hill, her cousin, went off to high school together.
Speaker 1: And what was the experience of shifting to Fort Valley in the--the woman you stayed with, her name?
Speaker 2: Mamie Allen, a very nice lady.  But I was pretty much on my own at 13.  And when I say pretty much, come--solely on my own at 13.  I had to prepare my own meals.  The hardest thing was taking food for a week and making it last a week, because I left on Sunday and returned to Byron on Friday evening by way of Trailway Bus.  And it was hard; in fact, on today's standards were impossible, but I made it.  And that lasted for one year.  After the first year then the school buses start.  And all of the kids, elementary and up, started going to school in Fort Valley.
Story_ID: 52441
Speaker 1: And what was the experience like, the high school?
Speaker 2: High school--different.  I had a strained high school experience, meaning that I was not from Fort Valley [Georgia].  When I graduated elementary school in Byron [Georgia], I was entering what we call fine art contests, oratorical speaking.  I won most of them hands down.  So by the time I got to high school, my popularity was minus zero (laughter) among the kids.  So I was pretty much like an outsider at first, and it stayed that way for a long time because I really was commuting from high school back to Byron, even, you know--or when the school buses start.  So I, I didn't--ever have the feeling of being intimately a part of the community, even though many sought to make that happen, i.e., the teachers and many of the students.  But many of them, you know, high school kids are mean, and they have not changed I'm sure.  That was a blessing though, because finishing high school when I had a scholarship at the local college, which was right across the street pretty much, I chose not to go there, because had I stayed I would have probably have done very little academically.  I needed to get away--a newer environment, make a new start, which is why I went to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] in the first place.  And of course Tuskegee was also a part of not having money.
Speaker 1: Now going away, that first year you're away from your grandmother [Dora Jackson] on a railer--on a regular--
Speaker 2: Eighth grade.
Speaker 1: --pattern--eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How difficult was that?  Just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, that, that was very difficult.  That was very difficult.  It was difficult.  I was under the impression, and I'm pretty sure my grandmother was as well, that a mother figure would take care of me.  That didn't exactly happen.  Because we're talking about an elderly lady who was really struggling, you know, trying to make ends meet, and a lot of mentoring and caring that I needed she just was not able to do for instance.  Meal time she could not prepare meals for the two of us.  My meals came from what I brought.  And she, too, was trying to make meals last through the end of the month when she got compensation from whatever check she was getting.
Speaker 1: This is Mamie Richardson?
Speaker 2: Mamie Allen.
Speaker 1: Mamie Allen?
Speaker 2: Yes--very nice, but for thirteen it was difficult.   Probably even more difficult than that was the fact that my two brothers, my two siblings, my brother and my sister could not go to high school.  They had to work.  So when they finished seventh grade and the subject came up around the dinner table about school, and, and they could not go.  They had to work without funds (unclear) no one, no, no one ate.  So they stayed in Byron [Georgia] doing jobs like at the mill, in the fields.  In fact, both of them opt to do seventh grade over again.  Mind you, we're talking about smart students now that I realized it, particular my--the brother Jimmy.  He was more precocious than I was probably.  That was probably the most difficult through high school and college for me.  And of course, there are remnants still today.  I, I shudder to think what life would have been like had they had the same opportunity I had.
Speaker 1: Now, why didn't--why didn't that opportunity present itself for them?
Speaker 2: Well, they had to kind of stop school, work, make a living, and feed themselves.  The grandparents were not able to feed them.  Only way they could survive then was to work, bring in income.  And there was no Social Security or welfare.  You know, you, you, you--your own bootstraps back then, at least in that community.  And so they would pretty much, you know--end of the road.  The brick wa--brick wall.
Story_ID: 52442
Speaker 1: So your--you--you're finishing high school and on your way to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  How did that become the choice of schools you choose?
Speaker 2: Some counseling--high school counsel.  Probably the two people that I remember most other than mom-- Elizabeth Richmond who became my adopted mother of course-- James Gibson, teacher, and Wilbur Telafaro (ph.) Thompson, who was my shop teacher and a person whom I had worked with, you know, odd jobs after school, some--he, he was a landscape.  And I worked with him, and we bonded quite well together basically because he felt I was probably the best worker he'd ever had.  Thanks to my grandfather [John Jackson] I was dependable.  I was there on time every time; I was there fresh, left last.  And out of that he kind of--between Mr. Thompson and Mr. Gibson they mentored me in going to probably Tuskegee.  I had made them aware of what--that I needed to get out of Fort Valley [Georgia].  By the time I matriculated high school, there were some habits forming that did not include studying (laughter)--but, but those two people.  I'm pretty sure there were others, but those (unclear) stick out in my mind as the two most influential people.
Speaker 1: Now why, why was Tuskegee so import--so important to them?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee had the dubious reputation of going there you can work and go to school at the same time.  Back then it was referred to as the five-year plan, meaning that you worked part time the first two years, and you take half a load.  So it took two years to finish a freshman year load.  And by, by the end of the second year you should have accumulated enough credits to carry you through the other three years; a perfect fit for myself--had no funds.  If I remember correctly, tuition was 150.  There was nowhere near 250--I don't mean 250--150 dollars, not even 50 dollars within the household.  So my mom--my adopted mom saw to it that I had 150 dollars when I went up to Tuskegee, and she, in fact, took me to Tuskegee.  During that time is when my mom, and a lady named Daisy Lewis, and a lady named Eldora Hayes probably put their heads together and made sure that I had the funds to, to go off to college.
Story_ID: 52443
Speaker 1: Now that you're away from home and pretty groomed now, what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's funny that you mention that because there are some.  Believe it or not, the smell that I associate with my, my father [Jesse Cook] is coconut, and it took me a long time to realize why.  When I was a baby--he died when I was six.  In this latter days he would allow me to walk to the corner store, which was like fifty yards I guess to get him a, a bar of candy that referred to as haystack candy--was a coconut mound.  And he always gave me a piece of it.  So every time in fact I have a--an affinity for coconut as we speak, every time I smell or see coconut I think of my father.  My mom [Annie Cook], peculiar or not, butterbeans.  I guess I liked butterbeans as a kid, and she always saw to it that I got ample, enough, you know, as opposed to some of the other sisters and brothers who might not have, you know, with seven kids to feed all of a sudden--not that many memories of my mother, because whether the times were good and bad, as the baby I would've never known anyway because I was protected by not only my mom but all the siblings.  I do remember her having such a hard time when she was finally in her last few days.  When she--in fact she passed at my grandmother's [Dora Jackson] house as I watched.  And so my memory of both my real parents is painful only because they were not able what they wanted to do for the family.  But despite (unclear)--that, they tried, and that's probably was the cause of my mother's demise.  She had no help, absolutely no help, and that's the truth of the matter.  But they did the best they could with what they had to work with, which was not very much.
Speaker 1: It seems as if all the siblings, and even your mother and father really wanted you to do very well.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I guess there were others that they, they wanted--had the same desire for, but it did not materialize.  I'm the one that kind of got the fruit of the labor of all the siblings.  They encouraged me.  They taught me almost everything they knew, talking about my siblings now.  Mind you, I was not in school yet, and I can remember I probably could count and read.  Because when homework was done, as a baby, they went over it with me.  They taught me to spell certain words.  And I guess I was probably the best (unclear)--speller in elementary school.  I had an affinity for spelling.  The longer the word, the more I enjoyed spelling it--automobile, Philadelphia.  Of course Mississippi and Missouri was always an easy one, you know.  But, but out of that I think what I gleaned from my sibling was a lot of mentoring academically that, that paid off in the long run.
Speaker 1: So were there any sights or sounds that remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Not really, no sights, because there were few sights that I want to remember.  Not only my family, but where we lived in Macon [Georgia] was a very poor area, and every family was poor.  The white families and the black families were just poor, now that I look back on it.  We didn't think so at the time (laughter), but none of us had anything.  But, you know, there were no--as I said earlier, there were no toys so we, we played games; we made our own kites or hopscotch; we just drew on the ground, you know.  So the games you made up.  The, the rhyming and games--we using rhymes of all kinds or the, the, the, the cultural exchanges from across town to this side of town, you know, Mary Mack and those kinds of things, that's how we busied ourselves.  And of course for me, I spent a lot of my time reading.  Homework was always what I was (unclear) to do.
Story_ID: 52444
Speaker 1: You said that before.  I wanna ask you what books were you reading on your own?  What books were you reading if you can remember--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: "Huck Finn," "Adventures of Treasure Island," "The Golden Eagle" was a name of a novel that--this was a teacher in high school who got me to read.  I must have--I was in a contest with another guy in my class named Johnny Stembrich (ph.).  And we had a contest on how many books we could read each week.  So we'd go to the library, he would check out four so I would check out four.  And I'd sneak back and check out one, one up.  And he'd find out I checked out one, he'd sneak back and check out two (laughter).  Now the teacher is playing us both one against the other.  He was "Henry, Johnnie has another book."  And she got us to reading.  And they were good--easy reading books, you know, that--the, the Adventure of, of, of, of Earl Flynn, you know, those or the, the, pirate books.  It was easy reading.  But that got me to reading, and I do a lot of reading now, you know, kind of fictional books that we, we won't go into that now (laughter).
Story_ID: 52445
Speaker 1: So you're in college.  How do you decide on a major?  How do you decide on what you wanna do?
Speaker 2: That came from mentoring as well.  I was good at math in high school.  I was good at most subjects in high school really.  But my teachers thought I had a high aptitude for math, and for that reason they suggested engineering.  I got to Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama].  My major was mechanical engineering.  And I went through the gymnastics of mechanical engineering for a few courses, was included engineering drawing on the front end, and decided oh, no.  I think electrical is probably more of my calling.  Now this is in the same year now.  So second semester I changed to electrical engineering; put it up on my door.  And all of my contemporaries who were in mechanical--Henry, what are you doing?  So they changed to electrical engineering.  Then at the same time I was working for the School of Veterinary Medicine because I was on a work plan.
Story_ID: 52446
Speaker 1: Take me back to high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about Mr. Robert Church [HM] and your relationship?
Speaker 2: I met Mr. Robert Church--I'm glad you said Mr. (laughter), 'cause I almost, almost felt like I need to.  He's kind of--consider him now my other father.  When I was in public speaking, and of course won the contest, you had to go to different areas to compete, to the state and of course to national, etc., etc., and so on.  And of course, the, the first level was at school and then at Fort Valley State College [now Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And I think the state was down in Savannah State College [now Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], which was taken by Bob Church and--but in summer times a 4-H club camp.  We would always go to 4-H club camp with Bob Church, and that was a wonderful experience because I only two camps I ever were--was able to go.  It was boy scout, and Byron, and of course, 4-H club camp.  And for some reasons--because your parents didn't trust you with anybody (laughter), and many of the camps, you know, was kind of like cost-prohibitive.  But every summer we went to Dublin, Georgia, to 4-H club camp.  And we did some other kinds of things, you know, in, in Peach County [Georgia], you know.  You will probably get into it when you hear about the Ham and Egg Show, which was a fine arts show, you know, where you kind of judge hogs, and cows, and hams, how well your produce is at the end of the year.  Bob was very much a part of that as the county agent.  So he was very much involved in my fine arts comp--competitions.  And that's how I met him, and of course, you know, over the years I've always maintained, you know, a close relationship with Bob.  In fact, I just saw him recently.  He and I have many occasions to travel together even today.  In fact, our last occasion we were in Las Vegas [Nevada], here (unclear) in October together.
Speaker 1: So what type of influence can you say that he had on you specifically?
Speaker 2: Very positive, a father figure.  He was the one who--one of the people who always said Henry, you can do this, and you, you gotta do that.  You are smart or, or be aware of the way some of the other boys are doing.  You should do that.  And he was a kind of person that you want to please (laughter).  So I always followed his directions because they always were good and timely.
Story_ID: 52447
Speaker 1: Now this is something that I heard you--the second time you've mentioned it, that your grandparents and Mr. Church [Robert Church], that desire not to disappoint.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think parents or father-mother figures instill that in you.  I don't think that's anything that come from the person.  And I wish I knew the answer to how you do that, because I would kind of write a book on that myself.  But, by and large, children who do well are children who like to please their parents and those who, you know, look to them for, you know, accomplishment.  And a part of that, of course, is yourself.  Eventually, you know, it kind of comes back to you, but it starts out I believe, you know, pleasing mom, pleasing dad, pleasing auntie, grandma, granddad, and of course in this case, Bob Church.  They had a, a way of letting you know that you did something real good.  And they had a way of praising you publicly, not necessarily in the big crowd, but in front of the other boys in my case--did you see Henry lay up on that stage.  Now that's the way it should be done, you know.  And then of course, you know, my chest goes out (laughter), and it makes you wanna do it again, and again, and again, and again.  It makes you try harder.  You are less prone to make errors and disappoint.
Speaker 1: So was there ever a time where you did disappoint and there was a--
Speaker 2: I'm sure there were (laughter) in small ways, probably saying something in front of an adult that I shouldn't have said or something small like that or--there was not a lot of bad things that kids did back then in my group.  I guess the worst thing that probably anybody in the group ever did was maybe on a weekend a bottle of wine appeared from somewhere, and probably out of my grandfather's barn (laughter).  And that was considered bad, and of course we were chastised for it.  But beyond that, it was unheard of to steal in my, in my family; I mean that was major.  In my family telling a lie was major.  I know, I learned the hard way, and I guess that's why, why (laughter)--how I learned this.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my cousin and I were playing in, in one of my father's pecan trees, and I was trying to show him how Tarzan does it.  And I swung from one of the limbs and broke the limb and of course told my cousin do not tell anybody we broke this limb.  So my grandfather came in.  He's really very macho, so he ask my--asked, asked us what happen to the limb?  I don't know.  Y'all broke, broke the limb?  No, sir.  Then he divided and conquered (laughter).  He got my cousin by himself.  And his name was Dan--Dan--of course by this time he has a small switch (laughter).  Who broke the limb?  He said Henry Lee.  And of course my grandfather came to me.  Henry Lee, you broke the limb?  I said yes, sir.  I got a whipping.  And it was more spanking than anything.  And--but the, the worst part was the lecture, you know.  The limb I can take care of, because we're gonna prune the trees anyway, but lying we will not tolerate.  I will never forget that in all of my life that one incident.  And he took advantage of other situations to demonstrate why you should not lie and also why you should pay close attention to what adults told you to do.
Story_ID: 52448
Speaker 1: And now the alienation in high school.  You said while you're in high school you really didn't feel as a part of the school atmosphere as maybe others did who were in that area.
Speaker 2: Well, I was com--a commuter, so to speak.  But my entree was not a popular entree.  My entree to high school was the winner of the fine arts contest for the entire county.  And it stood up with the highest grade point in the entire county living out in the country.  Now mind you the city kids was supposed to have been quite smarter.  Didn't particular care about that.  And it might be safe to say there was some egotism on my part (laughter).  So my entree at the high school was not a popular one.  And, and there were times when I was not able to participate in certain activities because I couldn't afford to get the uniform, or couldn't be after school, or whatever.  So I--the, the social life after school was, was unheard because I usually had to go back to Byron [Georgia] or I had to go to the house to do something.
Speaker 1: During that time did you develop any close relationships with any peers at the high school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, my class--our class were, were close to some extent, about as close you can get giving the, you know, two scenarios that I just gave you.  There were seven boys in my class, and we were kind of close, you know.  The rest were girls out of a class of about twenty-nine.  There were two grades, and the other grade, eighth grade, there was just the opposite, twenty-something boys and about seven girls.  Now how that happened, we'll never know, but my guess that is that they, they tried to do some of the (unclear) tracking back then, you know, and some degree of grouping.  And the principal's daughter was in my class, and the young lady that Ken Crooks [Kenneth Crooks, HM] I'm pretty sure alluded to, was in my class that I wanted to kill him for (laughter).
Speaker 1: This young lady's name?
Speaker 2: Eloise Bywaters (ph.).  But, we were close to some extent.  I think our relationship got more intimate toward the end.  Probably a distasteful memory was the fact that I didn't apply myself academically like I should.  I could have easily finished number one or two in the class.  Mind you, the person who finished number one and two were very smart, George Lester and Sylvia Bryant, the principal's daughter.  Not only did I not finish in the top of the class, I was not even mentioned, which is why I was prone to leave to go to, to go somewhere else's college.  After I took an assessment, I said no, something was wrong with this picture, and I went away to college rather than Fort Valley State [College, now Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].
Speaker 1: So what was the--what were the reasons that you didn't--weren't as successful in high school as you believe you should have been?
Speaker 2: I didn't have the prodding.  I was a little kid on my own.  There was no prodding.  I couldn't look for too much academic help at home with the grandparents.  My grandfather finished, what, third grade, and my grandmother probably, probably the same thing.  So academically I didn't have no push, none.  All of my motivation came from within, by and large.  I didn't do badly, but I could have done so much more academically.  And that was born at graduation when I didn't hear my name, and, and it was no surprise to me.  I--my name should not have been read.  But it said to me that I didn't do good, do a good job in high school by the fact I didn't finish in the top ten.  That changed in college I think.
Story_ID: 52449
Speaker 1: So now we are at Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama], and you changed your major from mechanical engineering to electrical engineering, and others followed suit.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what type of leadership was going on here at Tuskegee for you?
Speaker 2: Well, we were--we lived in the same back--what we called barracks.  It was not a brick dormitory.  It was an army barracks.  There were several of them on campus.  Our side of the campus was about three or four.  We lived in the first barrack, and of course, you know, we were close.  And I guess that was some pairing (unclear) because most of them were engineering students in that barrack.  About three or four of us was from Georgia, Carl Glover from Macon [Georgia], Phillip Harris from Macon, myself, who was born in Macon but finished high school in Fort Valley [Georgia].  So we were all kind of changing at the same time.  And then, lo and behold, I decided I'm gonna change to science.  And guess what?  All of them changed too (laughter).  I changed to biology and so did they.  But I imagine there was a lot of dialogue between us, you know.
Speaker 1: So what was the impetus for that change?
Speaker 2: Med school, focusing more on science.  I didn't have a clue what I really--what my talents were when I went off, went off to college.  I, I liked, you know, math.  I liked science, but I could have liked more science, but, but you know, courses were limited in high school.  I can distinctly remember if you took senior math, you could not take physics or chemistry; you had to choose one of them.  And yet when I got to college my contemporaries had taken all of them.  So when I got to college I was still searching academically, you know, where I, where I was, you know, as compared to my peers.  But the impetus probably came from me working at the School of Veterinary Medicine and, and, and, and, and admiring the doctors graduating--Dr. John Doe, School of Veterinary Medicine.  I, I, I really liked that.  And as me and my group talked about it, we talked about we need to go to med school.  And of course to go to med school you either change to, basically, biology or chemistry, and our choice was biology.
Speaker 1: How challenging was it?
Speaker 2: Very, but it was fun.  It was fun because we were competitive.  We made it fun.  We studied a lot together.  The instructors were very strict at Tuskegee.  The easiest thing to do at Tuskegee was to go home.  It didn't take much.  If you didn't prove yourself academically, you would not be at Tuskegee at all, and you didn't last but one semester.  I guess the word is flunk out, but no, they say you washed out (laughter).  So biology was challenging, but it was fun because, you know, we kind of, you know, was intimately into it.  And it's easier, you know, when you like something as to when you think, you know, you really dread doing it and also when you gotta goal you're working towards.  So once we decided that we're gonna go into science with a, with a possibility mind you, not going to med school, but the possibility of going to med school, because that was kind of wishful thinking.  The big goal was to finish college.  I mean I was the first to finish college for my community, very first from Byron [Georgia].  So now we establishing new goals as we go.
Story_ID: 52450
Speaker 1: So what was the social life in Tuskegee, Alabama, at this time for you while you're in college?
Speaker 2: For me?  I was a focused student basically because I was trying to bounce back from my disappointment in high school academically, and I decided that when I got to college I would buckle down and be serious.  So there was no social life for me my first year, none.  I allowed myself to do nothing.  After I got my grades and saw that my grades were looking okay the first semester, I didn't even go home the first--Christmas the first semester.  I stayed, stayed on campus and studied, myself and about four other students, one from India, probably three from Africa who couldn't go home because of distance and timeframe.  It was devastating on campus alone.  When we sat at that one table in the cafeteria with the one spotlight looked like "Dragnet" (laughter) and ate and studied together, gave me a chance to really do some hard studying that I needed anyway.  And maybe toward the end of my freshman year I started doing social things like going to a game.  Other than that there was no social because social took money.  There was absolutely zero dollars.  Even though I was working, you'd got no money for working.  You got what we call a voucher, and with that voucher you can purchase limited things like books, pay tuition, room and board only.
Story_ID: 52451
Speaker 1: Now at this time in Alabama, the Civil Rights Movement was really starting to pick up, the bus boycott--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: it's pre--it before then.  I'm right on the tail end of the Phenix City Story [1955].  And the gerrymandering of Tuskegee [Alabama].  What Tuskegee--
Speaker 1: What is the Phenix City Story?
Speaker 2: The Phenix City Story happened about in 1955 to '57 [1957] when gambling was rampant, prostitution, which is right across the river, was rampant, and of course something happened to the attorney general's--attorney general, wind up dead.  And the state militia was sent in to kind of, you know, police the city.  And I'm pretty sure--I don't know the intimate history, but people went to jail, and they cleaned the city up, so to speak.  And at the same time over at Tuskegee they were having problems with voting.  They had redistrict the area so that most of the blacks were out of the voting districts.  So there was a lot of bar--boycotting in Tuskegee, and it literally closed downtown down, because they stopped shopping there and start, you know, building and establishing their own businesses, you know, post office, clothing stores, grocery stores.  So by the time I got at Tuskegee, this was in effect.  The shopping we did was just beyond the campus where the stores were that blacks had built.  Rarely did we go downtown; only time we went downtown was to catch the Trailway Bus to go home.  So my impression at the time was that this was a city where actually blacks controlled, because my city really was the campus and, and just a few blocks beyond, which is about as far as we ventured.  Tuskegee's downtown was not that large at the time anyway.  But students didn't frequent downtown because of the previous boycott when we got there.
Speaker 1: Did you have any personal experiences with the Jim Crow, like personal experiences you'd like to share with Jim Crow South out here in Tuskegee when you're (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, probably the only thing that I can remember that happened to me personally--well, two occasions.  On one occasion I decided I wanted to go home.  I got kind of depressed.  I'm gonna go on the highway and thumb a ride home to Byron, Georgia, no money in my pocket, just leaving going home.  So I was picked up by the white gentleman.  And we stopped at a coffee shop, sandwich shop, and they didn't want me in there.  And I could distinctly remember him--he must have said some harsh words to them about I will come in.  But I think what eventually happened, he went in and got a sandwich for me, and we sat in the car and ate it.  And I rode on to Macon [Georgia] with him.  Other than that I can distinctly remember going home on one occasion, stopping at the Trailway Bus station here in Columbus, Georgia, with about I guess an hour, hour and half layover and decided to walk down the streets near the bus station.  And a policeman approached me and asked me why was I on the street walking.  And I told him who I was and that I was on the bus waiting for my bus, you know, my connection.  He told me to wait down at the bus station.  And that was kind of distasteful, you know, to the extent that I said I probably will never live in Columbus (laughter), but here I am.
Story_ID: 52452
Speaker 1: Now you're on the verge of graduating Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama] your senior year.  What do you--what are your thoughts--thinking about what you're gonna do, where are you gonna go, what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, the focus at all had changed tremendously by then.  By the, by--near, nearing graduation I'd gotten in ROTC, had fallen in love with the military stemming back from when all of my uncles went off to World War II in the '40s [1940s].  In fact, each uncle went to a different branch.  One went to the Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], one went to the [U.S.] Army, one went to, you know, the [U.S.] Navy.  In fact, it was my brother who went to the [U.S] Air Force.  So, you know, it was in my blood, but it just never surfaced.  But when I got at Tuskegee and saw the pretty uniforms, oh, this was a chance to have a, a, a pair of pants without, without having a hole in it, a pair of shoes that (unclear) sole wasn't flapping (laughter).  The military was it.  And not only that, they paid you a check, you know, at--in your junior and senior year, thirty dollars a month; of course they paid you quarterly.  I mean that was a, a, a, a goldmine.  So this was something I learned to love, and I was on a track for a commission in the Air Force, which I receive at graduation.  So my desire for med school was kind of like still on the burner, but kind of like side, sidetracked.  Hopefully my, my illusions of grandeur was maybe I could go to Air Force Institute of Technology [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio], you know, and they will see fit to see me to med school.  But that was not gonna happen, not for a black person, not by a long shot.  My desire, by the time I grad--graduated, was to make a career in the Air Force.  And when I got commissioned that was my intention.  But then that's another story too.
Story_ID: 52453
Speaker 1: Your friends--your two friends from Georgia, what did they do (unclear)--were they?
Speaker 2: One was commissioned in the [U.S.] Army; other one, when he graduated, he moved to Detroit [Alabama].  In fact, I've see neither one since, neither one.  You know, I've heard him--you know, our paths have crossed, but we never actually seen each other visibly, you know, since then.  So two of us actually went into military.  He [Carl Glover] went in the Army, and I went in the [U.S] Air Force, and Phillip Harris did neither.  Phillip got married immediately, and of course settled down I think in the Detroit area--Birmingham [Alabama] or Detroit, one of the other.
Speaker 1: So your military career.
Speaker 2: Went in the military, stationed in Denver, Colorado--lar--Colorado, Lowery Air Force Base for eight weeks training and went to France, stationed in Laon, L-A-O-N Air Force Base, which is about, ooh, seventy miles out of Paris [France], very difficult assignment, having to go into Paris, you know, frequently, you know.  But you know, some of us must suffer, you know (laughter).  And I--for three years that's where I spent my entire military duty, in France; enjoyed my job.  I was a munitions officer, which involves storing munitions, training personnel with using weapons, loading aircraft with live ammunition as in Kosovo, in Afghanistan.  That was my job; retrieving duds that did not explode, that was my job.  After I realized what my job was, something's wrong with this picture too (laughter).  So--and notwithstanding the fact that Vietnam [War] has started, and the return rate was less than 60 percent.  In fact, I believe the fatality rate was almost like 70 percent going to Vietnam back then.  It was in my best interest to probably do something other than going to Vietnam, which means I had to get out of the military.  If I'd stayed in I would have--almost invariably had, had to go to Vietnam.  And with my specialty, specialty, I would have been frontline, surely a casualty--different frequency of contact.  So I got out of the military and went to Meharry Med School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  It was a combination of those reasons.
Story_ID: 52454
Speaker 1: I'm gonna backtrack for one moment.  While you were in college, you're grandfather [John Jackson]--grandmother [Dora Jackson] passed?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Both passed.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather passed while I was in college.  My grandmother passed right after graduation.
Speaker 1: And how, how did you deal with that?  How did you--
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of difficult to un--to explain that, because see, their, their life was for me to go to college.  And when I'd gotten to college, and after two years, you know, the goal was ful--fulfilled.  The word went out that Henry Lee is doing well in college, you know, and so really their goal was fulfilled then.  It's my grandmother, however, who said I will be here until you finish college.  I finished in June; she died in June.  She was sick toward the end, you know, with the cancer--as a cancer patient.  My grandfather, however, died suddenly, you know, heart attack, almost instantly dead.
Speaker 1: What do you think the reason for, for his heart attack.
Speaker 2: Heart ailment without treatment, probably without diagnosis.  There was no medical treatment.  All their remedies were homespun hand down from generations ago.  And whether there were Indian concoctions or just Southern concoctions--for instance you cut your foot, you put a piece of meat and a, and a coin and tied it up with a, with a dirtiest--any rag, dirty rag, and that was treatment.  There was not--no going to the doctor for most things.  The one physician that was in Byron [Georgia] probably was overwhelmed.  And the black patients really had to wait, you know, to see him.  Incidentally, that physician is what inspired me quite a bit.  He reinforced the idea of my going to med school in fact.  His name was Dr. Kay.  But it was just one physician taking care of everybody with everything, which is the old family doctor.  But the day my grandfather died we were moving to another house and--which was only a few blocks away, and he decided to walk over there.  He made it over there and that was it, and he sat in the chair and kept going down.  And so he died in my arms.  But now in--you know, in retrospect, he was basically dead when he sat in the chair, because there was no response from him, you know, even though we took him to the doctor and eventually to the hospital.  But he was, he was dead already.
Speaker 1: Now, who dia--your grandmother was diagnosed with cancer.  At what point--was she going to get medical treatment or?
Speaker 2: I would think so, but, but I was away in college by this, by this time.  So I was seeing her like only on occasions that I would come home, which was very infrequently.  I was aware that she was sick.  And I saw her mostly in summer times.  But that was a traumatic experience, you know, watching her sick.  But she held on till I graduated, and--
Speaker 1: Did she make it to the ceremony?  Did she--
Speaker 2: No, she was too sick to do that.
Story_ID: 52455
Speaker 1: So you enter Meharry Medical School [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why did you choose Meharry?
Speaker 2: Well, I wrote to about four or five schools.  My intentions were whosoever call, let him come (laughter), meaning me.  I think I wrote to, to Tufts [University, Medford, Massachusetts], Meharry, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.], George Washington [Washington, D.C.].  I got no replies from any of the school except for Howard and Meharry.  And Meharry was the first one to say, you know, we have an opening for you.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you didn't hear from the other ones?  Any speculation on--
Speaker 2: Probably academic competition or--at the time not that many blacks were accepted per class in those insti--other institutions, white institutions.  I imagine that they got--had one slot.  I guess there were about, what, 200 blacks applying for it.  Probably, if I wanted to wait and (unclear)--I probably could have gotten in one of those other schools.  But once Meharry said you know, we're interested, I didn't pursue any further.
Story_ID: 52456
Speaker 1: Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] accepts you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you show up in Tennessee.  Continue.
Speaker 2: Well, by now of course I got married, you know, in the interim--married two years before I went to Meharry to the girl [Mamie Cook nee Richmond] I met at Tuskegee [Institute, Tuskegee, Alabama]; went off to Meharry, it was a wonderful experience, very trying, and very hard, and very difficult, again.  Because Meharry, like Tuskegee, they really believed that when they are finished with a product, it will compete with anybody anywhere, and I think they did a good job with that.  First year was difficult because I'd been in the [U.S] Air Force three years and away from academics, as opposed to some of the kids coming straight from college fresh.  So I had to do a quick learning curve.  So of the stuff that I had not had, you know, that they had had in the interim, like biochemistry.  I didn't even know what that was, you know, or some of the other chemistry classes, or, or some of the other biological classes like bacteriology, microbiology rather.  Some of them come having had that already, which kind of sets the pace fast.  So the first thing that instructor does in med school is find out where the class is--say do you know this?  Everybody raised their except me.  (Unclear)--Everybody still raised their hand (unclear)--(unclear) (laughter), and you say, hey.  But you're on your own, so I lived in the library at Meharry, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee] catching up with my classmates my freshman year studying overtime, double time, all the time, nonstop.  And my freshman year that's pretty much what I did.  And it was awesome because I really kind of finished last in my class my freshman year, very last, zap.  The guy who did worst than I did didn't come back.  They [sound effect], that's where the hatchet hit.  Aah, I'd made a reassessment and--but you know, I had already start to catch up--project catch up anyway.  So my sophomore year I kind of soared.  But it was kind of like, you know, loved diminishing returns.  You know, it all started accumulating.  And the guys who sought to do a little partying their freshman year, you know, I'd caught and passed them and didn't know it.  But I found out my sophomore year that I'd just zoomed past everybody [sound effect], went from number twenty-six to not--like number five, and I stayed there until graduation, because some of the guys I couldn't catch.  They had too much of a head start the freshman year (laughter).
Story_ID: 52457
Speaker 1: How dentistry, how did you choose that--that premier choice?
Speaker 2: Probably an aptitude test that they give you, a dental aptitude test.  I did well on the dental aptitude test, which indicated I had, you know, good dexterity with my hands.  I'd always had a good artistic ability, so it was a good match, you know.  And not only that, I could kind of short circuit the system of med school.  Med school is four years, then four years of specialty, then four years of experience, 12 years before you're really, really ready.  Dental school in four years, you really--if you got the nerve you can go.  But, of course, I still opted to do eight years internship and--as opposed to the thrust nowadays, it's finish four years of dentistry and, and you're almost invariably gonna specialize in something, you know, because of the thrust for specialization nowadays, as opposed to when I was finishing.
Speaker 1: How at this point in time you're about to come out of Meharry.  What is the--in your experience, blacks in medicine?  Who are you coming in contact with?  Are you seeing a lot of blacks in medicine, dentistry or otherwise in medical (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It just so happened that there's an organization referred to as the National Dental Association, which is all black dentist, and the National Medical Association, all black physicians.  And there's an annual meeting every year.  There's a Georgia component called the Georgia Dental Association--Georgia Dental Society, which is black.  So I, I, I had a chance to meet early on all of the black practitioners, day one, when I get out in the field by way of the, you know, annual meeting and the mid-winter meeting.  So every year I went to their national meeting, every year.  And on many occasions the physicians, the dentist, the attorneys, the nurses met at the same time, same city.  We referred to it as the World Congress.  The first time we did it was in Dallas, Texas.  The second time we did it probably was in New Orleans [Louisiana].  We tried to pull it off in Chicago [Illinois], but something happened with one of the groups.  We our separate ways, and etc., but it, it gave an opportunity to meet most of who's who, you know, across the country.  Oftentimes when asked, do you know Dr. Jones?  Where's he from?  From (unclear)--no, I don't know him.  And the reason I don't know him because he doesn't go anywhere (laughter).  But the guys who are really involved in the profession wind up knowing almost all of them, just because of the frequency of contact annually.
Speaker 1: So does that speak to the, the numbers aren't very large or--
Speaker 2: Numbers are large.  For instance, at our national, national dental meeting, you're talking about at least probably 200 guys meeting--a lot more than that, but I mean meeting on a given--in a given year, medicine, probably more.  At our state meetings you're probably talking about between 50 and 100 guys meeting, you know.  And, and, and, and that gets to be very, you know, good, because you get a chance to kind of, you know, meet the guys, find out who's doing what, and you get a chance to kind of measure your skills too in terms of what you're doing, are you doing well, or are you not doing well.  You think you're doing fine till, till Sam come up and say wait, are you doing this?  And you say, hey.  So you know, it's a good interchange, you know, and I guess that's the intent.
Story_ID: 52458
Speaker 1: So how does the practice bring you back to Columbus, Georgia?
Speaker 2: I was--had graduated, doing my internship with a desire to move to Atlanta [Georgia], which was my lifelong goal, just live in Atlanta, the big city, bright lights.  You know everything happens in Atlanta.  The girls are prettier in Atlanta they told me (laughter).  Went to Atlanta to make an assessment to find out, you know, my--if the, the building that I was gonna lease would kind of blew me out in terms of what it would cost me.  I made an assessment of my equipment that I needed.  It just blew my mind again.  I needed a house.  The smallest house possible was a hundred--I mean we're talking about just a four box--four-room box--broke, no money.  I said let me think about this.  At the same time, there was a dentist in Columbus who passed.  His name was Dr. Clifton Williams.  And it just so happened that his wife was living with my adopted mom [Elizabeth Richmond] in Fort Valley [Georgia] working on her master's degree at Fort Valley State College.  They called me and apprised me of the fact that Dr. Williams had passed and asked me would I be interested in seeing the practice before they mentioned it to anybody else.  I wasn't excited about that, because I wanted to go to Atlanta.  But my mom and my, my wife [Mamie Cook nee Richmond] said I think you ought to go down and take a look at it, which I did.  And I came down here at a, a heapings of records--patient records, which was the biggest thing in a practice.  He was well liked, had good people skill.  He was in a building that had a history of healthcare.  And on the corner of--"healthcare corner" we called it (laughter), which is not far from here, by the way; it's just a few blocks from here.  After giving a lot of thought and then after reflecting on what it would cost me to get started in Atlanta, in a city would--that would take me years to even be known because of the numbers alone, I decided Columbus is not a bad idea.  And I can always move to Atlanta if I want to.  That was thirty-two years ago.  And the, the fun of that is many times I called a colleague in Atlanta and said let's have a cocktail together at the bar in Atlanta.  He said where are you, Henry?  I said in ca--I'm in Columbus.  He said well, well, when you get to Atlanta, call--I said no, no, you start now, and I'll start now.  And I would always beat him to the bar, because the traffic's so bad in Atlanta.  That was my private joke with him.  And they never believed--you were not in Columbus.  Yes, I was--hour 20 minutes I'm in Atlanta; hour and a half they were stuck in traffic (laughter).
Story_ID: 52459
Speaker 1: So what did you go about to make the practice even grow more from the one you inherited?  What--
Speaker 2: The first thing I did I assumed a--upstairs over a drugstore that was something like five or six rooms.  There were three separate businesses up there, believe it or not.  At one time a physician was upstairs, a, a CPA bookkeeper was upstairs, and a dentist was upstairs.  And that was nothing, not enough space for me.  I couldn't do anything with, with two-room dental practice.  So I got the entire upstairs renovated, made it look, you know, appealing for what I thought, and I started there; did my own marketing.  There was no, no mass media, just got out and just met folk; went to the churches.  After work I would just go in the neighborhood and just meet people.  And I just liked doing that anyway.  That was just natural for me.  That was a natural--and over a short period of time, I guess half of Columbus [Georgia] knew I was in town.  The, the--a, a little boy is here (laughter).  And of course the best one they said: "He's little and young, but he's good."  And that one I could relate to.  So it started there.  And I always had business cards wherever I went.  I thought about it like this, I can buy a thousand business cards for ten dollars.  And if one patient come in I've paid for that and the next six orders, so I gave business cards everywhere.
Speaker 1: So how did the black community receive you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Quite well, quite well.  I think they were impressed the way I came and took the entire upstairs and just renovated the entire thing, (unclear) in business, which has never happened before.  And the word come out--he had the whole upstairs, which it was not really much.  But given, you know, the history of three and sometimes four businesses, one in each room, you know, up there prior to that, I guess that kind of like got people attention.
Speaker 1: And the white community?
Speaker 2: Didn't make any impact on them at the time.  But what I did, I went out to meet all of that, white guys, went to meet all of 'em.  On my--on Thursday was my day off.  I was in, in the dental office every Thursday, sometimes three and four.  And it was, it was--I had motives, find out how do you do this, or what do you use for that, which piece of equipment is good, which is bad, you know.  And I gleaned a whole lot of information from my colleagues, particularly the white ones who were buying new stuff.  And, and my intentions after I was here for a short period was to build a building in five years.  Nobody knew that but me and my, my family, but everything I did as of, I guess, a few months after I was--I, I--after I was here was to get around that.  So I started gathering information on the how-to's, and what cost this, and what waste--don't waste your money on that.  And I got good response, basically because I like people.  And by and large, I think don't have a problem getting along with people at all, because I don't wait for them, you know, to come to me.  I just get up and go.
Speaker 1: And your building?
Speaker 2: Five years I, I went into the new building, almost to the day.  Built a building out on--it was Brookhaven [Georgia] at the time.  We got the name changed to Martin Luther King Boulevard right in front of the WMCA, which is a black branch, very well located, very well traveled street; pulled some strings got a bus stop right outside the door (laughter).
Story_ID: 52460
Speaker 1: Now I do wanna talk some more about blacks in medicine and the philosophy of that.  Do you think that we all know law school is challenging and medical school maybe even more challenging.  Do you think that's an intimidating factor to many young African Americans who would aspire to be that?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's always have been intimidating.  Because we put medicine, dentistry included, on a high pedestal, and law.  And, and you're talking about reaching for stars; they are the higher stars.  That includes nursing.  We speak highly of them, and, and that kind of intimidate young minds who are trying to aspire to, to become.  And it really comes to fruition when you get into academia to find out what courses you have to take in order to go into those majors.  Like in my case, you know, parasitology and, and, and, and gross anatomy, and--I mean that, that--those are killing courses.  And you really have to be focused when you're going in those particular majors, and that's particular true with nursing as well.  You gotta be, have--talking about serious focus.  It does not belittle any of the other, you know, majors by no means.  But you're talking about probably the top of the line, you know, medicine, dentistry, law, you know, so, yes.  But I think what happened many times is, particularly with black males, such a hard attempt is made to blend social with academic, which oftentimes does not work when you're on a track for med school or law school.  That means you would have, have to have some sacrifices and deny yourself a lot of times if you're on that--those tracks except for a few occasions.  There are some few minds I've seen that just breeze right through just like a cakewalk.  Because, you know, they're just so precocious.  But for, for most of us, it's a, it's a challenge, it's in fact is a tremendous challenge and a struggle.
Speaker 1: So what can be done at a younger age, maybe even at the high school level to prepare people for--young blacks--for the difficulties and the challenges that lay ahead if someone wanted to be a doctor?
Speaker 2: Probably that, that, that starts day one in your, in your academic career, like in kindergarten and elementary school, study habits, getting homework done, you know, doing homework, getting used to doing homework, getting used to having to do something every night academically.  That's missing in a lot of homes, and I'm talking about smart kids.  I oftentimes say some of the smartest guys would have--on, on the street with drugs, I mean bright minds.  Some--probably some of the brighter minds are there--but getting kids focused academically.  I didn't have a lot of that early on.  It just so happened I was fortunate to have people, you know, somewhat intermediate to kind of come into my life and kind of get me on track.  But even in high school, if you didn't have good study habits, you almost lost in college, because if you can't read, you know--if you can't read with comprehension, college is difficult.  Those courses they have in read--speed reading and all those kinds of things I think that would be--that would be jewels for anyone going to college because a large part of college is reading with comprehension.  All of your aptitude test your talking about reading with comprehension, and not just reading it, but knowing what you read when you finished.  And of course that escalates when you get to medical school.  You're talking about tons and tons and tons.  And it's not so much the difficulty, but it's the speed at which you got to do it and the bulk combined with something else.  If you were to take any medical course one by one, most people could do well with that.  But when they throw seven to ten courses at you at one time, now that's a challenge.
Speaker 1: So do you just think that itself is the intimidating factor or--because the science field in itself oftentimes intimidated blacks, but is the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The degree of difficulty and also the limitations on social life.
Speaker 1: Those two factors?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that can be awesome for, for a man.  For instance, young male and med school, dental school, law school, his social life is almost zero.  So what is his popularity (unclear) among the young ladies?  He doesn't have a car.  He doesn't have any money.  I mean he's out of the loop.  He's losing his girlfriend, because here comes another guy with a car, working down at the corner, corner grocery store with, with money in his pocket.  So the social life for the guy on the street is popular.  And that guy who is really struggling and focused it can be difficult, so it's hard to--that's a hard choice.
Story_ID: 52461
Speaker 1: What would you have--if you had a program that you could implement in the colleges and maybe even later stages of high school to improve black population as in the sciences and the med--in the medical world, what would you do?  What programs would you specifically implement?
Speaker 2: Probably the one that is done all over the country, the mentoring program.  And the mentoring is an all-encompassing program.  But what it does, it gets you to focus on academics like work-when-you-work and play-when-you-play type scenario.  Because despite what I say, it's not all about studying all the time.  You just gotta know when to, and you gotta know what your limitations are so you know how long to.  So, in the event that one person needs to read two hours, whereas another person needs to read eight hours, he needs to know that.  Now that comes probably through mentoring.  That's difficult to learn by yourself, because many times, by the time you learn that you've flunked out (laughter).  Either--or better yet, you didn't get accepted in the first place and don't know why.  You're mad with the world because, you know, Sam got in, but I didn't, you know, and he was my boy.  But I have not been reading like Sam.  That is why parents who make sure that their children are doing homework and doing some degree of reading instead of watching TV all the time, they're gonna make the best--better students, which is why you know my contemporaries from Japan and Africa who were extremely focused, they did so much better than most of us did.  I mean their, their reading skills were tremendous.  They would read a passage and they're through, and you're still stumbling on the first paragraph.  But they have--you know, it's an evolution for them.  It started many years ago before they even get to this country.  And it happened in many families across this country, you know, families who are just a, aware of what the career goals are like.  They make sure that their children--like in my case, you know, my kids had to read something every night--daddy, we don't have homework.  Well, you have my homework tonight, and tonight you will read.  If you'd like to at least see that TV program, then you gotta read something.  Okay, daddy.  But after you get them in that channel, it's not difficult anymore; they just learn to expect it.  They don't even reach for the dial or now the remote.
Story_ID: 52462
Speaker 1: Now your children, their names, and what they do for a living, and what institution they attended to--
Speaker 2: My oldest daughter is Cathy, Cathy L. Cook.  She's a dentist in the military.  And my youngest son--well, youngest--my only son (laughter) is Henry L. Cook, II, he's a practicing dentist with me, as we speak.  Both of them went to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  Both of them finished in 1998, class of 1998.  They had a nice little spread in "Jet," you know, about their graduation and accomplishment and the fact they went to their father's alma mater.
Speaker 1: Now were you able to instill the same fear of disappointment and not desiring to disappoint mentors and your grandparents in them in regards to their relationship with you?  They wanted to please dad and mom?
Speaker 2: I think to some, some, some extent I probably did.  I never pressured them into going into dentistry by no means, but I always gave them living examples of, of--you know, you can--if you choose to do this, this is the kind of results you'll get academically or, or financially.  And if you choose to do that, that's the results you should expect.  And if you choose to do something less than, you know, these higher skills, then be prepared to live on those lower salaries.  And that's the way I did it.  And I also carried them with all the national meetings, so my daughter could see females doing everything, and my son could see black dentists and physicians all over the country doing well.  And, and oftentimes many of them would tell them, you know--talking about me--your father's really something, you know; you're gonna be like him?  And they--you know, but I never pushed them.  But I guess I kind of carried them with me, every echelon.  When I went to Hawaii I took, took them with me.  When we had the convention in Los Angeles [California] on two different occasions, I, I flew everybody out, because I thought that was a part of their mentoring, and it worked.  They aspired to be one of those people that they, they, they're accustomed to seeing at the meetings.  And it just so happened that all of them were either physicians, dentists, or nurses, or attorneys, or what, etc.  So it worked for me.  And I, I guess I should cross my finger (laughter).
Story_ID: 52463
Speaker 1: Now I'm sure you're aware of this, 'cause my grandfather used to always tell me this when we wanted to take him to the hospital, unless it was really hurting or he was near death he didn't wanna go.  And many African Americans still have that fear of hospitals and doctors.  How do you deal with that?  How do you break through?  How do you think--what do you think the message is that can be imparted for them to get rid of that fear of hospitals and doctors?
Speaker 2: I think that's changing now basically because accessibility is changing.  Case in point, when I first came to Columbus [Georgia] thirty-two years ago there were actually two physicians but one really practicing.  The other ones were kind of like semi-retired too.  Now they are probably between thirty and fifty, so access is altogether--and they're all black.  When we were accustomed years gone by of going to all white doctors and many times having to go and sit at--go in either the back door, or sitting in a separate waiting room, or going on a particular day because we were black.  It discouraged a lot of people from, you know, seeking healthcare.  You had a tendency to kind of do all the home remedies.  There, there's more teaching by black physicians in our community.  There's more patients.  I, I can say that from just personal experience, more widespread concern, not to say that white physicians--because many of them are just dedicated, you know, to whomever the patients are.  But on a wide scale, you would probably find more African American, you know, healthcare providers more committed.  Good example, there's a program across country referred to as Medicaid.  It's for indigent patients.  And over the years it has taken a beating budget-wise, you know, and the reimbursement rates have been really very, very low (unclear) Medicaid patients.  And those providers who choose to see them make no money.  And you can really go bankrupt you see too many--if that's all you're seeing.  Many of the providers just dropped out of the program.  Almost no white providers were at one time, almost none, or at least a low number.  And the remaining numbers were invariably, you know, mostly African Americans, and that is in the white patients and the black patients--indigent. Probably had to do particular with me with Meharry training.  Meharry training--trained us to go into the community of need, you know, where you are needed.  So I found it very difficult to even consider not seeing indigent patients even though I was taking an academic beating.  We're probably a little more sensitive, sensitive, less in tune with making a million dollar practice.  And some of us are doing that as well (laughter), but--and that has to do with basically your training as well.  Meharry just did a fantastic job of preparing you.  If by chance you're in the backwoods of Georgia, Alabama, or Mississippi, be prepared to do this, and this, and this, and this, and this, and you're almost geared--so, but--so anything else is a plum.  Like what I inherited was a plum.  I wasn't expecting my practice to be vibrant at, at--as fast, but it took off like a rocket.  And, and I'm pleased for that.
Story_ID: 52464
Speaker 1: And, and--I mean you've already commented on it, but did your wife [Mamie Cook nee Richmond] work in your practice with you in helping build it?
Speaker 2: She, she was not an employee of the practice, no.  But at the point of building the practice we worked together along with my [adopted] mom [Elizabeth Richmond] really, gleaning the ideas from other folk on, on the design, decor.  She did a lot of the decor.  The layout I did obviously, you know, like what rooms I wanted to--the flooring rooms or--but much of the decor I was surprised to find out the detail.  I guess it's kind of like building a house (laughter), except for in a dental practice you're building the building in the in--inner structure, which is the equipment, the cabinets in the wall, you know.  So when you're really finished, it's kind of like building your house with the furniture inside.  Color coordinating all of that, sometimes it's a challenge for a male (laughter).  Sometimes we don't understand that you don't need red wallpaper and red carpet (laughter) with the red chair.  But my wife was a tremendous help as it relates to that and you know.  So we really subscribed to magazines, you know, like, you know, "Southern Living" and all the dental magazines.  And not only that, I did a lot of touring of dental offices.  And it was no secret when I went.  I was letting them know that I was gonna build an office.  I was looking for ideas.  And I was received warmly in most places; cold shoulders sometimes, but not often.  So after we gleaned all these ideas, and I had a, a stack of, of pictures and color coordinations I guess must have been six inches thick, we decided on (unclear) room by room to include carpet--from the carpet to the ceiling.  So when we, we actually built, we had all of--I knew everything that was gonna go in the building, I mean everything to the water fountain inside the building.
Story_ID: 52465
Speaker 1: Now also, Dr. Cook, has the change in, in medicine, you know, and how things are paid and policies as it relates to medical care, you know, government policies, has that affected the practice?
Speaker 2: Ask the question again now.
Speaker 1: Has, has the changes in sort of, you know, how medicine is, you know, handled and what it's paid--you know there have been a lot of changes since that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Has that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think you probably refer--ferring mostly to managed care.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Managed care has not hurt dentists as much as physicians by no means.  Ph--physicians was just tremendously hurt by managed care because all of a sudden they are not getting fee for service anymore, for instance.  You know, you're going for a physical that cost 250 dollars.  Managed care said we're only gonna pay you a 150 dollars, and you take it or leave it.  And then medicine said well, we're gonna, gonna leave it.  And well, you know all of your colleagues gonna take it.  So you ba--don't be out by yourself and be left out of this--the loop.  And people were frightened to death.  I went to a lot of meetings with physicians, and many of them succumbed to that.  They formed groups, etc., in fact clusters were the, the prevalent thing after managed care came.  You know, you have to be a part of some cluster, you know.  You weren't in any group or that group, you were just almost a satellite out there by yourself to starve, so they, so they thought.  Dentistry, a little bit different.  We've always been fee for service for the most part.  The only demise we've come up against probably has been indigent treatment with Medicaid.  And if you do it right that can be a plus, particularly on the (unclear) end.
Speaker 1: Now is your practice primarily black still?
Speaker 2: Primarily, yes.  I guess I see about 30 percent white patients.
Story_ID: 52466
Speaker 1: And just in terms of, of any of your thoughts about Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, as an institution and the importance of that institution.
Speaker 2: My biased opinion (laughter)?  Meharry is an awesome institution.  Me--between Meharry and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] I guess, what, 70 or 80 percent of healthcare providers, you know, in this country, that has changing slightly now because we have access to other institutions.  But even with that, it's only one or two in the class, or three or four in a class, or--I think that Howard, probably talking about sixty in a class.  And Meharry your talking about, about forty in a class, or the School of Medicine at Morehouse [School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] you're talking about a tremendous number in one class, which is quite different from applying to a white university.  And then you--and you know from the outset they're gonna accept three, or five on a good year.  So from the standpoint of, of filling the need for African-American providers, you can't replace a Meharry or Howard, and, and now Morehouse, by no means.
Story_ID: 52467
Speaker 1: Oh, Meharry is a jewel.  More than the fact that it helped, along with Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in terms of dentistry, produce more black dentists than, than the rest of the, the universities across the country combined.  The mentoring that you received from instructors--these are black and white instructors, by the way--that teach you that, you know, you are being trained to treat a sector of the pop--population possibly that need your services, and sometimes they may not have the funds.  When I was finishing, we were encouraged to go to underserved areas.  In fact, if you went to underserved areas, and by chance you had a, a, a loan, they would forgive the loan if you went to an underserved area.  So we were encouraged to go to underserved areas, even in, in, in the big cities, go to the underserved part of town, as opposed to Wall Street or Saks Fifth Avenue, you know, where everybody wants to be.  Everybody wants to practice uptown, you know, in, in the (unclear) and you know, and, and the mayor's wife and the governor.  But the farmer that comes to town on Saturday with very little money in his pocket and probably the greatest need, they're the one who need, you know, a physician and, and a dentist.  And I think Meharry does a fantastic job of kind of, of, of prepping you for that whether it happens or not.  Even out of, out of that kind of training you are ready for the big city even.  Because even in the big city there, there--access is a problem.  You would think that it's not, but it is.  Some of the, the most severe cases you find in the inner city where you just get lost.
Story_ID: 52468
Speaker 1: Sir, you said that your favorite phrase or saying is to whom much is given much is expected.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And how have you seen that actualized in your own life?
Speaker 2: Well, that has been almost a rule of thumb in my life, basically because I was the one who was almost chosen to get an education--high school.  I was the only one even able to go to college and then Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and the [U.S.] Air Force.  And so the payback for that is oftentimes in the family (unclear)--(unclear) Johnny needs some money for tuition and, and, and, and nobody steps to the plate, and I'm usually the only player at the plate.  When somebody needs transmission repaired, call Henry Lee.  And that's been my plight for my life.  And, and many in the family think I was probably being used, and sometimes I might have even said it, but it really was a--once you think about it, it's a joy that you're able to give something back to your family, particularly your family.  But that is extended beyond--far beyond my family, far beyond my family.  I guess I, I, I, I find joy just giving to most, most people.  And it is no secret that I'm a giver.  I have kids in college.  I have kids--I've got some kids it take 'em forever to get out of college, but I'm (laughter)--I still help 'em (laughter).  But I believe, you know, you never give up on 'em, never, never give up.  That was my fortune, and it was fortunate that I was able to even finish any of those levels back (unclear)--and the payback for that is I got to give back.  And, and it's not necessarily, you know, money.  You have to give back time, mentoring, talking to young boys, which I'm a part of.  You know, I'm a part of about two or three different mentoring programs in the city.  I mentor dentists.  That has been my plight in dentistry, mentoring dentists.  I guess I've mentored 30 to 50 percent of the dentists across Georgia that happen to be black in my age group and younger in some form or fashion.  Many will tell you here, yep, you can count on Henry Cook.  And sometimes it means going more often than anybody, staying longer, giving more, but that's a part of it.  And at some point in time, you know, when it's all said and done, you look back on it and say that's good.
Story_ID: 52469
Speaker 1: Is there anything your grandmother [Dora Jackson] said to you while she was alive that still sticks to you today in your mind?
Speaker 2: My grandmother?  I think what my grandmother did more than anything was to show me love.  I mean there was a true mother hen relationship and the small chick under her wing.  She protected me from most stuff.  I mean she, she had candid conversations on what I should not do, particularly when we were visibly seeing other boys doing it.  She was my chaperone, oftentimes to my embarrassment.  She's my disciplinarian in the midst of my social peers, and, and, and it was not abuse.  It was a teaching experience that was very effective.  I still loved her when she finished.  I guess it was effective (laughter).  But so, so if there's one thing I can remember my grandmother for it's probably the--just the, the love and affection that she showed me, and then she taught me how to do chores too (laughter).
Story_ID: 52470
Speaker 1: My last question is what would you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy--probably the same as Martin Luther's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], probably the same as Jesus.  I think every one of the miracles that Jesus did he told 'em just don't thank me.  Just go tell somebody so that the others will know that there's help out there.  And of course you know Martin Luther said if I could be a drum major for--he said peace and all that, but I'll say for, for indigents and needy children who may be living with their parents but don't have a real parent or a role model that they can aspire.  So I think if I were to choose one, it would be that I helped any and everybody often sometimes to the demise of my own wishes and aspirations.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 52471
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me being sworn in on the Georgia Board of Dental Examiners by Governor Roy Barnes.  This happened about, oh, January of 2001, a five-year term, which I'm presently serving.  And on the photo from left to right, my daughter, Dr. Cathy L. Cook, who is a military dentist.
Speaker 2: Is Cathy spelled with a C or a K?
Speaker 1: C--the governor himself, Governor Roy Barnes, from Georgia.  My granddaughter, Jasmine Cook, standing in front of the governor.  I am standing next to the governor, as well as my wife on the end, Mamie Carolyn Cook.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me across the street.  I can give you any date on that picture because I've done it a hundred times for different kinds of programs across the street, either MC'ing the program or program coordinator.  But my guess is that I'm at--entertaining one of the congresspersons in Columbus [Georgia] to speak for a black history program.  And I'm at the microphone probably either introducing him or some other member of the dais.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my wife.  This was a picture taken at Christmastime, oh, judging by the hairstyle (laughter), probably about five or ten years ago.  It was a formal affair, as you can see.  And it's at--(unclear) Christmastime picture.  And you're given the opportunity to take individual pictures at this affair.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So between 1990 and--
Speaker 1: I would say between '90--1995--'90 [1990] and '90--'90 [1990] and 2000.
Speaker 2: A slightly older picture.  This picture was taken and look like in Sandestin, Florida.  The Georgia Dental Society is possibly meeting on that occasion in Florida.  That looks like it's now near the dock where the fishing boats come in, which my wife that I really love, and those are my two younger children and standing in front of us, Cathy which seems to be about, oh, five or six if that much, and my young son, who seems to be about four.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me.  This is graduation from college.  Would have happened in like 1962, possibly '61 [1961], getting ready for the annual publication.  As you can see, they make it look ten times better than you actually look (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my senior year in college.  Prior to my being commissioned into the Air Force, I'm, I'm there in my ROTC uniform escorting Ms. Tuskegee and her court along with--on the far left that's Dr. Arthur King.  I forget the young lady's name next to him--Donald Matten (ph.), and the center person, a male that is, along with Ms. Tuskegee, Catherine Deampert (ph.), myself and--my mind draws a blank on the young lady I'm with.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me taken about five years go.  I needed to take some pictures for a publication across the state for the--probably for the governor.  And that's one of the pictures I took.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of a function, looks like it's in Minneapolis at a Grand Boule meeting, as in boule as a fraternity of professional men.  And that's Judge Thompson and his (unclear), Mrs. Thompson, and myself and Mrs. Cook.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at opening house at my new office.  The first young lady is my adopted mother, Elizabeth Richmond, sitting next to my wife, Mamie Cook.  And the couple sitting next to my wife are the Parkers, Eckert (ph.) and Mona Parker, from Albany, Georgia.  They came up for open house.  He's also a dentist.  And the young man in the far corner and with the big afro look like Henry Thomas.  He's a businessman here in Columbus [Georgia] now, and his wife owns a florist.  In fact, they did the floral arrangement all over the office I believe.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my wife, Mamie Cook, and my mother, Elizabeth Richmond.  Those are my partners in crime in, in decorating the office and laying it out, and color schemes, and those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: This is a young lady that worked for me.  Her name was Michelle Richards.  She's a dental assistant, excellent employee.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my niece when she was in the military.  Her name is Willa Barber (ph.).  She lived with me at one--
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my, my wife, and I call her mother, my wife's mother, kind of like my wife's adopted mother.  Her name is Hattie Angel, and that's her husband, Carl.
Speaker 2: This is a picture in the new office.  That's my daughter in the chair, Cathy Laverne, and my wife, Mamie, sitting in the assistant's chair.  At the time, I believe, we were taking a picture of the newspaper doing an article on the office.  And we're just taking snapshots here and there for them to choose one.
Speaker 1: What year is this, sir?
Speaker 2: This is about 1976, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in my office, at the dental office, taken about 1976, '77 [1977], that timeframe.  That's pretty much the way it looks today (laugher).
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the front of the dental office, which was built in 1976 brand new, a very proud moment.  As you can see, the--it gives you the idea of the Pizza Hut from the top, but the design is a little bit different.
Speaker 1: Now this is one of the pictures that we were taking snapshots for the newspaper, if you remember.  This is the article that came out in the newspaper.  The, the, the--most of the curves in the office are around in the hall area with the skylights and of course the water fountain, you know, at the end of the, the, the corridor.  And the caption read, "Attractive office makes patients say I can't wait to come back."  That's why I said earlier we have a lot of fun at the office.
