Story_ID: 187992
Speaker 1: --Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Mercer Cook, M-e-r-c-e-r, last name Cook, C-o-o-k.
Speaker 1: And no middle name?
Speaker 2: I have no middle name.  I can't afford it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. on May 31st, 1930.
Speaker 1: All right and, sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 16th of December, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my living room at 1700 East 56th Street, Apartment 807 [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 187993
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.  They only require a short answer and the first one is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Steak.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Certainly not Christmas.  (Laughter)  The summer where I can play golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: We go to Hilton Head [South Carolina] for two weeks every summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the final questions is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm, not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187994
Speaker 1: All right.  Well let me ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um hum.
Speaker 1: And I'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give me your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Vashti Maria Smith [Cook].  Smith was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Baltimore, Maryland on May 9th, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about that side of the family?  How far back can you trace them first of all?
Speaker 2: Well, I was -- I know her mother, I knew her mother.  Margaret Hubbard and her grandmother, my great grandmother, Agnes Mason.  They lived in Baltimore at 1402 Druid Hill Avenue.  And, I used to visit there in the summers.  I never knew my mother's father.  In fact, other than his last name of Smith, I don't, I don't recall his first name.  But he died in 1918 in the influenza epidemic [The 1918 Influenza Pandemic].  And my grandmother -- my mother's mother, Margaret Hubbard, married later in life.  She married a baseball player from the Negro leagues named Jess Hubbard.  And subsequently they separated.  I did get to meet him and he gave me a baseball bat and baseball and told me a few stories about, about his baseball, his professional baseball days, but other than that I don't, I know I didn't see him after he separated from my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any stories that they passed down about that side of the family?  About life in the 19th Century?
Speaker 2: Well, my great grandmother, Agnes Mason, would tell me stories about, I remember her telling me stories about her youth, how she, how her foot was almost cut off by her brother who was chopping wood and how they staunched the blood by using spider webs and I thought that was pretty amazing.  She died when I was thirteen, but she was a wonderful woman.  She taught me what unconditional love really is.  And my grandmother, Margaret Hubbard, before I came along, had a restaurant on Pennsylvania Avenue in Baltimore.  I think she knew everybody in Baltimore and she was very active in Republican politics.  I can recall on one occasion when we were at our beach home in, near Annapolis, Maryland, one morning she told me, she said, "Put on your clothes we going to see the governor," and I said, "Aw grandma we're not going to see the governor."  We did (laughter).  We went to the governor's office.  The secretary asked my grandmother for her name and she gave her name.  The secretary went into the governor's office and a few minutes later he came out and we talked.  And what my grandmother talked to him about, was about certain signs that were at a gas station in Annapolis which indicated that the restrooms were segregated.  White ladies and colored women and white gentlemen and colored men, and my grandmother told the governor that they, that should be changed.  This was in the early 1950s.  And he did get those signs taken down.
Speaker 1: Who was the governor then, do you remember?
Speaker 2: [Theodore] McKeldin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other stories about that side?
Speaker 2: Well, not that I can think of right now.
Speaker 1: So she had access to the governor of--
Speaker 2: --of Maryland.  As I said, she'd been active in Republican politics for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do they have any tradition of where they came from?  Were they always from that area?
Speaker 2: I really don't know where they came from.  I have no idea.  They didn't talk about it.  I don't know if they were from Virginia or further south, or from Maryland.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about the Civil War or slavery or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187995
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Will Mercer Cook.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 30th, 1903.
Speaker 1: Was he born in D.C. too?
Speaker 2: He was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As I was, as his father was.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now what do you know about that side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know a little more than--I know that my grandfather, Will Marion Cook, was born on Howard's, Howard University's [Washington, D.C.] campus.  His father [John Hartwell Cook] worked there, and --
Speaker 1: What was his father's name?
Speaker 2: I really don't know [sic, John Hartwell Cook].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But his father worked on Howard's campus?
Speaker 2: Right.  And I don't know if he was a professor or what he did [sic, dean of the Howard University School of Law].  My grandfather attended Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio].  He studied music and, incidentally, his, his father was a graduate of Oberlin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather studied music in Germany under a violinist named [Joseph] Joachim and he also studied under [Antonin] Dvořak.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather's name is?
Speaker 2: Will Marion Cook.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother, my father's mother, Abbie Mitchell, was born, I thought she was born in Baltimore [Maryland], but, in fact, she was born in New York [New York].  I found out from a document my father had written several years ago.  And she married my grandfather at an early age and she was a singer and an actress, and I was fortunate enough to see her in a couple of plays.  She died in 1960, and my grandfather died, I thought in 1945, but, in fact, he died in 1944.
Story_ID: 187996
Speaker 1: Now, Will Marion Cook is a, he's a legendary musician and he's a lot, you know, he was involved with Broadway shows--
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: --and wrote a lot of music that people still playing now, but can you, kind of--
Speaker 2: And he also, he was a member of ASCAP [America Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers] and I still get some royalties from some of his music, not a lot of money, but, you know, it helped put me through school.  (Pause) I have a, as I told you earlier, I have a paper that my dad [Will Mercer Cook] wrote in 1978, which I'll get a copy to you, which indicates the things that both his father and mother [Abbie Mitchell] did in the early 20th century.
Speaker 1: Right, they were both associated with Paul Laurence Dunbar, and other, Bert Williams and other black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, Williams and [George] Walker.  They had very interesting lives, and they travelled a lot. They went to Germany, England and played for the crown heads of Europe.
Speaker 1: So he really, he was classically trained--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he played popular music as well--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and knew some of the great literary figures and entertainers in the black world in those days, so, can you tell us a little bit ab- now he was your grandfather. Did you get a chance to spend much time with him?
Speaker 2: He would spend time with us, he would spend--my grandfather was a character.  He would come stay with us.  My first memories of his staying with us was when we lived in Atlanta [Georgia], and he would come stay with us and let his royalties accumulate and when he felt he had enough money he'd get in an argument with my dad, storm out of the house, although he had made reservations to travel by train to go to New York [New York].  He'd go to New York, spend two or three weeks and when the money ran out, he'd call my dad and my dad would send him money and he'd come back and stay with us until the royalties built up again.  And (laughter), one of the things that he promised me, he told me, he said, "When you get to be sixteen, I want to take you with me to New York and buy you a woman," and I thought that was a wonderful thing, you know.  Unfortunately, he died when I was fourteen.  Years later, when I told my dad what my grandfather had said, I called him grandpa dad, I guess because I had heard him, heard my father call him dad, so I called him grandpa dad.  I told my father what grandpa dad had told me and my father told me, he said, "Well he told me the same thing, and I turned sixteen and he never bought me that woman," so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But grandpa would stay with us.  When we were in Haiti, he came and spent time with us.  In fact, he got sick while he was in Haiti and spent some time in a Haitian hospital.  He came back to the states and he died shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I heard some place that he wrote popular music for radio shows and stuff.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I know that, you know, in that document I was telling you about, it mentions the fact that my grandmother sang for one of the radio shows, but--and they never indicated who was singing until the last show that was put on because they didn't want to antagonize any possible southern listeners, white listeners.
Story_ID: 187997
Speaker 1: What was she [Cook's grandmother, Abbie Mitchell] like too?  She was an accomplished singer, actress.
Speaker 2: She was a singer and an actress and she appeared in the original 'Porgy and Bess' and introduced 'Summertime'.  And she, she was also an actress, and I was fortunate enough to see her in a couple of plays.
Speaker 1: What were the plays do you think?
Speaker 2: The one, the one I remember is 'On Whitman Avenue', which played on Broadway for a while.  She was, she also taught voice and, she was an interesting lady.  She, you know, when things were going well when and she was acting in a show and I would visit her during the time I was going to college cause I'd usually stop in New York [New York] on my way to and from college.  If things were going well, we always had steak, which I guess is still my favorite food, and, we lived pretty high on the hog, but when things weren't well, we had different, something other than steak, for dinner.
Story_ID: 187998
Speaker 1: You told me when I came in, an interesting story about your grandfather [Will Marion Cook] and John Mercer Langston.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you repeat that story because that's a--
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was originally, instead of Will Marion Cook, it was Will Mercer Cook.  My grandfather indicated that he had gone to listen to John Mercer Langston make a speech and John Mercer Langston attributed his success in life to his white blood, and this made my grandfather very angry and, in fact, he was, I guess, enraged, and he changed his name to Will Marion Cook and got rid of the Mercer.  But my father was named Mercer [Will Mercer Cook], I'm named Mercer, I have a son named Mercer [Cook] and I have a grandson named Mercer, so, the name goes on.
Speaker 1: John Mercer Langston is a, some sort of a relative of Langston Hughes, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Yea, he is, I'm telling you, he is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I just want to, just to confuse things even more. (Laughter)  I don't know how it fits in, but I know you said you were.
Speaker 2: That's the story that I heard.
Speaker 1: But I know your father [Will Mercer Cook] knew Langston Hughes and so--
Speaker 2: My father, I think my father knew everybody.
Speaker 1: What--was your grandfather named in honor of John Mercer Langston, the Mercer part?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Because I know Langston Hughes was named Langston in honor of --
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: John Mercer Langston, so, okay.
Story_ID: 187999
Speaker 1: All right, now your father [Will Mercer Cook].  Here we get to that.
Speaker 2: Okay, my father was, as I indicated, was born in Washington [D.C.], went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School in Washington, and then to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and he got his master's and his Ph.D. and an honorary degree from Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].  He started out teaching at North Carolina A & T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Just before we get further, I just want to go back a little bit.  Now how with a, two performing parents, I mean did he, I mean did he have a real stable like childhood coming up --
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: --or did he stay with a grandparent?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I think he stayed with relatives.  I know when he was very young he traveled with my grandparents [Will Marion Cook and Abbie Mitchell] to Europe and to Germany.  I really don't know, you know, I know he went to one of the elementary schools in New York [New York], then, you know, how he came to move to Washington, I don't know, but he ended up going to Dunbar High School and graduated from there in I think 1921.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I just thought it would, you know, that traveling parents in entertainment, hardly produced scholars usually, and your father was a great scholar everybody acknowledges this and ambassador and scholar and, you know, everybody respected him in academia, you know so, it hardly ever happens that way where you on the road and you produce a scholar.
Speaker 2: Well, it happened to him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Interestingly, I guess times got hard while he was attending Amherst College and he had to drop out for a year.  And he had worked at Grand Central Station [New York, New York] as a Red Cap during the summers and he had to drop out of college before his senior year and he worked as a Red Cap for a year until he got enough money to go back to Amherst and he graduated in 1926, but his class, he always considered himself a graduate of 1925 'cause that was when he was supposed to have graduated if he hadn't dropped out for a year.
Story_ID: 188000
Speaker 1: Well tell us about his [Cook's father, Will Mercer Cook] life and his contributions.
Speaker 2: Well, he, as I said he taught at North Carolina A & T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  That was his first job.  In ninteen--I guess in 1929 he went to teach at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. He taught there until 1936.
Speaker 1: What did he teach?
Speaker 2: He taught French, romance languages.  French literature mostly.  In 1934, I guess he took a sabbatical and we went to Paris [France], me, my mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook] and my father, and spent a year there, came back to Howard where he stayed until 1936.  John Hope was president of Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and he asked my dad to come and teach there.  We went there in 1936 and I went to [Oglethorpe] Elementary School in Atlanta [Georgia].  I started in the first grade and skipped to the second grade after a couple of weeks in the first grade.  Went to elementary school through the seventh grade in Atlanta.  But, when I was 8 years old, seven or eight years old, we went back to Paris for a year, and it was shortly before the war, World War II [WWII], and we left sort of in a hurry.  My mother and I left sort of in a hurry.  Dad had gone back to the states ahead of us and, as I recall, we went--we left Europe going through Belgium rather than leaving from a French port.  Dad stayed at Atlanta University until 1941.  We then spent a year in Cuba, which I hated (chuckle).
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I went to a Catholic school in Havana [Cuba] and I think it was the same school that [Fidel] Castro attended, high school, and there really was a lot of, lot of racial prejudice.  I encountered a lot of racial prejudice at that school 'cause the school was attended by, I guess, the upper echelon of Cuban society.  And, I was very happy to get out of there.  And we left there in 1942, and, 1943 maybe.  And we must have left, gone there in 1942, left there in 1943, plus my dad and mother didn't have a lot of money.  Dad was on some kind of fellowship and the money was very, very short, and our living conditions were not very good.  We were living with an elderly podiatrist who was an American, who was a black American, but who had been living in Cuba, in Havana, for a number of years.  We left Cuba, went back to Baltimore [Maryland].  I don't know what was going at Atlanta University, but anyway I was enrolled in [Frederick] Douglass High School in Baltimore for about two weeks, and my dad got a job teaching English.  I guess [John D.] Rockefeller [Jr.] had an English teaching project in Haiti.  We spent two years in Haiti during the war [World War Two, WWII], 1943 to 1945, and I really enjoyed being in Haiti.  I had a great time there.  It was before Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] and I made some good friends --
Speaker 1: Who was there, was it Stenio Vincent.
Speaker 2: No, [Elie] Lescot was the president.  I really enjoyed it.  In 1945, we came back to the states and Dad went back to Howard and I went to Dunbar High School and graduated in 1947.  Still following in my father's footsteps, I went to Amherst  [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and got my B.A. degree in 1951.
Story_ID: 188001
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm not trying to, I don't want to get too far into your career yet.  I still want to talk about your father [Will Mercer Cook].
Speaker 2: Still talking about dad? Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Dad stayed at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] until 1958, I think, and then he went to Paris [France] where he headed a program called the American Society for African Culture [sic, the American Society of African Culture, AMSAC].  I mentioned to you before the interview started that my dad, I think my dad knew everybody, and it was absolutely amazing.  Charles [R.] Drew was Uncle Charlie to me.
Speaker 1: That's the great doctor, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Robert [C.] Weaver, who was I think the first Negro Cabinet Secretary, was Uncle Bob.  [William] Bill Hastie who had been governor of the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and probably was the first black appellate court, U.S. appellate court judge, was Uncle Bill.  Dad, dad, as I told you, we, he'd say, "Come on Mercer, we're going visiting."  I wouldn't ask him where we're going and we'd go visit, turns out we were visiting Langston Hughes.  We were visiting Luckey Roberts, who was a song writer and musician.  Dad knew Fats Waller intimately.  He was a good friend of Duke Ellington. Benny Carter was another one of his friends and I remember we visited with Benny when we were in Paris.  It's just unbelievable the number of people that he knew and that he knew intimately and who were really very good friends of his.  In fact, Charlie Drew came to visit us in Atlanta [Georgia], when we were living in Atlanta, and I think that's where my parents [Will Mercer Cook and Vashti Maria Smith Cook] introduced him to his, the lady who became his wife.  Okay, we were up to when, I think, when he went to Paris in, I think, 1958 with the American Society for African Culture. I think in the early '60s [1960s] or in 1960 he became ambassador to, dad became [U.S.] ambassador to [the Republic of] Niger, where I had an opportunity to visit with him in, I think, 1961 or 1962.  And, he then became ambassador [sic, special envoy] to Senegal [and Gambia] and he retired, well, he came back to the United States and he was an alternative delegate to the United Nations [U.N.] for the United States for a year or so, and he went back to teach at Howard and he retired from teaching there in 1970.
Speaker 1: And the one work that he's always associated with is the translation of Cheikh Anta Diop's works into what's now, a book that's now called, I can't think of it, I know it so well.  Can't think of the title of it.
Speaker 2: I think I got it back in the bookcase somewhere.  Incidentally, he and [Leopold Sedar] Senghor, who was --
Speaker 1: 'African Origins of Civilization, Myth or Reality'--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right, that it's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --by Cheikh Anta Diop.
Speaker 2: He and Senghor were schoolmates in Paris at the Sorbonne and dad, after he left Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], he got a fellowship in 1926 to go to Paris for a year and there he met Senghor who became, who was president of Senegal while dad was ambassador there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187724
Speaker 1: You said your visited your father [Will Mercer Cook] in Niger?
Speaker 2: In Niger.
Speaker 1: Niger.  Some people call it--?
Speaker 2: --In French, the French pronunciation is Niger, and I visited him, there was a program, World Peace Through Law, and I went with someone from Delaware who needed somebody who spoke French, so they, somebody gave them, I think [William] Bill Hastie gave them my name and I, we went to the Ivory Coast to talk to lawyers about this World Peace Through Law.  And on the way back to Paris [France], 'cause we went from New York [New York], well I went from Chicago [Illinois] to New York, where I met the people from Delaware, and we flew to Paris, then we flew to Niger where we stopped briefly.  I saw my parents [Will Mercer Cook and Vashti Maria Smith Cook], and then we flew to Abidjan on the Ivory Coast, and we spent several days there and then I flew back to Niamey, Niger and spent a few days with my parents and went to Paris where I spent two or three days, then I flew back to New York and then to Chicago.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you did that?
Speaker 2: I was thirty-two, thirty-one, thirty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--
Speaker 2: Probably thirty-two.
Story_ID: 187725
Speaker 1: Well, just to end up the discussion about your father [Will Mercer Cook], your father was a translator, teacher, ambassador--
Speaker 2: --teacher, a diplomat.  He was an author.  He was a hell of a speaker.  You know, he could talk, and certainly, he could certainly write, but he was, you know, I attended some of his classes at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and he was a dynamic teacher.  He was, put a lot into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about your mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook].  What was her personality like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a wonderful person.  She started out, she was my dad's, she was a student at Howard.  And that's where she met my father and apparently they fell in love and obviously, they fell in love and then my grandmother, my mother's mother [Margaret Hubbard], sent her to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], trying to kill this romance between mother and dad, but that didn't work, and then after a year, mother and dad got married.  And, not too many months later, I was born.  And, mother was--but she ended up finishing her college education, I think, at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] while dad was at Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She did work for a time in Washington [D.C.] as a truant officer, but most of her life she spent as a housewife.  My brother [HM Jacques Cook] as a, you know, I have one brother.  He was born almost sixteen years after I was.  And he's a lawyer and he lives in Washington [D.C.].  He work, right now, he's working in New York [New York], but he's commuting between Washington and New York.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Jacques [Cook]?
Speaker 2: That's Jacques, my brother, Jacques, and he has two children by his present wife and two children by his first wife.
Story_ID: 187726
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up, you know, as I've indicated, we moved a lot, and growing up was kind of hard on me.  We'd get settled in one place and I'd make friends and things were going well, then we'd move and I'd have to start all over again.  So it was a little difficult.  But, you know, I managed to meet a lot of people and make a lot of friends and I managed to keep a lot of them.  So, it wasn't all bad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a great time in Atlanta [Georgia].  Atlanta and Haiti, and [Washington] D.C. after I moved back to D.C. to finish high school [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High school], were great experiences.  I enjoyed all three of those places, and, incidentally, when we were in Atlanta, my dad [Will Mercer Cook] was a great basketball fan and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had terrible athletic teams.  They probably still do, but he used to take me to all the basketball games and I was a big football fan and I used to go to all of the football games.  I'd clean up the football players' shoes and for that I got to sit on the bench with them during games and really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta, at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I never seen a college with the spirit that the students of Morehouse had.
Story_ID: 187727
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Dr. [W. E. B.] Du Bois?
Speaker 2: Dr. Du Bois worked with my father [Will Mercer Cook].  In fact, he come, we had to dinner several times and one of the funny stories was my mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook] used to tell is he was at dinner with some other people and my mother asked him to say the grace at dinner and he was somewhat taken aback, and he put his head down and mumbled a few words and one of the ladies at the-one of the guests at the table said, "Dr. Du Bois, I didn't hear what you were saying.  I didn't understand what you were saying."  And he looked at her, he said, "I wasn't talking to you."  But Dr. Dubois used to yell at me as I rode my bike around the administration building at Atlanta University [later, Atlanta, Clark University, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was not particularly fond of kids riding bicycles.
Speaker 1: Around the outside of the building?
Speaker 2: Yeah, around the outside of the building, he was--I don't think he was too fond of children period.
Speaker 1: Yea, his personality, we've heard different stories about him.  He didn't seem to be the friendliest of personalities.
Speaker 2: He was, he was one of dad's colleagues and, you know, they put out a magazine.  I shouldn't say a magazine, it wasn't a magazine, it was a publication, a scholarly publication--
Speaker 1: What was the publication?
Speaker 2: --called Phylon.
Speaker 1: Phylon, right, right.
Speaker 2: I'm surprised, you've heard of it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, read some of 'em--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No kidding--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you're quite a scholar.
Speaker 1: Oh, they're in the library--
Speaker 2: Okay, you know--
Speaker 1: I think I got a piece, there was an English edition of 'Presence Africaine' at home--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --with articles by--
Speaker 2: [Leopold Sedar] Senghor?
Speaker 1: --E. Franklin Frazier, Senghor (unclear)--
Speaker 2: E. Franklin Frazier was one of the people, when dad and I, in 19--let me go back a minute.  In 1951, dad got a fellow, a Fulbright Fellowship to go to Paris [France], and I went with him, and my mother stayed at home with my brother [Jacques Cook], and we had a great time, and E. Franklin Frazier was there working with UMESCO [sic, UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization], and we got to spend quite a bit of time with him and his wife, Marie [Brown].  Of course, dad had known Dr. Frazier when he was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  It as an interesting time.  And I got to meet Richard Wright.  We used to spend time in the cafes together.  I met James Baldwin.  Who was the guy who wrote 'If He Hollers Let Him Go'?  Chester Himes.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And there were several other black writers and artists.
Speaker 1: Did they call then Negro expatriates?
Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily expatriates.  Some of them were.  Of course, Richard Wright was an expatriate.  I don't know if you or heard of Ollie Stewart.  Ollie Stewart was a reporter for the Afro-American out of Baltimore [Maryland].  And he, I think he went to Paris during World War Two [WWII] and I don't think he ever came back to the United States.  If he did, it was just for short visits--
Story_ID: 187728
Speaker 1: But there was a, you know, there was some other--you know, some government employees, some black government employees who were there [in Paris, France].  A fellow named [James A.] Hulbert and I think he worked for USIS [United States Information Service].  Lem Graves did something with economics.  Another one of dad's [Will Mercer Cook] friends that I don't want to leave out is Ralph Bunche.  Ralph Bunche was in Paris [France] at that time, in 1951, 1952 and during the UN meeting there, we got a chance to spend a lot of time with Uncle Ralph, another one of the uncles.
Speaker 2: That's shortly after the formation of the United Nations when Ralph Bunche wrote the charter for the United Nations and all that?
Speaker 1: Yea.
Speaker 2: What was Ralph Bunche like?  Do you have any stories about Ralph Bunche?
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: Do you have a story about Ralph Bunche?
Speaker 1: Well, I have one story about Ralph Bunche.  Ralph Bunche came to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] while I was there.  I don't know whether I was a junior or senior.  But he came there to speak and, you know, there was no question he was a brilliant man, but he was not a speaker.  But, anyway, he was one of dad's good friends, good friends, and he had also taught us at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] before going on to bigger and better things.
Story_ID: 187729
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever meet Bricktop [Ada Smith] or Josephine Baker, or--
Speaker 2: Josephine Baker, I think my grandfather [Will Marion Cook] took Josephine Baker to Europe the first time she went.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that was the show.
Speaker 2: Dad [Will Mercer Cook] knew her and, of course, she was, she was so popular in France.  She was unbelievably popular.
Speaker 1: Was that the show 'In Dahomey' or something like that?
Speaker 2: Could be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I remember going to see Josephine Baker at the Regal Theater here [in Chicago, Illinois].  She came here in the mid-50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: From what I read, she didn't make a big hit here in the [United] States.
Speaker 2: No, she was very popular in France.  She was, I don't think she was as popular here, but she was the rage over there.  They loved her and, you know, she stayed there during the war [World War Two, WWII].  She did a lot from what I recall.  I think she did a lot with adopted children.  She was quite active in that movement.
Story_ID: 187730
Speaker 1: What about Dr. Channing [Heggie] Tobias?  Did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: I don't remember meeting him, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dad [Will Mercer Cook] probably knew him.  Like I said, he knew, dad knew everybody.
Speaker 1: You said he didn't know [William Leo] Hansberry.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  You know dad, if they were at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when dad was there, I'm sure dad knew them.
Speaker 1: He was a pioneer in African Studies, that's why I thought--
Speaker 2: Dad and Rayford [W.] Logan.  Rayford Logan was in Paris [France] at the same time we were there in '51 [1951], '52 [1952].  He was another one of dad's friends.  He was quite a speaker.  He spoke at my high school graduation [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.] and he was inflammatory.  He was great.
Speaker 1: In that regard, Carter G. Woodson--
Speaker 2: Carter G. Woodson was another one of dad's friends.  You know you bringing up names that I should have, well, should have mentioned on my own, but anyway, Carter G. Woodson, you know he put out the Negro History Bulletin and when he'd get in a tight, he called dad--'cause the magazine had to go to press the next day or a couple of days later.  He'd call dad and dad would go over and help him get the magazine together.  He was a gruff old guy.  I don't remember meeting him, but I remember his phone calls.  He was not particularly pleasant on the phone--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --although he was asking, he wasn't asking me, he wanted to speak to my father 'cause he needed some help.
Speaker 1: Just a couple of other people.  Did, you remember [HM the Honorable] Sandye Jean McIntyre [II].
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know he was in charge of Fulbright Scholarships at one point at Morgan State [University] in Baltimore Maryland].  He's still there teaching.
Speaker 2: Is he?
Speaker 1: Yea, yea.  Semi-retired.
Speaker 2: Uh, hum.
Speaker 1: And J. A. Rogers, historian?
Speaker 2: I, I, that name is familiar, but I personally don't know him.  Incidentally, my mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook] went to high school with Cab Calloway, and he was in Paris [France] in Porgy and Bess.  He played Sportin' Life and I saw him on the street one day in Paris and he said, "Come on."  We went to a cafe and he said, "Would you like to see the show?"  I said, "I'd love to."  So, I met him later that day and I watched the show the wings.  That's the only time I ever seen a big show from the wings.  You get an altogether different prospective.  He's another friend of the family and, as I said, he and my mother had gone to high school together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother [sic, Grandmother, Abbie Mitchell] is not related to the Mitchells in Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: You mean my grandmother [Abbie Mitchell].
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was, as I said, her father was Jewish and his parents had a fur store and it may still be there, I don't know, Mitchell Furs.  But I know it was there when I was growing up, and he married a black woman, who was my grandmother's mother and I think his parents disowned him.
Story_ID: 187731
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to--well, you went to grade school in a variety of places.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) as I said, I went from the second, well from the first to the seventh grade, through the seven grade I was in Atlanta [Georgia].  I went to kindergarten in Washington [D.C.], in Miss Howard's school.
Speaker 1: Miss Howard's school?
Speaker 2: That was, you know, she was, she was the one who was doing the teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: She had a little private school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, I went to school in Cuba and two years in Haiti and I came back to Washington [D.C.] and finished [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington, D.C.] there.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the teachers that you remember that had an impact on you growing up.  There are so many influences--
Speaker 2: There was Ms. Holmes [ph.] who was my fifth grade teacher in Atlanta at Oglethorpe [Elementary School], and I used to pop in and visit her, she lived--I think Oglethorpe and Lab High [Atlanta University Laboratory High School, Atlanta Georgia], as they called it, were schools that Atlanta University [later, Atlanta Clark University, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] supported and used as, I think, for the training of teachers.  But she was a great teacher.  I was really crazy about her.  High School, well in high school at Dunbar in Washington, all the teachers were so dedicated and after all these travels in France and Haiti and Cuba, I needed some help with English and they were happy to spend extra time with me to help me do better in my native language.
Speaker 1: So at this point, as a young high school student, you spoke French, fluent French, and--
Speaker 2: Some Spanish--
Speaker 1: --some Spanish.
Speaker 2: The Spanish went away very quickly because when we went to Haiti, I spoke French 'cause we usually spoke French at home.  Dad [Will Mercer Cook] and mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook] and I, we spoke French at home, but we didn't speak Spanish, and when we went to Haiti, although I spoke French, I had to learn how to speak Creole in order to play with the guys in the neighborhood, so, you know, the Spanish went away very quickly.  I still speak a little French and understand it, and, occasionally, I'll see a French movie on television.
Story_ID: 187732
Speaker 1: So in high school [at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.], you have like, you spent like four years at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: --two years
Speaker 1: Two years, okay, so you were in--
Speaker 2: --I spent two years in what was considered high school in Haiti.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was thirteen.  From age thirteen to fifteen we were in Haiti, and I was in school there.
Speaker 1: So, how would you characterize yourself at this point in your life?  When you come back to the states to attend Dunbar, what kind of a kid were you and what were your aspirations and goals and--?
Speaker 2: I don't know what my aspirations were, you know, just to get along with, you know, in a new setting.  Of course, to do well in school 'cause all the teachers knew my father [Will Mercer Cook].  They probably--most of them had gone to school with him and if I didn't--if I wasn't getting my lessons, they would call him and that happened once so I decided I'd better make sure I did my, kept up with my school work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you play sports or did you get involved in clubs-
Speaker 2: Naw--
Speaker 1: --and school activities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: --naw, other than the Honor Society, I played some basketball.  I started out going for the team.  I didn't persevere.
Speaker 1: How was your social life when you got back?  Did you feel like you--
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: It was great-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got along with the ladies very well.
Speaker 1: That's important.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Especially at that age, that's very important, so--
Speaker 2: Right.  And I enjoyed going to high school.  I made a lot of friends that have lasted up until now.
Speaker 1: Who are some your friends that you've made?
Speaker 2: Some of the friends, Harold Martin [ph.], Ernie Martin [ph.].  Ernie is very sick.  Richard Clater [ph.], Carnel Evans [ph.], Clarence Gilkes [ph.], Robert Keys [ph.].  I still see some of these people when we go--some of these people I see when we go to Hilton Head [South Carolina] in August.  I see Ernie Martin and Harold Martin and their children, about seventy of us who meet down there every year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were a senior in high school did you, I mean what were your, did you have career plans at that time?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  You know, I didn't really have career plans.  I went to--well I thought I wanted to be a physician and until I went to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and found out that I did not have any talent when it came to taking chemistry courses--
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: --and physics.
Speaker 1: --so you went to Amherst basically because your father went there, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I--yea, yea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any other schools in mind, I mean--?
Speaker 2: I had Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], but I'm happy I went to Amherst because I probably would have gotten lost at Yale.  It was much larger and then I was--it was good in a way at Amherst and it was bad, you know, because a lot of the professors knew my dad.  The president knew my dad, had been in school, had been in school with him and some of the professors that I had had taught my father.
Story_ID: 187733
Speaker 1: So you started at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] in '47 [1947], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the professors at Amherst that you--
Speaker 2: Well, I graded the papers for [E.] Dwight Salmon, who was a history teacher, and I did my French honors work under Geoffrey Atkinson, who had also taught my dad [Will Mercer Cook].  [Charles W.] Charlie Cole was president and he had gone to school with dad.  One of the French professors, Professor Fernal [ph.], had gone to school with dad.  I enjoyed Amherst, a great school.  I have a daughter who went there too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did like it, you liked it?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I got out, I thought I wanted to go into the [U.S.] State Department, but the State Department was not anxious to hire me and, well, I spent two years in Paris [France] after Amherst.  The first year I spent with dad while he was on the Fulbright, while he had the Fulbright Fellowship, and the second year I got a Johnny Whitney Fellowship and, I was there by myself.
Speaker 1: Now what was your major at Amherst?
Speaker 2: French.  It ended up being French although I was pre-med up until my last year, decided I wasn't going to make it as a, I wasn't going to make it through the organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in Paris for two years after--
Speaker 2: --Amherst, and then I thought I'd--
Speaker 1: What did you do there for the most part?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to the Institut d'etudes politique [IEP-SciencesPo] which is a part of the Sorbonne and I studied International Relations.  And I thought, you know, I'd like to go into the [U.S.] State Department, but at that time the State Department was not particularly interested in me.  I took the written--two or three day written exam and passed it, and they never called me for the oral.
Speaker 1: Now what do you think, why do you suppose they weren't interested in you?
Speaker 2: Probably because of my color.  And the only way they called me for an oral is because dad talked to Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] who was, at that time a Congressman, and he managed to arrange for me to get an oral examination which they made sure I flunked.  They asked me stuff I had no way of having any knowledge about.  But, you know, that was all right.  It worked out okay.  I ended up coming out here [Chicago, Illinois] to go to law school and went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 187734
Speaker 1: Now, before I get you there [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I know you want to get there, tell me about Langston Hughes.  No, I'm sorry, Richard Wright.  You said you got a chance to--
Speaker 2: Yea, I spent some time with Richard Wright in cafes in Paris [France], you know, he was, I admired Richard Wright a great deal, and I enjoyed his writings and enjoyed talking to him.  Of course, I'd read just about everything he had written.  I particularly enjoyed 'Black Boy' and 'Native Son'.  You know, people laughed at Richard when he said, you know, he was being watched by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], was being hounded.  People thought he was paranoid, but he was telling the truth, he was right as it turned out.  But I, you know, to me he was a good person and I really liked him.
Story_ID: 188002
Speaker 1: Now, we had just gotten to Richard Wright.  You said, you thought he was, you really liked him.
Speaker 2: I did, I thought he was a great man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean what was it that you liked about him?
Speaker 2: I thought he was honest, sincere, just a nice person.  Certainly wasn't pretentious, you know.  And it hurt me that [James] Baldwin attacked him so.
Speaker 1: On what score did Baldwin attack him?  I mean, as you remember.
Speaker 2: I think Baldwin felt that, you know, that he had to attack Richard Wright because one, it would help him, you know, help his notoriety, would make him more important.  I really don't know why, but he did attack him, then stories written about it.  I shouldn't really say anything about it, other than the fact that I was sorry that--
Speaker 1: Well they're both gone now anyway.
Speaker 2: --sorry that it happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Richard Wright, we were discussing his, what you said was a so-called paranoia to keep people talking, but that you think it was real.
Speaker 2: It was, it was true, he was being hounded by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and he was being watched.
Speaker 1: Have you ever, have you seen any documentation of that since the files have been reopened and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I haven't seen any, but I don't doubt that it's true.
Speaker 1: J. Edgar Hoover now has been associated with just about everybody--
Speaker 2: That's right.  If he did it, if he did it to [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], you know he did it with Richard Wright.
Speaker 1: Someone who was acknowledging--
Speaker 2: Acknowledged the fact that he had been a communist.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you ever meet Margaret Walker?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Margaret Walker.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: She was very close to Richard Wright and I just thought that you might have met her. But, okay, so we were talking about you coming back to the United States and then going to law school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, but before we leave Richard Wright, just for sake of historical continuity, he died in Paris, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: And there was a--what were the circumstances as you understand them?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I remember reading an obituary or eulogy that appeared, I think in Ebony magazine.  It was written by Ollie Harrington.  But, you know, I don't know what happened.  I think I read, I think I read something some time ago about the circumstances of what happened to him, but I don't remember what exactly what it was.
Story_ID: 188003
Speaker 1: One more personality I thought as we were talking here.  What about a Frantz Fanon?  Did you ever meet Frantz Fanon?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My dad [Will Mercer Cook] probably knew him, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Or any of the francophone writers or the Negritude writers?
Speaker 2: [Leopold Sedar] Sanghor.
Speaker 1: [Leon] Damas?
Speaker 2: Damas was a very good friend of my dad's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Aime Cesaire?
Speaker 2: Aime Cesaire was another good friend of my father's.  My father translated the book by Jacques Roumain who was a Haitian.  The book is called 'Masters of the Dew,' 'Gouverneurs de la rosee'.
Speaker 1: Cesaire, Damas, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Jean [-Fernand] Brierre, you know, there was--dad knew all those people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they would, you know, when we were in [Washington] D.C., they would come to the house.  If they were in Washington [D.C.] they would always come by.  Like I said he--it amazes when I think back, that dad, he just knew all kinds of people, and you know, like I said, he knew a lot of musicians. He knew, you know, you mentioned the Negritude--
Speaker 1: Poets and writers.
Speaker 2: --poets and writers.  He knew them.  He knew doctors, he knew lawyers, he knew judges, you know, he knew everybody.
Speaker 1: Did you meet Cheikh Anta Diop?
Speaker 2: I'm sure my dad did.
Speaker 1: He translated the book, I know he did. I just wondered if you ever?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't meet him. I knew Senghor, Senghor.  In fact, one of the pictures over there was taken when they were honoring Senghor in New York [New York] in 1968, a picture of me and my brother [HM Jacques Cook] when we were going, dad took us to the dinner.  But like I said, he and Senghor had been at the Sorbonne [Paris, France] together in 1926, 1927.  They maintained their friendship down through the years.
Story_ID: 188004
Speaker 1: Let's try to focus on you now.  You're going back to the states to go to law school--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --and around that, okay, where did you go?  You went to--
Speaker 2: I went to University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, why did you choose University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, [William Robert] Bob Ming was connected with the University of Chicago and had been, had been a teacher, was a teacher.  He wasn't teaching while I was there, but he knew everybody there and decided I'd better do something since I couldn't get into the [U.S.] State Department, I'd better try to do something and I wasn't particularly anxious to go in the armed forces to go to Korea [Korean War], so I came out here to go to law school.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was surprisingly difficult.  Law School was tough, but I, you know, managed to get through it, and--
Speaker 1: What was toughest part of it, I mean, it just--
Speaker 2: It's a lot of studying and it's a tough school.
Speaker 1: Were you able to get into a study group?
Speaker 2: I had, we had a study group and I had a moot court team that I worked with.  I made some good friends.  I'm the last survivor of my moot court team.  There were four of us.  The other three have died.  I was not an exceptional student.  As I said, I managed to get through in three years and I was not particularly happy with, with the law school, although I think they gave us a good education,  but if you weren't in the top two or three percent, they didn't pay any attention to you.  I know when I was getting ready to graduate, I asked to speak to the dean of placement--placements.  I said, "I'd like to see you," and he said, "There are no jobs available for you," and he said this out in the hall and I was just flabbergasted he would be that crude.  But I made myself a promise that I wouldn't give them any money, and I haven't.  I always contribute to Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] but not to University of Chicago.  And, unfortunately, in those days there were, let's say, there were maybe four, four blacks in my class?  I think one flunked out.  There were three of us who finished, and the law firms, the large law firms were not hiring in those, you know, the white law firms were not hiring blacks in those days, in 1956, and it was--
Story_ID: 188005
Speaker 1: Now, you got married in '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your wife and what happened?
Speaker 2: I had met my wife previously, and she came out here [Chicago, Illinois] to go to the University of Chicago, School of Social Work [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Where did you meet her? (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --to get her master's.  We met in, I think, we met in [Washington] D.C.  She was from Tuskegee [Alabama], and we had four children, Antoinette [Cook Bush], Mercer [Cook], Janice [Cook] and Jacqueline [Cook].  And Jacqueline was killed in France in 1981, after she finished her first year at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: How long were you married?
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten years, okay.
Speaker 2: And I met my present wife [Edwina M. Cook] and we've been married, we just celebrated our thirty-sixth anniversary.
Story_ID: 188006
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, well what did you do after law school [at University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: After law school, I went to work for the [City of Chicago, Illinois] Corporation Counsel's Office, working in the area of eminent domain which is land acquisition, and I worked with them for a year, and then I went to work for a casualty insurance company that insured the black, black and some white cabs, independent cabs, not Yellow [Cabs] and Checker [Taxi].  I worked as a claims adjuster for them for about a year or so, then I went into private practice.  And, after a few years, I went to work for the Cook County [Illinois] Legal Assistance Foundation.
Speaker 1: Now before we get you too far along, I just wanted to ask you about [HM] Truman [K.] Gibson [Jr.].  We haven't talked about him and you have a long-standing relationship with Truman Gibson--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --one of the outstanding lawyers here in the city [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Truman and Truman's wife, Isabelle [Carson Gibson], and my mother [Vashti Maria Smith Cook] were good friends and they went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] together, I think for a year before my, before my mother and father [Will Mercer Cook] got married.  And, they maintained their friendship down through the years, and, in fact, when my mother died in 1969, Isabelle came to Washington [D.C.] for the services.  And, it's funny what happened.  Two of my classmates and I were going to room together in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] while we were in law school the last two years.  And, we found a place, they found a place on Woodlawn [Avenue] around 50--somewhere around 55th Street, 56th--maybe it's 56th Street, and everything was fine until I showed up, (laughter) we had a basement apartment and when I came in, the property owner told us we'd have to move.  So, they went their way and Isabelle and Truman told me that there was--they didn't own the building but they knew, they were friendly with the owner, that there was a basement apartment that I might be able to rent there in their building at 5111 Drexel [Avenue], so I rented that for two years, and that's where I finished law school from there.  The first year I lived in the law school dormitory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At one time you say you had offices at Supreme Life [Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, after I left the casualty insurance company, Truman let me use his office because he was busy doing other things and was hardly ever there.  So I had an office there for maybe a year, and right next door was his brother, Truman's brother Harry, who was--
Speaker 1: Harry Truman?
Speaker 2: Harry Gibson--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Gibson.  Right.  Harry Gibson, okay.
Speaker 2: --who, I guess he was General Counsel for Supreme Life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was [HM] Lloyd Wheeler in charge of Supreme Life then?
Speaker 2: I really, I know he was there, I don't know who was, I think, I don't know, I don't whether it was Earl Dickerson or Lloyd Wheeler, who was in charge, but somebody.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188007
Speaker 1: In the progression--we got you as far as the Cook County [Illinois] Legal Defense Foundation?
Speaker 2: Cook Country Legal Assistance Foundation.
Speaker 1: Assistance Foundation.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I started working with them--before I worked with them, I worked for, with Stark and Anglin in the old Drexel Bank Building [Chicago, Illinois], then I went to work with Euclid [L.] Taylor for two miserable years.
Speaker 1: Why were they miserable?
Speaker 2: Well, he had promised me all kinds of things and when I came to work with him, he never gave me any money.  He had me doing all kinds of work and, you know, I was pretty much on my own.  So then I worked with a couple of guys for maybe a year, then I went with the Cook County Legal Assistance Foundation in 1967.  I stayed there until 1970.  I ended up being in charge of the Brookfield [Illinois] office.  People don't think that suburbanites are poor, but there are plenty of 'em, plenty of poor people in the suburbs.  That's who we represented.  We, we had an office in the Western Suburbs, in Brookfield.  There was one, there was an office in Harvey [Illinois], I think, and there was another one in Evanston [Illinois].  And I left there and then I went to work for the--I handled a lot of, we had a lot of child support cases, divorces and things of that sort, some bankruptcies, whatever the poor people needed, we tried to provide for them within the guidelines as indicated by the federal government.  Then I went to work for the Cook County State's Attorney's Office under Edward V. Hanrahan--
Speaker 1: Who's now an infamous figure in history.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think he deserves to be considered to be infamous.  As I told you earlier, I think his problems arose because he was too loyal to the state's attorneys--state's attorney's investigators who conducted the raid, the [Fred] Hampton raid.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So you think that wasn't his initiative, but rather--
Speaker 2: I don't know, I assume that he knew about it, but I don't know that he condoned their actions.  But, you know.
Speaker 1: Did he ever discuss it or anything?
Speaker 2: Not with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  An investigation just showed, that whoever was in charge of that, he was (unclear) in charge of it anyway.  But whoever was in charge, it was a one-sided shootout.
Speaker 2: No question about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, you know, there's a history of police brutality that exists in this country.  It's not just Chicago.  That's certainly a prime example of it.
Story_ID: 188008
Speaker 1: But anyway, I worked with, with [Edward V.] Hanrahan and, in the civil area, representing [Cook] County [Illinois] officials who got sued, and, as I indicated to you earlier, we represented the Cook County Department of Public Aid and, of course, they got sued all the time and--
Speaker 2: What was the Department of Public Aid sued about primarily?  I mean what kind of law suit?
Speaker 1: Not providing benefits.  We did have one very interesting case, not providing proper benefits, or, you know, denying certain classes of people benefits that they felt they were entitled to.  But we did have one case where case, under Hanrahan, where we sued governor, then governor [Richard Buell] Ogilvie who was seeking to reduce general assistance payments for Cook County, certain Cook County residents.  We tried that case for, starting on a Friday and started, tried it all day Saturday and ended up winning and made the governor put the funds back, give the funds back to Cook County eligible recipients.  I spent twenty-three years in the state's attorney's office, and I ended up being, what they call a deputy state's attorney.  I was chief of the civil division--not the civil division, chief of the public interest bureau.  I was in charge of about sixty lawyers and did a variety of things like being responsible for--we had a child support division, an environmental unit, criminal housing unit, sexual--no not the sexual abuse unit, that was not part of my--there were about six units that did a variety of really good things that was, we helped a lot of people and I enjoyed that.  I did that for four years, but by then I was promoted by Cecil [A.] Partee in--after he lost the election, I stayed there under Jack O'Malley for two and a half years.  But it was a very good experience and I really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 188009
Speaker 1: You retired--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) I retired from there [Cook County Illinois State's Attorney's Office, Chicago, Illinois] in 1993.
Speaker 1: There was a case that you mentioned that I should--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Early in my career I was handling tax exemption cases and the Elks War Memorial [sic, Elks National Memorial and Headquarters], the Elks War Memorial in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois], they wanted to gain tax exempt status and they filed suit in order to do so.  While the president or the wizard, grand wizard, or whatever he was with the Elks was on the stand, I noticed that he had a marked Southern accent, and on cross-examination, I asked him if there were any restrictions to memberships in the Elks and he indicated that the membership was restricted to Caucasian males and since they had that discriminatory clause in their constitution, they failed to get the tax exemption that they were seeking.
Speaker 1: Weren't there black Elks, I mean--
Speaker 2: --There's a Black Elks organization that is entirely separated from the War Memorial Elks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: War Memorial Elks are the Caucasians.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But maybe they've changed their constitution by now but I don't know.  I'm talking, this must have been in the early '70s [1970s], '73 [1973], '74 [1974] somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't that late because [Edward V.] Hanrahan was still state's attorney, so it must have been like '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: How did the Civil Rights Movement affect your, you as a lawyer and your various roles in your career during the height of the civil rights movement, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know that it really affected my, you know, my career.  I remember going to the March on Washington in 1963 and being there all day long and being very proud to be there, but the Civil Rights Movement I think has helped my children.  They're all doing very well in jobs that were not available to blacks in my day.  I don't know what's going to happen now with [President George Walker] Bush and [Dick] Cheney and they would try to undue the Emancipation Proclamation if they could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have you been a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the NAACP and I contribute to the Legal Defense Fund and I belong to several bar associations, including the National Bar Association, which is black, Cook County Bar Association.  I belong to the Chicago Urban League, DuSable Museum [Chicago, Illinois], various organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you retired from the State's Attorney's Office, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I went to work with two lawyers, Gordon and Pikarski, doing, handling--[Morton A.] Mort Gordon handles real estate tax matters and I worked with him, and John [J.] Pikarski handles real estate sales transactions.  I worked for both of them.  Pikarski represents clients buying and selling real estate.  And since I left there, I left there after three years, I now do some hearings for the Chicago Department of Personnel and do a little, some limited law practice handling real estate transactions if they're not complicated.  I don't want to do anything really complicated.
Story_ID: 188010
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I hope that affirmative action won't be dismantled, and, you know, I'm disturbed by, you know, by this thug attitude that I see too many young people, too many young blacks involved in.  Not just blacks, but the whites too.  I'm concerned that a good education is not more of a focus for the young people, the young black community.  I just, you know, sometimes I feel really despondent when I see certain things on television.  This, some of these rappers, their messages is to me, it's really frightening, you know, what's going to become, what is the so-called thug life gonna, gonna produce, you know?  And, you know, it's disturbing to see what the present administration [President George Walker Bush administration] is doing.  To me it's, you know, they're not doing anything for education.  I don't think, you know, there can be any uplifting without education.  You need education, you need jobs, and I don't see this administration doing anything to promote either one of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's the [President] George W. [Walker] Bush Administration.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or the [Dick] Cheney administration, if you prefer to call it (laughter).
Story_ID: 188011
Speaker 1: Do you have any future plans, I mean what are your future plans?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My future plans are to retire from doing anything, just try to enjoy the years that are left to me.
Story_ID: 188012
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you look back at the things you've done, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a legacy.  I think my children are my legacy.
Story_ID: 188013
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an honest person who really enjoyed life.
Story_ID: 185926
Speaker 1: Okay, you wanna know about this picture?
Speaker 2: We do.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken probably in 1944 in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, at our house, outside of our house.  We had a house, we lived in a house overlooking the Bay of Port-au-Prince.
Speaker 2: In the photo we see?
Speaker 1: In the photo you see me, age fourteen, and my mother, in 1944.
Speaker 2: And your mother's name is?
Speaker 1: Vashti [Maria Smith] Cook.
Speaker 2: Okay.  V-A-S-H--
Speaker 1: I-T-I.
Speaker 2: I-T-I. Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the only picture I have, seems that I've been able to find so far of my grandmother, Abbie Mitchell, and my father [Will Mercer Cook].  This was taken probably in early 1950s or mid-1950s.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, taken in 1952, in Paris [France].  My father, Will Mercer Cook.
Speaker 2: Alright, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother's mother, Margaret Hubbard.  Was taken probably in the early 1960s in Africa.  She was with my parents when my father was ambassador to Niger and to Senegal.  I don't know whether this picture was taken in Niger or in Senegal.
Speaker 2: Alright, fair enough, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was two years old in 1932, and I don't know who the lovely young girl is (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And I don't know where the picture was taken either.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother in Paris in, either 1934 or 1937, 1938.  I think it was 1930s, probably 1937 or 1938.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my mother on the Normandie.  We were either coming from, or going to, France.  It must have been in 1934, or 1935.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And Larry, would you rotate that ninety degrees for me?  I'd like to get one more shot of it.
Speaker 1: It does say Normandie, doesn't it?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and dad taken in about 1954, in Washington, D.C.  They were on their way some place, some place special.  I don't know where it was.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, Larry, can you rotate that one ninety degrees?  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This picture, this picture of me and my father was taken in Chicago [Illinois], probably in the 1970s, judging by the narrow tie that I'm wearing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, hold on one second please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my wife Edwina [M. Cook].  It was taken in Indianapolis [Indiana] probably.  We go to Indianapolis for the Circle City Classic every year.  It was probably taken in the year 2000. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, when you're ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of me, looks like I must have been, is there anything on the back of that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Looks like I must have been twelve or thirteen years old.  I don't know where the picture was taken.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, give me a ninety degree rotation on that one please Larry?  Alright.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is my favorite right here.
Speaker 1: It's everybody's favorite.
Speaker 2: I never seen a baby smiling like that.
Speaker 1: Probably had gas (laughter).  This is a picture of me and mother taken when I was three months old and probably in August of 1930.  I was three months old, my other was twenty years old.
Speaker 2: That's really a work of art because she's so serene, and you have this grin.  That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: That picture was given to me, was given to Isabelle Gibson, [HM] Truman [K.] Gibson's wife, and after Isabelle died, Truman gave it to me.  I'm very happy to have it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that made in?
Speaker 1: 1930.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  I know you said it, I was just focusing on something I was doing.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: We ought to pull together an exhibit of ordinary photographs, calling it photograph and people snapshot collection, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You've got some fascinating photos.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my brother [HM Jacques Cook].  Let's see, where was it taken?  I think it was taken at his house in Potomac, Maryland.
Speaker 2: That's Jacques Cook?
Speaker 1: That's Jacques Cook.  J-A-C-Q-U-E-S, and it was probably taken about two years ago, would be 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Alright.  Next.
Speaker 1: This one says 70+.  It had a tag on it.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Lest we forget.
Speaker 2: I can tell.  This is a picture of me and my wife Edwina.  I say it was taken in 1970 something, in 1972, 1973, and the only reason I can say that is because I remember when I owned the suit and the tie, and I seem to have quite a bit more hair than I now have.
Speaker 1: The sideburns
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: We got it from Black Enterprise.  [HM] Earl Graves took it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is a picture of me, my oldest girl, Toni [Cook Bush] in the pink, my son, Mercer [Cook], and the proud graduate, Janice [Cook], my daughter.  It was taken at Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] in 1982, June.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my brother in New York.  It was taken in 1968.  We were on our way to a dinner honoring president [Leopold Sedar] Senghor of Senegal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and Cecil Partee at my retirement party in 1993.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Did you want to take the picture out of the folder?
Speaker 2: It might work.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of my mother, probably taken in the early 1960s.  My mother's name is Vashti.
Speaker 2: What kind of name is Vashti?
Speaker 1: It's a biblical name.  There was a Queen Vashti.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Sounds Indian.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather.  It had to have been taken sometime before 1944 because that's the year he died.  His name was Will Marion Cook.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay. Next.
Speaker 1: I need to get some copies made.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father, Will Mercer Cook, my mother, Vashti Cook, my brother, Jacques Cook, and me, taken, I think, in 1948, maybe 1949, in Washington, D.C., at our house on, at 127 W Street, Northwest.
