Story_ID: 100820
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers' interview is being conducted by Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Scott Stearns.  The location of this interview is the Ellington, at 1301 U Street, Northwest, Washington, D.C.  And the date is November 10, 2006.  Madam HistoryMaker, would you please give me your full name, and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: I'm Priscilla Clarke, P-R-I-S-C-I-L-L-A, C-L-A-R-K-E.
Speaker 1: And would you give me your birth date and your birthplace, where you were born and?
Speaker 2: August 3, 1960, in Swinden, England.
Speaker 1: Swinden (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-W-I-N-D-E-N (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: England.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (tape interruption) Experience for me (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was S-W-I-N-D-O-N, so just that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: D-E-N.
Speaker 1: D-E-N (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Swinden?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Madam HistoryMakers, would you, tell me what your profession is, your occupation?  What your title is, your organizational affiliation, very briefly, we'll go in detail later, but what do you do?
Speaker 2: I am President and CEO of Clarke & Associates, which is a public relations firm here in Washington, D.C., and we also have an office in Los Angeles.  And primarily we deal with public relations, public relations, crisis management and very big campaigns.
Speaker 1: How long, have you been doing this work?
Speaker 2: About fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Fifteen years?  Okay.
Story_ID: 100821
Speaker 1: Before we get in the more formal part of the interview, we have what we call warm-up questions, People magazine-type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I notice that you've done some work with People's magazine.
Speaker 2: Um-hum
Speaker 1: The first question is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (laughter) Wow, favorite food, I would have to say I love fruit.  Different types of fruit, that's probably my favorite food, and if we're talking bout--, I love Italian food.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Black, okay, your favorite time of year?  What season do you--.
Speaker 2: The summer, well actually I like the transition of summer to fall.  Because of, I love when the breeze comes through the house.  So I, I like it, not too hot, not too cold, just perfect.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I would have to say probably Jamaica, I love the water, and I love the island atmosphere and the peacefulness of it, so probably Jamaica.  I haven't been to a lot of different islands, so been to Jamaica and the Bahamas, so I would have to say Jamaica.
Speaker 1: If go back to Jamaica, go to Treasure Beach, on the south side.  You ever been there?
Speaker 2: No, I never been there.
Speaker 1: I was there last year.
Speaker 2: Was it nice?
Speaker 1: All the way on the other side the island, yeah, very quiet, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Very rural.
Speaker 2: Okay, I have to try that; I was in Negril [Jamaica].
Speaker 1: No, we were, we were about two and a half hours from there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Wow, Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but on the on the south coast, yeah.  Last warm-up question, do you have a favorite phrase, or saying that you like to use from time to time with your children, or friends or colleagues?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I would say is--, what I try to tell all my friends and colleagues and my children, is to "make a difference in the world."  I don't know what that difference is for each person as an individual, but do something that makes a difference in the world in a positive way.
Story_ID: 100822
Speaker 1: Okay, thanks.  Let's move into your family history and your roots.  Okay, we're gonna start with your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Would you give me your mother's full name and where and when she was born?
Speaker 2: Dorothy Sharples, she was born in England.  And oh, oh the year, I don't know off hand.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother share with you--, where did she grow up, where did, where did she--.
Speaker 2: Well she grew up in England, but then she came to America.  When she got married, my hus--, my father [Gilbert Clarke] was in the service, so they got married, and then they moved to America.
Speaker 1: So she was about how old then would say?
Speaker 2: She was about 20, 21.
Speaker 1: Did she share with you stories about her growing up years in England, she talk about the culture and the life for her?
Speaker 2: Yes they had a very British, lifestyle at home.  There was some tragedy; she had a brother that was killed and another brother that got--, my uncle, got into a motorcycle accident when he was sixteen, and he lost his leg.  And I think it kind of affected the family for a long time.  So but, other than that she had a very happy life, a very happy life.
Speaker 1: What city or town in England, was she raised in?
Speaker 2: London.
Speaker 1: In London?
Speaker 2: Uh-um.
Speaker 1: So she grew up in London?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about London, to you at all?
Speaker 2: She did, she loved London, and also Scotland because her mom was from--, my grandmom was from Scotland so.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Gladys Moskal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And maiden name Sharples.
Speaker 1: Your mother went through school in London, elementary, (simultaneous) high school, so on?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you remember your mother as a person, what was her personality like?
Speaker 2: She was, very bubbly--, very much, she loved Christmas.  I--, no one celebrated Christmas like she did.  I mean she would start buying gifts months in advance.  And, you know, she couldn't wait like, a week out every day she'd wanted us to open something leading up to Christmas.  So, she loved to do--, to treat people special and buy gifts for folks; she was big on gifts.  And I think that's where I got that from, 'cause I'm very big on gifts too.   Giving--, I see something that someone would like, I'll you know, I'd get it for them--.  But, just a joyful spirit, she was a very joyful spirit, love to vacation yeah.
Speaker 1: She had a business, did she, or did she--, (simultaneous) what did she have a career?
Speaker 2: Uh-um.  Antique store, she ran an antique store in Belfast, Maine, (simultaneous) yeah, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Was it year round (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: So, with her husband.
Speaker 1: Was it year round?
Speaker 2: Year round actually, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was kind of awkward in winter though, but yeah, they did it year around.  It's big business in Belfast, [Maine], there's a lot of antique shops there.
Speaker 1: I collect old bottles, and so I've been to Maine because that's--, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: A good source of old bottles.  But I don't think I've been to Belfast [Maine].
Speaker 2: Belfast [Maine] is a very small town now, little ways from Portland, [Maine], yeah but more northern.
Story_ID: 100823
Speaker 1: You mentioned her mother, Gladys Moskal; you knew your grandmother, your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, she actually lived with me for a while a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh she did?
Speaker 2: Yes, when she--, she had Alzheimer's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she lived with and--, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where did she live with you she a--, here, here Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Washington, yes.
Speaker 1: And, what, what--, where was she from?
Speaker 2: She's from Scotland.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she share with you, anything about her growing-up years in Scotland?
Speaker 2: Yes, she, you know, she, she had a little terrier, a little black terrier, and she loved that dog so much.  She used to tell us about, you know, different episodes with the dog and romping around getting into mischief, and you know, how much fun they use to have in Scotland.  And I haven't had a chance to go back to London, or England since I was born, so that's one of my big missions in life, to go soon.
Story_ID: 100824
Speaker 1: Give me your father's name and when and where he was born?
Speaker 2: Gilbert Lee Clarke, in Poolesville, Maryland, in 1936.
Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-six [1936], Okay, all right.  Poolesville where is that, I never heard of that.
Speaker 2: That's near Frederick, Maryland, its North--, Rockford.  It's about twenty miles on a country road north (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he raised, where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: In Poolesville.
Speaker 1: In Poolesville?
Speaker 2: Yeah, his parents--, his mom and dad built a house in Poolesville years ago, which--, where it wasn't customary for black families to have homes.  They built a home, and that's where they grew up, he had seven siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did he tell you about his growing up years, as a child in Poolesville?
Speaker 2: Well, granddad was very strict.
Speaker 1: And his name was?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, Millard E. Clarke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Millard E. Clarke, my granddad died when I was twelve, but I remember every summer we would go to stay with grandma [Beulah Clarke] and granddad in Poolesville.  And granddad was a preacher, and he was very strict.  So my father would always be in mischief, always running away, always doing stuff because he didn't, you know, he didn't--, it was all boys and one girl.  So the brothers would always get in trouble with granddad, he wouldn't allow chewing gum, in the car, or you know--, the house was immaculate all the times, so.
Speaker 1: What church did he pastor?  You say he was a--.
Speaker 2: Jerusalem Baptist Church, and then also in Laurel, Maryland, was Gethsemane Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: So he was a Baptist Preacher?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was your father's occupation, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was a home improvement salesman for years, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: Working for himself, (simultaneous) or working for--?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was self-employed.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did he sell?  What was--?
Speaker 2: Siding, roofing, anything home improvement, redoing your kitchen-
Speaker 1: Oh I see.
Speaker 2: --any type of home improvement.
Speaker 1: How'd he get into that business, he was a wholesaler then, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, you know, I don't know.  It's just, I can remember as far back, he'd always--he used to take us when we were young on his sales trips.  We use to have to sit there.  And we would just be punished through, just having to wait two hours while he doses his sales pitch.   And we're just sitting at the coffee table like "Oh my God, this is," you know.  But my dad had this famous thing he'd say, "We're going visiting", and me and my brother, would be like, "oh no."  So it was an all day thing, he'd go house, to house to house, and you know, doing his work but you know, it was, it was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he's still living?
Speaker 2: Yes he is.
Speaker 1: In Rockville [Maryland], okay?
Speaker 2: He's in a nursing home actually, he's--, he had a stroke, I would say, it's been probably about six years ago now.
Speaker 1: He's really young too.
Speaker 2: Yes, very young, it's was actually his second stroke, he also lived with me before this last stroke.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Story_ID: 100825
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your siblings; we talked about your family, mother [Dorothy Sharples] and father [Gilbert Clarke].  How many siblings do you have, give me their names, and-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when they were born, and what they've done what they're doing now?
Speaker 2: All right.  My brother is Donnell Cellino [ph.] Clarke, he's the oldest, and he was born December 28, 1958.  And he's a Computer IT [Information Technology] specialist, and he also does work with us in the company as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are there other siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh that's right, Gilbert Clarke Jr. is my youngest brother.  And he's my half-brother because my father remarried.  And he was born in April--, well he's twelve years younger than me.  So I have to do the math on that.  I didn't do my homework did I (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (unclear) Let me see, forty-six--, forty-six-- he's twelve years younger, so he's thirty-four.
Speaker 2: Yep he's thirty-four.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 100826
Speaker 1: You were born in [Swindon] England, how many months or years did you stay in England?
Speaker 2: Just one, I came over when I was a baby.
Speaker 1: So that you don't remember.
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You came at about one year, one year's old?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, about one year old.
Speaker 1: How did you happen to born in England?
Speaker 2: Because my--
Speaker 1: Your father's [Gilbert Clarke] from Poolesville [Maryland], your mother [Dorothy Sharples], of course, was from England?
Speaker 2: Because he was in the Army--, in the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: He was in the Air Force?  I see, stationed there, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, so that's how he met my mom.  And then they fell in love and, you know, brought her to America against all odds, back then it wasn't, you know, very-(simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So where did he move the family then, you and your mother?  Where did you move to when you came?
Speaker 2: Springfield [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Springfield, Massachusetts, why Springfield, do you know?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know why we ended up in Springfield, [Massachusetts].  I don't know what the connection was there, because oddly his brother was also--, his brother, my uncle Donald, also married a woman from--, my aunt from England.  So, it was oddly enough they both ended up in Springfield [Massachusetts].  So we all grew up with their children together, you know, so it was really very interesting--, I don't know what the draw was to Springfield, Mass [Massachusetts].  Yeah, I really don't know that.
Story_ID: 100827
Speaker 1: What are your farthest back memories, earliest memories, as a child in Springfield (Massachusetts)?  How far back can you remember?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: As a child?  I remember pretty young, I would say--, you know what, we actually were in Buffalo, New [New York]--.  I think we were in Springfield [Massachusetts], first, then Buffalo, New York.  We were in Buffalo, New York, for a time; it wasn't a long time though.  But I was in probably kindergarten, second grade.  I remember that 'cause I went to--, I remember my teacher, she was a nun, and I remember I used to get in trouble all the time.
Speaker 1: This is in Buffalo [New York] now?
Speaker 2: This was in Buffalo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a little mischievous, you know.  So I remember one time, my dad [Gilbert Clarke] was cooking spaghetti, so he said "You better eat all that spaghetti."  And I was like, "I will dad," and I'm like, "I want more, I want more" (laughter).  And he's like--, the plate was like piled that high, and he was like, "You better eat it all, don't say you want it if you don't."  So I'm like--, so he left us alone, so then, you know, me and my brother [Donnell Clarke] sitting cross from each other eating.  And he was like; "You gotta eat all your food."  And I was like, "I'm not eaten all this food.  I can't, I'm so full already," and it's like (demonstrating by hand the amount), I had this much still left.  And he's like you gotta eat it.  So I went and got ketchup, and I poured ketchup on it to make it taste better.  And I was like; I was like, "Oh my God, I can't eat it, Dad's gonna get mad, and you're gonna get a spanking."  So what I did, I thought I was brilliant.  I said, I'll take all the trash out the trashcan.  I'll pour the spaghetti in the trashcan, put all the trash back on it.   You know, I'd get away with it (laughter).  So dad comes upstairs, and he's like, "you eat all that spaghetti?"  I was like, "Yeah, I ate it all dad."  And he was like, "Was it good," and I was like "Yep," and he said so--, and I was a little bitty thing.  And he's like, "So you ate all that spaghetti?"   I said, "Yes dad."  So, so he goes in the kitchen, and he's looking around and he's like, I don't know if he smelled it.  I don't' know what happen, but he dug all the trash out the trashcan--
Speaker 1: There it was.
Speaker 2: --and, and he found all the spaghetti.  So, I was busted (laughter).
Speaker 1: How long, did you live in Buffalo [New York] with your family?
Speaker 2: I was--; I want to say about a year, about a year.
Speaker 1: And then you moved?
Speaker 2: Then back to Springfield [Massachusetts] yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think work at that time took my father to Buffalo [New York], from what I can recall.
Speaker 1: Was he out of the military at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was out of the military.
Speaker 1: He was?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 100828
Speaker 1: So your mother [Dorothy Sharples] and father [Gilbert Clarke] were married, what year?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one, what year-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, you were born in '60 [1960], and you said you came here as an infant (simultaneous).  So sometime in-
Speaker 2: In '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: In '58 [1958], roughly they were married?
Speaker 2: --in '58 [1958], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And so then he left the military-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when he come back to the States? Okay.  So you come back to Springfield [Massachusetts].  So how old are you, you about six, seven?
Speaker 2: When--, right, from Buffalo, I would say yes because I was in kindergarten.  So, I had to be like, going into first grade, so about six.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you started where in Buffalo [New York], or Springfield [Massachusetts], grade six?
Speaker 2: You mean grade, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: First grade.
Speaker 2: First grade.
Speaker 1: You started school in Buffalo [New York] or Springfield [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I think I--, I believe I started in Buffalo [New York].  But then, we came to Springfield [Massachusetts] because I went to elementary school in Springfield [Massachusetts].  Like in second grade, third grade was in Springfield, Mass [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What do you remember about--, what school did you first attend, and what do you remember about that elementary school and the teachers?
Speaker 2: Wow, elementary school, I remember I used to get in trouble a lot (laughter).  And I don't--; I was a little bit of a bully at a very young age.  And I don't even know why I was, but I just remember I used to be a little mischievous.  And, used to get in trouble with the teachers.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm
Speaker 2: But I just remember, when the elementary school I went--, we lived--.  I used to have to walk to school, and it was so far, well I thought it was far, which really now it's not that far.  But it was this huge hill we use to have to walk up to go home, and it was--, it took forever to get home.  So, of course, on the way from school, always used to stop and play and everything.  So I used to stay in trouble, you know, never getting home on time and stuff like that, but--.
Speaker 1: What about the school itself, inside the school with studies in the classroom, what do you remember about--
Speaker 2: It was very small, and I'm trying to remember the name of that very first school, was in Springfield [Massachusetts].  Dayton [ph.], I can't remember, you know, I'm old now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, No you're not.  What was the ethnic-racial mix of the school, the elementary school?
Speaker 2: I would say it was predominantly white, little bit of Hispanic, and probably about twenty percent black.
Story_ID: 100829
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about the neighborhood [Springfield, Massachusetts] that you grew up in, age six, seven, eight and nine when you were a child.  Where did--, what street did you live on, and what was the neighborhood like?  Excuse me.
Speaker 2: That's fine.  High Street was the name of the street.  And we lived in this old--, it's, it's kind of ironic, we live in this old--, it was a two level house with kind of the older Victorian style homes.  Kind of--, I love the house though because it had so much character to it, but it was kind of run down.   But it had a, a ton of character, and it was--, we lived on the second floor and it had this balcony.  So, you know, how I told you I love the breeze and everything.  So, I would always go with a blanket wrapped out and sit outside.  My mom [Dorothy Sharples] had like a rocking chair outside on the porch, and just sit with a blanket wrapped around me and just rock there.  But the way the house was designed, was just really different, the inside.  And we had so much room inside the house, it was a very big house and I remember there's a hospital that was, Wesson Memorial Hospital, was literally across the street from our house.  And they started doing redevelopment.  And I remember they were going to tear the house down. They were buying up everything in the neighborhood.  And we were like, one of the last houses that remained, and I was so devastated when I found out.  What happened-- I can backtrack a little bit, we actually, ironically, we had a house--  I remember one of the crazy things that happen when we were little.  We had a house fire, and all I remember is I woke up, I couldn't breath and I opened my eyes and I looked around, and there was just smoke everywhere.  And I could hear banging--, and at that time my uncle was living with us, the one I told you had the accident.  And I could hear banging, and what it was, it was the firemen, trying to bang the door down.  And the house was engulfed with smoke and we had another family that was living downstairs.  And they--, and we were all rushed outside.  And I remember that it was like one of the most tragic experiences because we sat there, and our house didn't burn down, but there were so much damage, till everything inside was ruined.  Between the water damage and the smoke damage.  So, we became homeless that night, and you know, we ended up in temporary housing and shelters.  And it was just like a kind of a really weird, life changing experience because we went from--, we lived in a pretty nice neighborhood.  It--, but then we ended up moving what we would consider the ghetto.  A very low income, 'cause we were being put in temporary housing, well that temporary housing, of course, lasted for a while, you know and a school change and everything. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You were about how old now?
Speaker 2: Now I was actually; I was probably about eleven, about when that happened about eleven.  Because I remember, I ended up at Kennedy Junior High School.  I think I was going into like the seventh grade and--.
Story_ID: 100830
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you, in the elementary school?
Speaker 2: I was bad, but I was a good student (laughter), (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Good student though?
Speaker 2: You know, I was, I was actually a very good student.  I struggled a lot though, you know, it never--, learning never came easy to me.  I always had to work extra hard, where my brother [Donnell Clarke] --, and I just noticed this at--, from a very young age, my brother might finish his homework in an hour.  I'd be four hours later still struggling through my homework.  But, I always had the tenacity to keep working, no matter how hard or how long it took.  I was a little slower, you know, then I think most kids.  I'd just--, I had to work a really hard, at school, but I was able to get--, for the most part, I was a honor roll student.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Kennedy Junior High, you went there because of course you were in a new neighborhood?  How do you remember the junior high years?  How many years were you there, what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Kennedy, you know, I remember--, Kennedy was kind of crazy.  It was--, it reminded me of like, what was that movie they did about the schools, it wasn't quite that violent, but it had a violent element to it.  I got attacked twice at the school I remember.  I got jumped in the bathroom.  Almost jumped in the bathroom, and threatened in the bathroom, I remember that.  And it was a lot of hostility in the school amongst the young kids.  And I really didn't understand it, I was a new kid, and I think I was picked on because I was a new kid.  And I just noticed a whole different climate--
Speaker 1: How was it different?
Speaker 2: --at that school. Just to--, you know I think there was a lot more anger with some of the children.  And then I, I attribute that maybe, because of the condition maybe, that some of the kids were living in.  Maybe some of their issues at home and like I said our neighborhood changed dramatically.  We were in a low-income neighborhood, and there was a lot of crime in that area at that time. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now was your mother [Dorothy Sharples] working at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was working.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: She was just doing odd job work; she didn't have a specific career at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 100831
Speaker 1: And your father [Gilbert Clarke] was in the home sale (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, my parents were not together, (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I skipped a chapter.
Speaker 1: --when did they--?
Speaker 2: I think they, they actually divorced quite early on.  They divorced when we were young, I would say probably when I was probably about two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah they were divorced very early on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so when you, when you had the fire in Springfield [Massachusetts] then--?
Speaker 2: We were with our mom [Dorothy Sharples].
Speaker 1: It was just you and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: We were living with my mom, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay. (unclear)
Speaker 2: I'm sorry (simultaneous) I skipped a chapter.
Speaker 1: No, that's all right, this is the way we go back and forth that's (unclear).
Story_ID: 100832
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were in [Kennedy] Junior High School did you have any notion or any clue, about what you wanted to do career-wise, what you wanted to be as we say? Did you have at that early age any thoughts?
Speaker 2: Well you know, interesting enough, when I was in junior high school.  I met a young lady that--, actually once we moved from there we--, I transferred to another junior high school, Forest Park Junior High School.  And I think I was about, I was twelve then.  I was about twelve, and I met a young girl and her dad--, she was like "You know you should come to my dad's karate school."  And I was like oh-okay, so she took me one day to her dad's karate school.  So I was sitting there looking at all the people.  And I was like--, and at that age at twelve, I was very uncoordinated you know, I was little slow on the learning side.  And I was like "Wow, that's amazing how they can do all that stuff."  So she's like, "Well you should take a class" and I was like, "Uh uh." I just knew, no way I could do any of that stuff.  So, I did I took a class--; she convinced me after a couple of weeks, you know, we'd go and hang out at the karate school.  And then she commits me to take a class. Her name was Tina Graham, and I'm sorry not, I'm sorry not Tina Graham, I gave you the wrong name, her name is Tina.  And so I took the class, and I loved it, you know, I was very awkward at it.  I'd say the first year I was very awkward at it, but it started to build my confidence, and it was something that I became very passionate about, I started training really hard.  So I trained actually, you know, from--, I started when I was twelve, took me about two or three years to get coordinated you know.  So, then I started competing, I started doing form, what they call form, which is we see the movements, and you do a series of movements.  I started learning weapons, and I started learning how to fight.  So you know, but it was something that--, it was interesting enough because when you learn martial arts, you learn not to fight because you learn discipline.  And you learn how to deal with it in different ways as oppose to combat, but I started becoming very good at it.  And I started competing in the United States.  I started competing in Canada, and I started winning.  So, you know, and by the time I was eighteen I was a Canadian Champion, I was an East Coast Champion, I was number two in the country.  You know so, that was something I, I felt at that time I wanted to do for the rest of my life; that was one thing I wanted to do. And once I--, you know because that's something I became very good at although I started off--.  And when someone would see me initially they'd like "Oh no way, she's never gonna be any good at this, (laughter) she needs to quit now."  So it was something that was really against the odds, you know, I kind of blossomed.  And that did a lot for me I think, you know, moving forward in my life.
Story_ID: 100833
Speaker 1: Well you were saying that the karate experience was a self-esteem builder, and gave you confidence and began to give you some identity.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and a lot of discipline.  You know, I, I think by time you know when I went through the whole--, 'cause my life was pretty much was school and karate, school and karate.  I trained all the time, which was really good for me you know.  It just instilled a lot of discipline in me where--, like, I think a lot of children were having fun and I was working.  You know, one way or another I was working, and one of the great things I ended up doing was, I use to teach the kids class on Saturday.  And that brought me so much joy because, you know, kids are so uninhibited.  They just are natural, and you know, and just to watch the growth in them was very exciting for me.  I love children, and I love inspiring children so.
Speaker 1: So you were doing this at what age?
Speaker 2: I was--, when I started about eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Bout 18.
Speaker 1: Okay, end of high school so, okay.  We're gonna come to high school in a few minutes too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, I'm jumping right to high school.
Speaker 1: That's all right, no that's fine, we're gonna come to that.
Story_ID: 100834
Speaker 1: Kennedy Junior High [School in Springfield, Massachusetts] and then next one was what Forest--?
Speaker 2: Forest, Forest Park.
Speaker 1: That was--?
Speaker 2: Junior High.
Speaker 1: Junior High, yeah.  Where there more black students in these schools than your elementary school?
Speaker 2: There was yes, Forest Park, definitely had more black students.  Actually when I went to Kennedy, I would say Kennedy, had a large number of Black and Hispanic, because of the area it was in, definitely it was, it was the majority.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me stay with the school business for a little bit.  Nineteen seventy-two [1972], you were twelve years old.  Nineteen seventy-four [1974], you're about fourteen.  That is when, In Massachusetts, the Boston, public schools and the Springfield [Massachusetts] public schools, where you were had racially imbalanced schools.  When we had a federal court order, I don't know whether you remember any of that or not.  But, that federal court order desegregates the schools also applied to Springfield.  Do you remember any of that going on in your neighborhood, in the city of Springfield, in the schools?
Speaker 2: I remember a lot of racial tension amongst the students.  There were often, sort of riots at school.  There was a lot fights, you know, a lot of racially charged fights at school.
Speaker 1: Do you recall the bussing was implemented in Springfield, or not, do you recall?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think--
Speaker 1: 'cause you'd been fourteen, this was in 1974?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, I remember that, yes it was.
Speaker 1: Do you remember busing--?
Speaker 2: During that time yes, because we--, I re--, I remember that whole issue during that time of busing because some of the children were relocated during that time.   So it became--, it was, it was a moment, I think of, of crisis to a lot of families, because some were not in agreement with where their children were being bused to.
Speaker 1: Did you and your mother [Dorothy Sharples] and siblings [Donnell Clarke] get caught up in any of this in any way?
Speaker 2: We didn't get caught up in the busing because we were within walking distance of that particular school.  So, we weren't affected by the busing issue at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's exactly how it affected Boston, people who were not near schools, they were you know, moved around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I lived all through that 'cause I was in the city of Boston, at the time.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, yep.
Speaker 1: So I was very much aware of Springfield's situation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 100835
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we'll go to high school in a minute.  Let me ask you about your family life, with your mother [Dorothy Sharples] and your brother [Donnell Clarke].  What kind of things did you do as a family? What family traditions do you remember?
Speaker 2: We used to go to Riverside Park [Riverside Amusement Park in Agawam, Massachusetts, now Six Flags New England], you heard of Riverside Park?
Speaker 1: No I don't think so.
Speaker 2: It's an amusement park.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was a big, big outing you know, my mom would take us there.  That was something we did a lot.  We did family reunions with--, it's kind of interesting, because at a certain point, we were living with my mom. Then at a certain point, when I ended up at Windsor [Connecticut] we went to live back with my dad [Gilbert Clarke], so we kind of flip flop for you know, a minute.  But you know, we would do family reunions, but with mom, I think the biggest thing, she'd take us roller-skating.  She really liked to do a lot of activities you know, so, she was very active.  And--, but roller skating was a big thing, back then when I was in junior high school, I was also a great roller skater.  So, I used to do racing with roller-skating at the roller rink and you know, that was a--, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where was Riverside, right in Springfield or--?
Speaker 2: It was in Holyoke, Massachusetts [sic, Agawam, Massachusetts].  Yeah, Holyoke, which is right outside Springfield, probably you know, it's what--ten miles if that--, I don't if it's that, that far.
Story_ID: 100836
Speaker 1: Where did you start high school?  Did you start in Springfield, [Massachusetts] or Windsor, Connecticut?
Speaker 2: Windsor, 'cause I'm thinking junior high school, but junior high was in Springfield, but--, high school, because when I went to Windsor High [School], when I started high school.
Speaker 1: And how'd you happen to be in Windsor, Connecticut for high school?
Speaker 2: Ended up during the summer from junior high school, moved with my father [Gilbert Clarke].
Speaker 1: Okay, he was living in Windsor?
Speaker 2: And he was living in Connecticut, right.
Speaker 1: I see okay, he have a family at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes and that's--, he had a family, and then my, my half-brother Gilbert [Clarke], Jr; he was about three at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Bout two or three yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so you went to live with your father and that's how you get to Windsor, okay and you started high school there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was Windsor like compared to Springfield?
Speaker 2: Windsor was, I'd say, predominantly white school, more of an up-scale school.  We were in a very nice neighborhood; I really liked Windsor High School.  There weren't--, there were very few black students there-
Speaker 1: I can imagine, yeah.
Speaker 2: --now that I'm remembering. Yes, there were only a few, and --.
Speaker 1: No problems being--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.
Speaker 1: Student of color?
Speaker 2: No, I became very active in--, that's kind of where I blossomed.  I, I thought that I was going to--, you know, I wanted to do filmmaking during that time.  I was photography, I was the photo editor of the school newspaper, and you know, I was a photographer and you know, I was very active in school activities, so playing basketball.  So I didn't have many problems at Windsor High School.  I had a few friends that I made, you know, white friends, black friends.  And my high school wasn't too traumatic it was pretty good, you know I don't remember anything--.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a honor roll student.  I actually, I'm sorry, I actually graduated school early.  I did six months early because I, you know, had done enough credits in advance.  So I was able to leave school in January and then come back for my graduation in June [1978], and I think you know, I'd learned that you know, through my counselor, that you could take, you know, a couple of extra classes and then actually graduate early, but I decided to walk.  So, I waited to graduate with everyone else, so.
Speaker 1: In addition to the counselor who gave you good advice, any other high school teachers that were particularly influential in your life at that time?
Speaker 2: During that time, not particularly, not particularly.  Again during that time I was--, I'm trying to think if any particular teacher stood out that I became close--, not really I was, it was pretty much the same during high school because remember I'm still in martial arts.  So, and I'm in the lab during photography, you know, school and then I'm shooting.  So I was very, very busy, overactive actually I think, you know, so.
Story_ID: 100837
Speaker 1: Was your work in photography during your high school [Windsor High School in Windsor, Massachusetts] years something that began to set the direction for your eventual profession in media or not?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: You know, it's kind of interesting how our life transforms when we start off, and we have a plan.  And when we think--, when I was in high school, I really had a passion to wanna be a filmmaker because I was taking film studies.  I made a short film while I was in high school and then photography I loved documenting things.  So I loved taking pictures and I kind of transformed that during high school into you know, being the photo editor of the newspaper.  Going out and actually shooting a lot of the work.  And also I was a writer, so I always loved writing you know.  And at that time--, but oddly enough my goal what I aspired to be when I went to college was a politician and a lawyer.  That's what my original dream was; that's where I started out.  When I went to college that's what I was going for you know, and photography became more of hobby and I wanted to stay close to home.  And the filmmaking seem like, I couldn't get what I wanted close by.  So I kind of picked and choosed.  I really had about five careers I was going after but you know, that's, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 100838
Speaker 1: Up through junior and senior high years did your mother [Dorothy Sharples] ever take you back to England?  Did you ever go back?
Speaker 2: No.  I never got a chance to go back to England.
Speaker 1: You haven't been back then since--, (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No. Not at all.
Speaker 1: Yet anyway.
Speaker 2: Not at all no, you know, it's funny 'cause I had a client call me yesterday and say's "Would you like to go to London?"  And I was like "I'd love to go to London. When?" "Today." I was like, "I can't go today, not today."  And I was like oh well, you know so, missed opportunity but you know there'll be another opportunity.  I'll have to plan a trip.
Story_ID: 100839
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from Windsor High School [Windsor, Connecticut] after three and a half years, got your diploma what 19--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], what happened that summer, after you had the piece of paper?  What did you do that summer, do you remember?
Speaker 2: What did I do that summer, wow you're going like, way back.  Okay.  Was I working then, let me think?  I'm not even sure--, hold it let me think, 'cause I started working very young, but I'm trying to remember did I have a job after high school.  I wanna say I didn't, now that might not be true, but let me think for a second.  I don't think I did, I think I was training.   I was teaching martial arts at that time.  Oh, actually no, I didn't, I know I didn't have a job at that time.  Yes, I did (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay. I found it
Speaker 2: Okay, the memory--, I'm getting older,
Speaker 1: You found it.
Speaker 2: --the memory's working now.  Yes, I did, I started a job at sixteen.  I worked at a nursing home.  When I was sixteen, I got a job actually with my stepmother [Ophelia Munera], and we both worked at the nursing home that was down the street from--.  You know, I was sitting there thinking, 'cause I said it's very odd for me not to have worked, 'cause I started working when I was twelve.  You know so, it was hard--, I was saying there couldn't have been a down time for me.  But yeah, so that's what it was a nursing home I was a nurse's aid.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your stepmother's name?
Speaker 2: Ophelia.
Speaker 1: And where was she from?
Speaker 2: Colombia--, Bogota, South America.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You said you had other jobs even before the nursing home.  What other, other jobs, jobs did you have, you said you started working at sixteen what else (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Actually twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve, what other-, what was some of the, quickly, of some of the other jobs that you had along the way?
Speaker 2: The funniest job I had, the first and funniest job, Ringling Brothers Barnum Bailey.  I loved the circus.  So I had a opportunity to work at the circus.  So, the first year, at 12 years old--, I don't even know how I ended up working at 12.  But I was selling--; you know how they have the people going around selling cotton candy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I was going around selling cotton candy making--, actually really good money.  I think like $16.00 a day or something, during that time for a 12 year-old that's great money (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a lot of money.
Speaker 2: So that--, and it was just seasonal based on when they came to town.  So I just worked for whatever those weeks were that they were in town and, and I loved it so.  That was I think when I was about twelve.  Well, fast-forward to next year.  And they said, "Well the only job we have available for, for students this year is to sell coloring books."  So, they said "Well, you only make 10 cent per coloring book."  So you get a commission basically, so I was like, ok.  But I love the circus, all I want to do is see the circus so it's ok I'll sell coloring books.  So told my mom [Dorothy Sharples], and I just didn't have the heart to tell her, like I think the first day I made 60 cents.  So I was like oh my God, she's gonna kill me, she's not gonna let me work.  If I tell her, I only made 60 cents, so she's like, "How much did you make today?"  I was like, "Well mom I haven't counted it yet you know I don't know yet."  But, it's like--, and so for that time I made so little money.  I think I made five dollars for the whole week, you know, which is truly slave labor.  But I just--, I used to sit there and just wanna see--, I was fascinated by the circus, so that was the first job.  My second job was with Burger King, at 14.  But, I wasn't suppose to work at 14, but I think I told a fib, you know I told them I'm 16.  And I was a cashier at Burger King at 14.  And, it was owned actually by Art White, who was one of the first black franchisers, franchisees for Burger King.
Speaker 1: This is in Springfield [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah in Springfield, and so I worked there for, for a while.  I would say over a year, you know, I worked there.
Speaker 1: When you were at Windsor High School--course you were busy with the Martial Arts--did you have jobs during high school years?
Speaker 2: Right and that's when I started with the nursing home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I kept that job until I graduate--, when you asked me about the summer, yes I was still working that job during the summer.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 100840
Speaker 1: All right, you finished Windsor High School [Windsor, Connecticut], what came next after that graduation?
Speaker 2: Western New England College.
Speaker 1: Western, and where is that?
Speaker 2: In Massachusetts, Springfield, Massachusetts, as a matter of fact.  And I chose that school because as I said I was planning on being a big time lawyer and changing the world.  A politician and a lawyer, so that was my big plan.  Because I was so idealistic back then, a little bit of a radical because I was--, and I'm still very much the same way in terms of justice.  I think justice is very important, and it's important for people to be treated fairly.
Speaker 1: What was some of the things you experience as a young person and a high schooler that were unjust that gave you this--, you must have had some experiences of injustice toward you or others, can you give me what happen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have one thing I think affected me for a long time.  When I went to a Friendly's restaurant with my stepfather [Al Sale] at the time--, God I don't know how old was I, maybe six, seven.  So I was sitting there you know, we went 'cause I loved their ice cream, so we were sitting down getting ready to eat and he went to the bathroom.  And these three white guys walked over to the table, and they were like, "What are you doing in here little Nigger?"  And I just looked I'm like--, they like "you see, you hear us? What are you doing in here little Nigger? You need to get out of here you, little Nigger."  And I was like, wow why would they say that to me, you know. It's like-- And then I remember my father; my stepfather came back to the table, and he's like "What's wrong?"  I was like, "Nothing," he's like "No what's wrong, something's wrong with you.  You look like you're going to cry," and I was like "Nothing."  And I just, I held that in you know, for so long.  I was like why would they do that to me?   I never did anything to them, they don't even know me.  So I always you know, I had this thing I was like "Wow." And in--, to backtrack a little bit, when I was in junior high school I got teased--, was that junior, elementary school.  I'm sorry, elementary school.  I got teased a lot, and they used to say because I'm a Mulatto, which I'm half black, half white.  So they used to call me "Oreo cookie, black on the outside, white on the inside."  And oddly the white kids didn't wanna really soci--, this was, I'm talking about elementary, really didn't wanna socialize with me because I was black.  The black kids didn't wanna soci--, and actually this, this went into junior high school, 'cause I remember in junior high school, I went to Classical Junior High School as well after--, I mean before, actually it was Classical then to Kennedy [Junior High School].  But it was a big issue with friendship because the black kids didn't wanna associate with me because I had white in me.  And then you know, so its, it was very hard for me to fit in at that time, during that time. When you talk about in the '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s].  It was--, and you wouldn't think so looking back, but it was, it was very much a racial issue back then.
Speaker 1: Well you- you grew up during the Civil Rights decade of the '60s [1960s] and of course everybody was looking for identity at that point.
Speaker 2: And then a black man being married to a white woman was not well accepted, you don't--, during that time. When my parents [Dorothy Sharples and Gilbert Clarke] got together it was not looked upon very favorably, you know.  So I, I went through a lot of teasing, in elementary and the very beginning of junior high school.  You know, and I think that you know, and then you, you deal with the challenge of when you're in school you don't want kids to know you got a white mom.  And it's really very hard for a kid when you have so much pressure, you know, because people look upon you negatively, you know.  So that was my first racist experience that kind of resonated I think inside of me.  That, that made it where I felt people needed to be treated justly.  And you know, you needed to treat a person for who they are, you know not because of their color of their skin or because of their religion, or because you know.  So, I very much became kind of the radical advocate (laughter) for justice.  And I really--, my goal and dream in life, when I was going off to college, was to be a politician--
Speaker 1: I see
Speaker 2: --and to be you know, a lawyer-
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --that could change the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 100841
Speaker 1: Let's, let's go to the college experience [Western New England College in Springfield, Massachusetts].  The first year, second year, what happened to you there?
Speaker 2: Well, the first year--, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Is this a public or private school?
Speaker 2: It's private.
Speaker 1: It's a private school?  Okay, go head.
Speaker 2: And predominantly white.  My first interesting experience there was, I was so excited to be at school.  I remember, and we're in homeroom or opening class and, and they allowed for you know people to come in and make announcements.  And that type of thing, you know, we'd make our daily announcements or whatever.  So there was a gentleman that came in with a white piece of paper, and he's like, well you know we're here to recruit for the, what is it called?  The white knights, no not the--,they didn't say, white knights, they said the Knights of something, but it was the Ku Klux Klan that was recruiting members in my homeroom.  And I was like because you know, and I kept looking I says, "Well wait a minute, I know that organization.  And I says what is that organization wait a minute," and then after I validated I said that was the Ku-- how in the world can they recruit at our school?  Then it's like I got a reality check.  I went to the Dean's office; I said, "How is this right?"  I said, you know, I said, "They, they want--, I mean they hate black people," and I said you know, "what they represent.  How are you able to support that and allow them to come and recruit at this school?"  You know, and I was, I was livid.  I couldn't believe it first of all.  I was in shock, and I said, "Wow."  That made me kind of understand what the condition of the world was in, you know. It hadn't moved to far from when I was in that restaurant that day, to now I'm in college years later.  And I'm getting the same type of sentiment, you know, in my personal circle.  So I thought that was really interesting, so but, you know.
Story_ID: 100842
Speaker 1: What did you study [at Western New England College in Springfield, Massachusetts]?  I mean what were your studies at?  What did you major in? What were your--
Speaker 2: Political Science.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did go into Political Science?
Speaker 2: I started there (laughter) kind of changed, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: You know, after the first year when I realized that I--, I realized how corrupt the world was.  You know, it's kind of like I came into school very idealistic.  I felt I could change a lot of things.  I felt I was going to be a powerful politician and lawyer.  And I was going to make change.  I felt that I had all the solutions that the government didn't have.
Speaker 1: Well when did all this change for you?  When did you begin to look--?
Speaker 2: I think through that first year of school I started to, to learn more about the intertwinings of the government and how corrupt it really was.  And I realized, I came to a rude awakening that as radical as I was, that-, because I always kind of challenged certain things at the school.  So I'll--, stayed in the Dean's office so I think they were like okay, she's a troublemaker.  It wasn't a troublemaker it was more about justice it's like you know things if I saw were wrong, you know.  A interesting quick story is, you know how they send the, the surveys around and they say well, what race are you, "white, black, other."  And then that was it.  There was white, black or other, there was no Hispanic, there was no--, so I put, I didn't check it.  So they're like, "Well you must check something."  I said, "Well you don't have a classification for my race, you know."  I still consider myself black, but what I was doing is trying to understand, there's the Hispanics are not represented, the Asian's are not repre--, they're just considered "other."  I said okay so if you're half black and half white what are you?  Are you still black are you white, are you other, what are you?  And that was my point.  It's like all these individual races were not represented. So I got called into the Dean's office because I refused to indicate what I was.  So you know, but I was always about trying to make something better.
Speaker 1: Were there any activist student organizations at the college that you were a part of or did you--, were there any--, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I was--.
Speaker 1: There probably weren't enough black students to have a black student body, (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or anything.  Or were there any active--, any more radical student organizations at the college during those years?
Speaker 2: No, I think I was it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were, so you were kinda out there by yourself (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, then yeah, pretty much.  I mean, I, I.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you how did they resolve that "Black, White, Other" thing, you talked to the Dean, what did they do?
Speaker 2: They didn't, I wrote a, an article actually, I wonder if I still have it.  "White, Black or Other," and I wrote it--, and they published it actually in the literary magazine for the school, 'cause they thought it was so well written.  And I just addressed the issue of race and you know, and I said--, all I remember I think of my last line.  I said, what did I say, "In a world that concerns itself so much with the race."  I said, "If you're white or if you're black" I said, "but what if you're both?  Why is instead of that being a solution, it's another problem?" You know, something like that, but--  I got in just to the you know, the, the state of being black in America the state of being White in America, and the state of being a mixed child in, in America.  And it is a different experience, you know if--, 'cause I, you know, I get that all the time.  People will say "What are you, you know, are you Spanish, what are you?"  You know, and it's interesting how people's perception or the way they treat you--, you know.  And I mean we can, we can get into the whole thing of light-skinned, dark-skinned and you know, that whole issue as well.  And I just, I've always been a person about treating people fairly no matter who you are.  And it's always bothered me when people are not treated fairly.  And so you know, needless to say I--, you bumped heads with some of the administration at school.  And you know, but I, I realized after that first year that politics--, you know, ironically I'm--, have clients that you know are major politicians now.  But, I just realized at that point that, I would end up dead as a politician because I would try to change too many things, and I really could not, you know.  I was too idealistic, and there is politics within the politics that I wasn't aware of, you know.  Things don't always happen because of, of what is right; you know it's not always about justice, so.
Story_ID: 100843
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Western New England College [Springfield, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Actually I didn't graduate from Western New England College.  I went there for two and a half years and then I got pregnant, had my daughter and it kind of shifted my life a little bit at that point.
Speaker 1: Your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Huda [Mumin], H-U-D-A.
Speaker 1: H-U-D-A, thank you.
Speaker 2: It's also pronounced "Huday," but she like's "Huda" she just likes you know, being controversial with her name so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so you had, had your daughter, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I had my daughter, so then I kind of had a little bit of a life change at that point.  I postponed school at that time and began raising my daughter.
Speaker 1: Were you working, did you have a job when she was young an infant?
Speaker 2: Initially no, that's kind of actually where my entrepreneur spirit started.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm
Speaker 2: And I'm trying think, the first that actually--, I wasn't married yet, but I was with her father.  So, I wasn't married at that time, so he was taking care of the household for a minute.  And then I began to do design work.  I'm trying to remember how my careers kind of evolved, but I began to do design work.  And I remember because I wanted to stay home with her and--
Speaker 1: When you say design work, what kind of design work?
Speaker 2: I was creating different designs of hats and some clothing.  So I was a seamstress actually--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By default.  So and actually that started doing pretty well.  I you know, file patents on some of the designs and everything.  Then I was trying to figure out if I wanted to do the fashion industry.  Even though that really wasn't what I wanted to do.  You know, but I kind of evolved.  I began to like it didn't love it, but I began to like it, and I'm trying to think.  When she was about--, my first real business, began when I--, she had to be about eight years old.  About eight, or nine and that's when I actually decided that I wanted to have a company.  And I wanted to own a business.  So what I did is--; initially I was trying to figure out what type of business I wanted.  And I was looking at Mail Box Etc., so well maybe I'll do a franchise.  And I started researching franchises and you know went and met with some of the owners of Mail Box Etc.  I said that's not really what I wanna do.  So, I was always, because of the martial arts; I was always very health oriented, nutrition oriented.  So, I found out about two Washington Redskins was selling a failing health food store [Eat to Live Health Food Store].  And I think it was God that just kind of made me find out about this opportunity.  And I was like wow, it was--, but the store they were gonna close it, it was making I think about $5,000.00 a month and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Where was it?
Speaker 2: It was in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Gaithersburg?
Speaker 2: Gaithersburg, Maryland, and it was failing they were trying to decide whether to sell it or close the doors.  And what happen was they bought it but they put it in someone else's management who mismanaged it, so they didn't do well.  And so I came in I said, "Wow, this would be great because this is my living, this is my lifestyle anyway."  And I had so much trouble; I was trying to get a bank loan, at that time I had perfect credit.  You know I had--, I owned a home and I couldn't get a loan to save--.
Speaker 1: Where was your home in--?
Speaker 2: In Germantown, Maryland.
Story_ID: 100844
Speaker 1: Oh so you'd already come to Maryland then? To this area?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, oh did I skip a chapter?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well you said.
Speaker 2: Yes I did, actually because what happened, when did--.  Okay, she [Huda Mumin] was four when I came to [Germantown] Maryland she was four.  I moved to Maryland, actually I had her--, then I moved from Springfield [Massachusetts], to Holyoke [Massachusetts].  And I was in Holyoke, till she was about three and a half, four, then I moved to Maryland.
Speaker 1: So that would have been 18, 19?
Speaker 2: Okay she was born in '81 [1981], about '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right '85 [1985].  I moved down this area 'cause most of my family was down here.
Speaker 1: Who was here?
Speaker 2: My grandmom [Beulah Clarke], my dad [Gilbert Clarke], my uncles, aunts, cousins (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh I see family was here okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (simultaneous) most all my family was here.
Speaker 1: So family, kin staying with kin, so you came?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I came down here.  And--.
Speaker 1: Well was that when you learned about the health food store [Eat to Live Health Food Store].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Couple years later, I was still doing the seamstress stuff when I came down here.  But so, the health food store--, so what I did is I went from bank to bank to bank to bank, and I could not get a loan to save my life.  And I was like, I was only asking for $40,000.00, and I couldn't get a loan.  I remember specifically a particular bank was very rude to me and actually discriminated against me.  And at the time had I not been so driven to open this business, I would have stopped and filed a lawsuit but I didn't.  I just I, you know I was driven, and I said, "I have to get this store."  I had just, felt like really wanted to get this store and it was meant to be.  So, It--, the ironic part about this how I ended up getting a loan, was I went to a--, remember Crestar Bank, which is now SunTrust.  And they had just come into Washington [D.C.], and they were saying--, I remember sitting down the Vice President happen to be there that day.  And he's like, "I'm sorry I really can't help you I need $200,000.00 worth of collateral."  I was like "For a $40,000.00 loan?"  He's like, "Yeah you know," so I was like this is--, and by then this was bout my tenth bank.  So I'm like okay this is crazy you know I have a home that was worth about $150,000.00.  And I said wow okay, so what I did is--, then we start talking football of all things.  You know, and I said what you know I mentioned that I was trying to buy it from Art Monk was one of the owners.  And then another [Washington] Redskins of course they had just recently won the Super Bowl or something.  You know, and he was like wow, okay and he was like, "I tell you what I'll give you $15,000.00 and see what you can do."  I was like "That'll work, $15,000; I'll work with $15,000."  So I go back, I talk to the owners, and they were like "Okay we'll work it out."  So took over ownership of the store and within that first-year sales went from about $50,000 a year to about $200-and-something thousand a year.
Speaker 1: This is in Gaithersburg [Maryland] now?
Speaker 2: This is in Gaithersburg; it was at the strip mall right off of Firstfield Street--it was on Firstfield Street.
Story_ID: 100845
Speaker 1: So you were running that business full time, yourself?
Speaker 2: I was running that business yeah.  And you know, dealt with a lot of racism with that business as well.  You know, it was very interesting because as I went on in life you know I just found different levels of, of racism that I didn't expect, you know, I didn't expect.  So it was very interesting, but I was able to turn the business around.  It became very successful.  And even at ten years old my daughter [Huda Mumin], I taught her every aspect of the business.  How to do stocking, how to run the cash register, how to do everything.   And I thought it was very important for children to know how easy it is to obtain a business or to run your own business or to you know, learn the particulars.  I always been very big on education, that's formal education and un-- informal education.  Whether it's you reading on your own and learning things.  Whether it's taking up a trade, but learning.  You know I've always been--, it's always been important to me to learn as much as I can about as many different things as I can.  Because I felt that, that would always make me valuable in some aspect and that I would have a job, I would always work. You know as long as I had different careers and skills, and so I instilled that in my daughter as well that's probably why I have an issue with her changing careers (simultaneous) now.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But, so but I--, yeah I dealt with a lot of adversity with that store.
Speaker 1: How long did you have the business?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years?
Speaker 2: Uh-um Uh-um
Speaker 1: But it was very successful, it was featured in Black Enterprise twice.  We were featured on television a couple of times, and it went very well.
Story_ID: 100846
Speaker 1: You know I-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well when did you current business, Clarke & Associates, when did this, when did you become a media specialist and the, and the (simultaneous) kind of work you're doing now?
Speaker 1: Well what happened, well.
Speaker 2: Where these parallel to each other?
Speaker 1: Not at all. Not at all. What happen I was in the process of, I was moving this store it was growing there was a new development a shopping center being built.  Do you know where Lake Forest Mall is?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: In Gaithersburg, Maryland there's a huge shopping center called Lake Forest Mall.  I was--; I had negotiated a wonderful contract across-- for a new strip mall that was being built.  And I was moving my store I was having it built to my specification it was gonna be great.  Just to had moved into a beautiful big house, the same house Sugar Ray Leonard had.  So I was making money I was doing really good being very successful with this.  Well you know it's kind of like in life sometimes things happen that change your total direction in life.  And that's what happened to me at that moment.  Well when I thought everything was going just fine it wasn't.  What happened was, in the--, I was supposed to make a thirty-day transition with this other store being built the strip mall.  And that got halted because the Home Owners Association in Montgomery Village didn't want--, there was a gas station slated to be built with that strip mall.  They didn't want it, so they halted production on the strip mall, well thirty days turned into six months.  So and during that time Freshfields which is now Whole Fields was moving into that, the market here and I could not--, there was an issued about competing.  But some other things happened during that time on a personal level that changed my whole life.  And while I was waiting for that transition of moving into this great big house, everything is going, perfect fabulous.  I--, my mother [Dorothy Sharples] gets killed in a fire with her brother in Maine.  I get a call, and I was told that her and her brother there was a fire, and they were both you know deceased.  And meanwhile you know, my business is supposed to making a transformation.  I'm supposed to be moving in this house, and everything is happening.  Well, my world stopped at that moment, and I just can't tell you--.  It felt like someone cut out my heart and needless to say from that moment forward my entire world fell apart.  First my mother, then I never reopened the store because you know at that point, six months later you know then six months turned into an indefinitely.  Then it was like do I start all over at another location now I have to compete with Freshfields.  My marriage fell apart everything crashed you know.  So--  Fast-forward a year you know, I was still depressed, I went into a deep depression couldn't work, couldn't think, couldn't function.  And I remember one day my grandmother said to me--, I couldn't pray.  That was the hardest thing I realized at that point I couldn't pray I felt God was punishing me at that moment.  Because I'm like how could everything just go so bad at one time and I remember my grandmother [Beulah Clarke] 'cause I was at her house she said "What are you going to do?" she said, "is this it?"   She said, "You have three kids; you're not tending to them.  What are you going to do; you have to make a decision, you have to get up.  You're going to church with me you gonna get your life together." You know.  And at that point I was a single mother now.  And didn't have a job, didn't like, didn't know what I wanted to--, didn't even think about what I wanted to do.  Didn't even think about doing anything, financially I'm going into crisis because my money's running out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so after my grandmother picked me up off the floor, I said you know, I had to think I had to reevaluate my life and what I wanted my life to do, or be.  You know, and I realized, you know, I was so sad at that time, just so sad.  And I hadn't laughed in, in a long time.  And--
Story_ID: 100847
Speaker 1: What I did is I said, "I want to do something in life that I love.  I want to do something that is gonna make me laugh. I want to do something that, you know, I really enjoy doing."  And I knew that photography was one of those things you know, I was trying to identify what my dreams were at that moment.  'Cause you know, as, as you go on in life your dreams change.  You know, what my dreams were in high school were different than college and then from college to where I was at that point.  So, I really you know, I said what I always wanted to--, you know, I went back to high school.  I said I wanted to be a; I wanted to be a producer. I wanted to either produce film, television or something.  And I was very intrigued by [Robert] Bob Johnson and BET and I was like wow.  I didn't believe in the content of what they were putting on TV, but I admired that he was able to build that network from where he started.
Speaker 2: Just for our listeners, BET stands for?
Speaker 1: Black Entertainment Television.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you know I said I would love to work for BET.  Still I was kind of going a little backwards you know, even though I had started off as an entrepreneur.  I was like oh that would be a dream working for BET. So I said well I'm not qualified as a producer you know.  So I went back to school to study every course I could, to learn how to be a television producer you know to get all the skill that I needed. I became certified as a producer.
Speaker 2: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 1: It's called FCAC, and it's Channel 10, in Fairfax, Virginia.  They offer year round courses in every aspect of television production, and they also have one of the state of the arts studios.  So you're there, I went there for two years.  And I learned everything from lighting to technical, direction to everything that I need to know, and I got certified.
Speaker 2: How did you support yourself and your family at this point while you--?
Speaker 1: Still with the funding from my store previously.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: So now you're a certified producer?
Speaker 1: Producer, right.  So, I'm a--, what I do is I apply to BET I'm ready you know that's what I think you know, "Oh I'm ready.  I'm so qualified they're gonna hire me like" that and well I think they shut the door in my face.  About six times (laughter) like "No thank you, no thank you, no thank you."  I was devastated once again I spent all this time being--, you know going back to learn you know I was like ok.  Meanwhile I guess what I didn't say too was I--, after my mother [Dorothy Sharples] died, I had loved photography very young I stopped taking pictures like after I became an adult.  After my mother died I pick the camera back up, and I started shooting and you know started taking a lot of pictures and this will be significant a little later on but--.
Story_ID: 100848
Speaker 1: So when BET [Black Entertainment Television] didn't hire me, I was like, wow, okay there goes that dream.  And oddly enough I was sitting in a comedy show, or audition, a comedy audition one day and I sat there and I laughed, and I laughed, and I laughed.  And I was like wow, this is what I--you know, it's like this is the kind of career I want, something that, 'cause it was so I think it--I had been through so much pain; I hadn't laughed in so long 'til it was so healing for me at that, during that night.  You know, and I met the producers of Def Comedy Jam that night.  And we all, you know, really clicked, and really formed a friendship at that time.  Well, I ended up getting a opportunity with Def Comedy Jam, HBO [HM] Russell Simmons' Def Comedy Jam to--well actually let me back up a little bit.  I started doing independent editing for projects, so that's kind of like, I was doing some freelance work and that type of thing with the production piece.  Started doing some photography, you know, became very good at photography and kind of all over the place, you know, now that my BET dream had been just destroyed.  And I started doing, actually I started doing by default, it's really kind of odd, this is how my, my PR [public relations] career launched.  I started doing merchandising for Def Comedy Jam, did all the tour jackets, had everything designed and you know, which goes back to my seamstress days.  Had everything designed you know, started actually managing the marketing on tour and that type of thing.  I ended up producing something they did called the club series, which was an intimate--like at the Improv or some of the smaller comedy clubs we would recreate Def Comedy Jam.   And so one day the producer of Def Comedy Jam tells me he's like, "Well, why--," he says "well, can you give me some publicity on the show?  Get me, you know, I need some--." I said, "No I don't do that," and he's like, "Well just, you know, can you try?"  I'm like, "That's really not my forte." He's like, "Well just see what you can do."  And I got so much publicity (laughter), so I was like wow; you know it's like my first big story.  I was like, I like--you know it just gave me this incredible feeling, this incredible feeling of accomplishment.  And seeing the client so happy to see their stuff in print, and that was a revelation for me I was like, I really like this.  Okay.
Story_ID: 100849
Speaker 1: Back to school, I went back to school (laughter).  And I was like, you know, I need to learn more about communications, and you know.
Speaker 2: Where did you go, where'd you go?
Speaker 1: Columbia Union College [now Washington Adventist University in Takoma Park, Maryland] here.
Speaker 2: Columbia Union College?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so I, I took communications and business and you know, so that's when the career was launched.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, so from there I you know, I started working really pounding the pavement.  Oh my God, the networking, the free work, the--, it was crazy because I was a novice and you know I was just learning the industry. I started working with you know with different people in the PR [public relations] world and it took a long time of just really, really you know doing a lot of networking and started locally.  Every big event took place in Washington [D.C.] I was there.  You know, And I think one of my biggest breakthroughs was, I got an opportunity to work with Johnnie Cochran right after the trial [O.J. Simpson trial].  When his first visit to Washington, I was in charge of his public relations, and I can tell you I think that kind of set the tone for the rest of you know, my career.
Story_ID: 100850
Speaker 1: Johnnie Cochran, oh wow, I got to handle the PR [public relations], for Johnnie Cochran when he came into Washington, the first appearance after the O.J. [Simpson] trial.  And that was my launch into real PR I think.  And it was an unbelievable experience, first of all, the calls that we got, and the craziness surrounding the trial.  And I remember I gave Donnie Simpson an exclusive interview with, interview with Johnnie, you know.  And Johnnie talked on the phone with him for quite a while and the next day Donnie Simpson had a full page spread in the Washington Post because he spoke to Johnnie.  And I remember picking Johnnie up at the airport, and it was like, you remember how Michael Jackson, was in his hay day.  It was like walking with Michael Jackson, I have never seen anything like it.  And I didn't know what to expect, I thought I was gonna get received by an arrogant black Lawyer.  But Johnnie Cochran was one of the most gracious, unbelievable spirits that I have ever to this day worked with.  You know I was honor also to do PR, for his funeral that was a great honor for me to do that.  But, you know, I really got a, a great dose of what it's like to work with a very high profile, controversial figure.  And I spent three days with Mr. Cochran and you know, doing appearances, and PR, while he was in town.  And it was a, a incredible experience and his wife [Sylvia Dale] so gracious, two the nicest people, Dale Cochran and Mr. Cochran two of the nicest people I ever worked with, so that was one of my big you know, milestones I think that happened in my PR, career. And from there it just took off to you know from one thing to the next and really trying to, to create and build relationships.  It took a long time you know for me to build a lot of relationships but over the years I did a ton of networking.  You know, I did a ton of free work; I did a ton of volunteering.  And, and you know, I look back now, and it was all worth it.  I mean you know, did a lot of sacrifices, a lot of broke days you know, I couldn't buy groceries or you know, but it all paid off in the long run.  And I think that I, I truly found my calling because you know, you fast forward all these years later.  Ten plus years and you know I still love it as much as I loved it when I first got introduced to it.  And it's a lot of work you know, I work a lot of hours still, but I'm very passionate about my work.  And you know, it's very important for me to be able to deliver, and our clients be very happy with the results that we give them.
Speaker 2: You have a very long list of clients, very diverse, well-known people, well-known organizations in the corporate sector, in the political sector, and in the entertainment sector of America.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when we continue our talk I'd like you to talk about your clients corporate, political and entertainment.  And who's some of the people are that you're working with today and those you've worked with in the past?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So let's, let's do that as we continue to talk.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 100851
Speaker 1: Would you outline for me the broad and diverse range of services that Clarke & Associates offers to clients and the corporate world, the political world, and the entertainment world?
Speaker 2: Well we primarily are a public relations firm, but we also specialize in entertainment, event planning, and partnerships, I would like to say, because we merge a lot of those different entities together to help one another.  So and we do we cover--, we have corporate clients, we have non-profit, we have political, we entertainment.  So, and that was strategically done because I don't, I wanted us to be balanced.  And we can utilize a lot of certain clients like we bring our celebrity clients to help with the non-profit causes and it's a way for us as a firm to stay balanced as well.  Because if you work just in the entertainment industry, if you-- were caused driven, so we get an opportunity to work with various causes as well as the high-profile things that happen.  But I wanted to make sure that we were diverse and that we were able to you know, be in all those different areas and be successful at the campaigns that we do in those different areas.
Story_ID: 100852
Speaker 1: What I meant by that was you know, you do galas, golf tournaments (simultaneous), grand openings?
Speaker 2: Oh I see what you're saying, okay.
Speaker 1: And receptions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --special events, weddings, tour media support, that's what I mean?
Speaker 2: Oh I see.
Speaker 1: You don't have to do a lot but just--, you know what are the various range of services and then they fit into these?
Speaker 2: Right okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, you can speak.
Speaker 2: Oh okay all right.
Speaker 1: So the range of services that you provide across the various sectors what are--, can you kind of give us a checklist of those?
Speaker 2: We do everything from major campaigns to crisis management.  We do events such as golf tournaments, album release parties, galas.  So we--, a wide spectrum, golf-- you know, I did say golf tournaments but yeah, we do a wide spectrum of events.
Story_ID: 100853
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your high profile events at the present time in any of the sectors--corporate, political, entertainment--what are you working on right now?
Speaker 2: We just got finished with the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation's annual legislative conference which really official public relations firm for the conference every year.  And that one is where the forty-three members of the Congressional Black Caucus come together.  And they have issue forums, bring trust that deals, that deal with some of the issues that are affecting the African American society today.  And we normally have to handle about three to four hundred media outlets from around the world over the period of that conference.  So that's a major undertaking and, and it's been a great experience working with the members of Congress.  And we've been very successful over the past four years so.
Speaker 1: Can you give me another political client?
Speaker 2: Well actually the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation has been our biggest political clients.  We've worked periodically with the local candidates.  We've done some work with Adrian Fenty and some of the local political figures.
Speaker 1: Who is Adrian Fenty?
Speaker 2: He's the new Mayor of Washington [D.C.] (laughter) so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I was, I was laughing because actually when we did, we did something and Entertainment Tonight came out when we-- when that last election.  The presidential election, when there was all the controversy about the voting and the numbers.  And Adrian Fenty was in the room, and I say's I'm pitching entering him to Entertainment Tonight because the celebrities that were supposed to come had not come.  So I'm like, "Oh, he's a bright political star in the city and--," so they, "Oh great we'll talk to him."  So you know now that he's mayor, I says I have to dig up that footage of him.  You know, that they did 'cause now it's valuable yeah.
Story_ID: 100854
Speaker 1: What about the corporate sector, who would be some of the big clients that you service and how have you serviced them?
Speaker 2: We've worked--, for the most part with various campaigns, we've worked with Xerox Corporation, AOL/Time Warner, we just recently worked with Dell [Inc.].  Also with the Congressional Black Caucus to launch Avoice, which is also, the online archive of some of our political and civil rights leaders.  So, we work with a lot of major clients on different campaigns.  It just depends on the particular campaign where a launch on a particular product.
Speaker 1: You work to assist various celebrities entertainers to be on interview shows, get them in feature articles, and magazines would you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, we work with the--, actually you know it-- it's interesting because there's not too many very well-known celebrities we hadn't worked with at some point or time.  We've worked with Oprah Winfrey; we were very honored to work with her with [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height's 90th birthday celebration, and also with the Dream Academy.
Speaker 1: What you do with Oprah Winfrey?
Speaker 2: Well we handled, similar to what we did with Johnnie Cochran.  When Oprah came to town we worked with her with all--, actually Oprah was one of my most interesting experiences. We worked Oprah with all her press when she came into town.  We managed all the press opportunities and the interviews that she willing to do and set'em up and that type of thing and also basically her overall appearance.  And on that particular day what I did is--, Oprah gave me a challenge.  So, we had twenty-five corporate groups, and this was, this was really hilarious twenty-five corporate groups that needed pictures with Oprah.  Oprah was--, "Priscilla you have ten minutes," and I was like, "Ten minutes, Oprah, are you ser-- twenty-five--" you know. And she's like, "Ten minutes." I said, "Okay, how I'm I going to do this."  So then I said, "Look people this is an assembly line," I said, "You got five seconds to get your picture with Oprah and keep it going."  So I did it I literally brought people in, I had them in a line and like they posed with Oprah.  And then to the point where I got it done in the ten minutes that she got me.  And she looked at me, and she was like "That was incredible." She said "I can't--, I never seen anything like it, I can't believe you got it done" and so it was such a compliment coming from her.  But then throughout that day, you know, day I scheduled the interviews that she did.  But that particular incident the Washington Post ran the picture of me (laughter) trying to coordinate these people through Oprah.  So it was the most hilarious thing.  You know, but- So, you know but she's so gracious.  I got actually the opportunity--, that was one of the most memorable events I ever did in one night for [HM] Dr. Dorothy Height; we raised 6.5 million.  And I literally--, you know, Oprah had me accompany her to each table you know, to go to ask for money and raise six and a half million dollars in one night.  It was one of the, the best experiences I think I ever had.
Speaker 1: You raised for Dorothy Height?
Speaker 2: Right, they were trying to burn the building.
Speaker 1: That's for the National Council of Negro Women?
Speaker 2: National Council of Negro Women [NCNW].
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you about that.
Speaker 2: That was, and she such a historical figure Dr. Height.  And it's you know, I worked with her periodically on projects, and it's been such an honor.  You know, and but that one was most memorable because that room had so much compassion that night.  We had little kids donating all of their piggy bank money.  And I mean everyone was giving, I mean it was such a spirit of giving I've never experienced anything since then.  But you know Oprah turned that entire room into the Oprah show.  And people they just were--, their hearts were there in that room.  So Oprah is--.
Story_ID: 100855
Speaker 1: You mentioned Beyonce Knowles [Knowles-Carter], would you tell me about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh Beyonce, yeah.
Speaker 1: Beyonce?
Speaker 2: Beyonce. Oh yeah, Beyonce.
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your work?
Speaker 2: Well actually we represent her father and manager, Mathew Knowles and Music World Entertainment, which is the company that manages Beyonce.  So we've, we've had the honor of course of working with all these various artist including Beyonce.  And we worked her recently, and she did something for Radio One and also when she did the walk of fame in Hollywood they just got a star and on several events and occasions.  That family is one the most humble families.  You know, the superstardom that she's obtained, she is one of the most humble celebrities I've ever worked with, and she's very compassionate.  And just good people, all of them; her entire family is like that, just great people, you know so.
Speaker 1: You were telling me during the break that you have a business right here next to the Ellington, where we're doing this interview, and you wanna make a connection between Beyonce and your (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well hopefully by time this airs (laughter). We're actually in talks with Mr. Knowles. Beyonce's father, to bring House of Dereon here for them to come in and, and come--, you know and partner with us.  And bring House of Dereon, which is the line that was started by Beyonce and her mom [Celestine "Tina" Beyince-Lawson], in honor of the grandmother. So--.
Speaker 1: And where you gone put that line, tell us where you--?
Speaker 2: The line, the, the clothing line it's a, it's a beautiful clothing line it would actually be in the store.  Our store right now is Destination You, which is a boutique and we would convert it into House of Dereon.  And you know, and then have a major presence of Beyonce in the city, yeah.
Story_ID: 100856
Speaker 1: I play golf every day, I'm a golfer, that's my passion.
Speaker 2: Ooo. Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the golf tournaments, maybe one or two that--
Speaker 2: We've done
Speaker 1: --you've put together?
Speaker 2: Okay we had, one of the most memorable golf tournament, [Tyrone Curtis] Muggsy Bogues, I don't know if you remember Muggsy.
Speaker 1: Heard the name, but yeah.
Speaker 2: He's a NBA player.  The little NBA player that Space Jam with Michael Jordan.  Played for North Carolina, yeah North Carolina, the Charlotte [Hornets].  I can't remember the name of the team, but anyway we did a--, with his non-profit organization, we organized a golf tournament weekend at the Atlantis Hotel in the Bahamas.  So we did that two years in a row.  And that was a great experience you know, and we had a golf tournament on the island of the Bahamas and several activities surrounding it, which was a lot of work.  And we brought in about forty NBA players so, and celebrities.  So it was really--, we had a party on the beach, so we organized the whole entire thing.  It was really fabulous it was great.  And we do--, we've been working with the Greater Washington Urban League here in Washington [D.C.], with [HM] Maudine Cooper.  And we've been on the committee to also organize her golf tournament for the past nine years.
Story_ID: 100857
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I'm looking at you client list, and I've guess I checked off some that I'm kind of have experience with and let me ask you a couple of others.  I'm a historian of blacks in medicine; so let me ask you about I know that you said the National Medical Association (simultaneous).  What have you done with them and for them?
Speaker 1: Well, actually we worked with them on their conference a few years ago.  And we brought in Cicely Tyson to be their keynote speaker for you know the conference, to talk about I think, I believe it was diabetes at the time.  And that was a wonderful experience.  Actually getting to spend a day with Cicely Tyson, was, was great.  And working with the National Medical Association was great, we've, and we've consulted them on some things that they've done.
Speaker 2: Okay, what about NAFEO, The National Association of Equal Opportunity and Higher Education?
Speaker 1: We handle the public relations for their conference.  So they're a great organization as well.
Speaker 2: And they're an annual, that's an annual conference?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We've interviewed two people very recently who one is now the CEO of NAFEO, and one is the former CEO, so.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, who?
Speaker 2: [HM Frederick] Fred Humphries, he was with them for a while (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Oh, actually that's what--, during the time I worked with them.
Speaker 2: And my very first interview this week was with [HM] Lezli Baskerville.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Who is found heading up NAFEO, okay?  Johnson Publishing Company, Ebony and Jet, what have you done with them, for them?
Speaker 1: Actually I worked actually with the Washington [D.C.] bureau here for a couple of years.  And then I also have--, 'cause I told you I was a photographer.  So I've had work published, which that's something I, I've done, I did professionally for quite a few years.  I still dibble dabble in photography a little bit.  I've actually at--, worked publishing Newsweek, I have had worked publishing at Jet magazine, and quite a few others.
Speaker 2: Now this is important, I noticed on your client list you have BET, Black Entertainment Television.  That (simultaneous) (laughter), they didn't except you so what have you done with that.
Speaker 1: Right, yes.  Actually they've hired us to handle public relations for projects and some the show's that they've done.  I know ironically you know, it came back a different way this time, I don't have that passion to work for them anymore.
Speaker 2: Another one I'm interested in because it's one of the social human services organization, The Boys and Girls Club of America, what have you done with that company?
Speaker 1: We did a; we've done a few things with them but one thing that; we actually got the opportunity to work with Bill Gates and Shaquille O'Neal.  Well, Shaquille O'Neal has been an ongoing client as well.  We worked with him on quite a few projects.  But that was a memorable experience 'cause you know, we got to work with them on the safe surfing the Internet campaign ["Stay Safe Online"] that they did with the Boys and Girls Club of America.  And one, one client that I think people find very intriguing that we work with is Omarosa from The Apprentice, and because she's been so controversial.  One of our--, one of the things in the years that I built the firm, it's been important to me is to work with good people.  You know, I've turned down a lot of clients because I want to deal with people of integrity and people that are good nature, good spirited.  So, when I take on--, she's considered the reality star villainous.  You know, I got a lot of flack, and they're like you know, why would you--, why would you work with her and you know because she has such a bad reputation.  But when I met her you know, we clicked instantly, and this--, I, I ended up working with her prior to her leaving the show.  But when I met her it was nothing like I expected, and it was during the beginning of the show.  And she's been one of the great clients that I worked with you know.  We've been able to leverage her opportunity and keep her out there. You know, but it's interesting because like we worked with The O'Jays, Robert Townsend, a lot of our clients are just--, Shaquille O'Neal, a lot of our clients, are really good people.  You know, and I try to keep it that way.  You know, where we don't--, I like to keep it balanced, and you know.  But it's very important for us to believe in what we represent, so that's, that's part of my mission with the company.
Speaker 2: And Clarke & Associates, you're based here in Washington, and tell me where else you are?
Speaker 1: And I have an office in Los Angeles, California as well.  We have a lot of clients that we work with because that's our entertainment base out there.  So a lot of the clients we work with are out there, and I'm out there about every other week.
Story_ID: 100858
Speaker 1: What entertainment activity are you presently involved in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Give me an example of something ongoing right now.
Speaker 2: We're working on several campaigns; right now we're working on Dreamgirls.  And you know the movie is coming out where we're specifically handling the Dreamgirls soundtrack that's being released on December 5th.  We're also working on American Music Awards 'cause we have some clients going, Beyonce's [Beyonce Knowles-Carter] performing at the American Music Awards.  And, but the biggest project we're really excited about The Dreamgirls project because you know we're anticipating it's gonna be really huge.  And so we just sent out an announcement about that.  And we're working on with several other artists that Music World [Entertainment] is releasing.  We're working on--, we just got finish with the campaign with Sinbad; we do a lot of comedy still.  You know, we've worked with several comedians lately, Tracy Morgan, Mike Epps and release of their new DVDs.  So we're all over the place but importantly we do everything very well.  I mean, we're--, it's very important to me that you know, no matter what genre we're in, that you know, we're successful with our campaigns.
Story_ID: 100859
Speaker 1: Good.  Well, let me come down to some wrap-up questions to conclude this HistoryMakers' interview.  Is there anything you'd like to add to your interview that I have not asked you about?
Speaker 2: Well we do a lot of non-profit work, and that's really what moves my heart like we work a lot with the Negro League [baseball] players.  And that was a really good experience for me because they've never got no just due of what they deserved, like with the museum, they weren't getting any residuals from that.  And you know, so part of that was important to me to try to help them, you know, get some of what they deserved, from a financial standpoint, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Tying back to justice.
Speaker 2: Right back to justice (laughter).  And so you know, we work with an organization called Reaching Out to Others Together with Kenneth Barnes and his son was murdered five years ago.  And they do a lot of work with anti-violence, and youth, and guns aside programs.  So some of the non-profit is our substance, like the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation and their issues.  So, and the Urban League here in Washington, [D.C.] and cause-driven is very important to us and that gives us our balance.  You know, we jump in and out of Hollywood, Hollywood is great, but I need that balance because you know, it goes back to what I said about making a difference in the world.  It's like you my recording says "Slow down take time, make a difference in the world."  And everyone laughs at that (laughter) 'cause they say, "You don't' slow down, you know."  But I think everyone has to figure out--, I think everyone has a purpose here in the world, and in life.  And I think sometimes you know, we struggle through life trying to figure out what that purpose is.  But you know, it's important to me to help people.  To help try to turn people's lives around to make a difference, to make a contribution in some way to society, to people, to a child.  You know, I like to mentor children.
Story_ID: 100860
Speaker 1: That leads me to my next question.  How do you feel about the way that you've led your life?
Speaker 2: There's a few things I might do a little different, but--, (laughter), (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you that too, so go head that's another question right here?
Speaker 2: I you know, I feel blessed; I feel that God has really you know bless me.  I'm a very positive person I think; I always think the glass is half full.  And when something goes wrong I says, "Wow, thank you God that it didn't, didn't--, that something worst didn't happen."  That's how my--, you know, people think you know I'm in the mist of crisis, and I'm always so calm, cool, and collective.  And they're like, "Wow how do you do that, you just like so--, everything is falling apart around and you're so calm."  It's like 'cause I have a inner peace.  You know, and I, I always feel that God is gonna make it ok.  I'm gonna do my part, but I feel that, you know, he's gonna look after whatever it is, and it's gonna be ok.  And I feel that nothing happens by mistake even our tragedies.  I think all of our tragedies are learning experiences and it's to help us be stronger and to be better.   And sometimes those tragedies are what make us help other people you know, help us inspire other people.  So, I'm one always to say it could have been worse it always could have been worse.  And I say I work a hard day.  And then I look at someone like a [HM] Dr. [Dorothy] Height, or Coretta Scott King, or [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and I says, "Oh I don't even touch the surface."  So, you know, I don't complain, I just try to get it done.
Story_ID: 100861
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: I would like to make our firm [Clarke & Associates], a very reputable recognized firm that's not a "black firm."  We still get labeled as a black firm, even though, I mean we deal with all types of clients.  You know, I think we do a good of job as many of the big firms.  But I think that we still are, you know, we got--, we get labeled still--, you know.  I even have people call me and say, "Oh well you can do the black press for that.  But we'll hire the white firm to do our--."  I say, "But we, we secure Jay Leno, I mean we do all the big shows too.  We do Oprah.  We do, you know, we've secured, you know, New York Times articles I mean we do all the top of the line PR [public relations] work you know, we have relationships with everyone."  So, but there's this stigma still with our company.  That's because it's ran by a black woman that it's a black firm.  And they can't--, and we can't do anything other than--, you know it's funny because the, the--, we have a new client we just signed.  And you know we called back, we said "Okay we have Jay Leno scheduled."  And they're like, "Jay Leno, how did you get Jay Leno?"  I'm like, "what do you mean how did we get Jay Leno?"
Speaker 1: Quickly, how did you get Jay Leno?
Speaker 2: We just called the producer; we have a relationship with them.  And so we just called, and you know we pitched like we do everyone like you know pitching Oprah show for another client right now.  And I mean we have--, we can pick up the phone and call some of the executive producers or some of the producers, and they know us.  So, but I think people don't think that you know they think oh you know.  And then if we run down the list of some of the stuff that we've gotten done there amazed and like why are they amazed.  You know it's our job, and that's what we do and we do it well.  And black, white or whatever you know, we do it well.
Story_ID: 100862
Speaker 1: Looking back over your life, is there anything that you think you've might have done differently.
Speaker 2: I think the number one thing and I thought about this the other day is, I would have spent more time with my children.  My son you know it's like I worked from home a lot, I built my company from home a lot.  And I felt like oh I can be home, and my son use to always tell me, "mom, you're here, but you're not here."  And I think I would have taken a little more time to spend with my children.  And you know really do more family things.  I did family things, but I didn't spend enough time and I think that, you know, that's one of the major things I would have done.
Story_ID: 100863
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American communities here in Washington, D.C?
Speaker 2: You know, my biggest concern is our children; I think that the condition of the youth today is really in a bad state.  I think that everyone needs to spend a lot more time on the youth.  I, I think they're lost generation right now.  I don't think us as adults us--, even the organizations that exist are really paying attention to what's really going on.  And I think that there should be a bigger collective national, international effort to really try to save some of these children in our communities.  There are kids here in Washington that haven't even been out of their communities.  We dealt with a child recently that had been beat up by gang members.  It's just sad because I think that children have no direction a lot of them, a lot of them it's their homes.  We can't save everyone, but I think we can save a lot more than we're saving.  And I think that that's one of my big missions and passions is to--.  You know I try to mentor children as much as I can.  Sometimes it's just someone taking time, and that's one of the things eventually my goal is to take these celebrities-- because the kids listen.  It's only because they have that value for the kids to listen to them that they have power to make a change in some of these societies in some of these children's lives.  Sometimes if you have someone that you look up to and you idolize saying to you, you can do it, you can--  you know, and it's very important and I've seen change happen.  Because one person like you know in your life there's been someone, that has inspired you, or changed or done something to help you go on.  To try to achieve something in your life and I think that a lot of us don't do enough. That's one of the bigger things I think.
Story_ID: 100864
Speaker 1: Last question, or maybe next to last: how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a really good person.  I want to be remembered as someone that cared, someone that worked hard and treated everyone fairly. Someone that hopefully made some type of difference in the world.  Someone that touched the lives of people that I came in contact with.  That I maybe inspired you know, that maybe I helped someone a long the way.  And someone that tried to achieve goals that were against all odds, you know.
