Story_ID: 402486
Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Philip Thomas Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth, well, I didn't--I have a title, I should put that in there. My title is Kelan, K-E-L-A-N. It was given to me when I was in China visiting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when were you--
Speaker 2: I was visiting the Great Mosque in Xi'an [China], which they have Muslims in China now. And I visited that mosque, and the imam gave me the name Kelan. He asked me how many children, sons I had, and I told him thirteen (laughter). But anyway, we had a very nice interview. And he gave me that scroll that's in my living room there from this--it's a parchment from the mosque that was built in 750 A.D. [sic.]. So, they put in me in their log for that day. June, I think June 3, 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any other names or nicknames that you--
Speaker 2: No, no, I never liked nicknames. I've been formal all my life. (Laughter) And I taught my children--this is what I taught them. It's that when a person names you, they're either naming you out of knowledge or love, and both of those causes are enough to keep your name. Because the energy--every time someone speaks your name, they call forth the energy of the person who gave you the name. So, that's either love or knowledge (laughter). And I told my kids not to use any nicknames, because it's very popular nowadays to have nicknames, you know. That comes from jail (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oxford, Mississippi near the university. In fact, our people's property, the family property was--the university bought some of it, Ole Miss University [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi]. And there's a telescope down there in the Adler Planetarium [Chicago, Illinois] that was made in 18--it was ordered in 1850-something [sic.] for that university. And they built a dome for it to go on it and everything, the structure part. And the war broke out, the Civil War broke out, and all the men joined the Confederate Army and all of them got killed. So, they didn't have any perspective (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Astronomers.
Speaker 2: Astronomers. (Laughter) Ole Miss University. And Chicago [Illinois], its Astronomical Society [Chicago Astronomical Society], they bought it, you know, since it was finished. It took about five or six years. But they bought it, and they kept it out at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] a long time. I've gone out for classes and looked through it. I remember looking at Lyra, the harp [constellation] through it. And so now Adler bought it back, and it's downstairs in the Adler Planetarium.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, that's my connection--
Speaker 1: Now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) from Oxford, Mississippi (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Just to continue the ID, briefly, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Oh, angel. That's the only word I know that takes it up, because it means that I magnify the part of me that was personally in God's presence. Secondly, my biggest activity is trying to help people. Third, I'm a researcher, and I try to discover the unknown truth. And fourth, I have a lot of fun playing music (laughter), and that's about it.
Story_ID: 402487
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that the office makes me ask everybody.
Speaker 2: Good, I like lightweight questions (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes. What is my favorite food? It changes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm seventy-nine now, and so I've gone through a few stages. But I would say that my favorite food--boy, that's so hard, is grits.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a versatile food.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you see, I have developed principles for my body. Because I had experiences in 1961, and I met a man and he told me that I would be an old man before I was recognized, and that I should have my health thing together. (Laughter) So, that's how I started. I started reading labels (laughter).
Speaker 1: I want to talk about that later, too. You have some health ideas that are tremendous (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. We started a lot of stuff that people use, and I was the first one to deal with distilled water. Nobody else knew what it was. But I did the research on it and found this, what do you call it? Surface tension was the most important property of water. And so, you increase the surface tension when you take anything out of it. It has to be pure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the government only, or guarantees distilled water. The rest of it could be pee, or anything. I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's okay. What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color has always been blue, because the sky is blue when it's a really good day.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I love that, I always have. I've never been downhearted. I ain't never been depressed over a period of time, or nothing like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it had to be some event or something. But as long as I can see some sunlight, I can make it (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. So blue makes you feel better. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think that everyone's favorite time should be near their birthday (laughter), because those are the conditions that you entered this earth realm in. And so every time you get back there, you get back to your native position. Yeah, I think everybody ought to have a favorite time right near their birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then there's the other side of the coin where, when I worked as a fingerprint technician, I found a lot of people got arrested on their birthday (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's very interesting. I formulated some principles from it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me, what is, oh, what's your favorite vacation destination? That's one of the questions.
Speaker 2: Vacation?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What is that?
Speaker 1: All right (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand. The last one is, well, do you have a favorite place in the world you like to go?
Speaker 2: Yes, to the lakefront.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've been there over a thousand times, I know.
Speaker 1: All right. Our Chicago [Illinois] lakefront, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other lakes don't feel the same. Superior [Lake Superior], Erie [Lake Erie], you know, Huron [Lake Huron], they just don't--you know, when you see them, there's a different energy altogether. And then I did that research on du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable], and then (unclear) told me that this was the only spirit lake. That's what it is, and that's why turns me on so, you know. All year round, it's like, one day, it's just as smooth as glass, like you can see the sky in it, you know. And the next day, man, the waves are eleven feet high, and you can hear it from here, it's going (imitates waves). That's the way it sounds, and that's all you can hear when you're coming through there. You know that the sound is way up, and you know that the water is going sideways (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, the last question in this series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Boy, I can't think of a favorite phrase. Well, musicians, you know, we're creative people. We frown on doing the same thing all the time. But I will say, let's see; I know I've got some that I use all the time. My favorite phrase, I don't know if I should deal with that (laughter) in this interview. Let's see, what would it be? Let me see if I can get some. You know, these are some taxing questions, you know. We should be talking about the universe or the world or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, think about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: And if it comes to you, all right.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: If not, we'll just--
Speaker 2: I know I've got lots of phrases I use. Yeah, well, I'll tell you what.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Frederick Douglass, I use that quite a bit. I used it yesterday. "A man gets worked on by what he works on."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because a lot of people think they can jump in some nasty stuff and don't get dirty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--
Speaker 2: But he reminds you that you're being worked on while you're working on something.
Story_ID: 402488
Speaker 1: So, let, let me ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Good.
Speaker 1: --and your father's [Philip Cohran, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: And we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right, my mother--
Speaker 1: Can you give us her name first--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --her full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Her name is Frankie Mae Green [Frankie Green Rogland].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what--
Speaker 2: That is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's spelled?
Speaker 2: G-R-E-E-N, Green; Frankie, K-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Mae, M-A-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, that's Mississippi, see. And you know that the slaves used masculine names and put little phrase tags on it to show the feminine gender. See, that's a practice. That's the reason I named my instrument the frankiphone because there's a lot of African descendants of the slaves who have masculine names that have been, you know, they put a little tag on them, like -ie or -a or something like that. But they come off of the man's name.
Speaker 1: Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is May the 4, 1909. And she was born outside of Lexington, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's close to your birthday.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's four days--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and her brother [Jack Green (ph.)] was May the 8th. And so, we used to always celebrate together. She told me I was his birthday present (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me, what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I mean how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: We can only go back to her mother. Her mother's name was Jennie [ph.], and her father, she don't even know him. He was a musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute, that's the grandparents. Let me back this up. Her father's name was West [Hugh West (ph.)]. And there's a strong story about him, but I don't want to publish it because I can't prove it's true.
Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't matter if it's true or not; it's just a story.
Speaker 2: Just a story? All right then. The story that I got was that my mother, at an early age, like maybe like ten or eleven or something like that, her mother died. And so the brother, Jack Green [ph.] and Frankie Green, came to, moved to Oxford [Mississippi] to live with their auntie, whose name, they called her Put, P-U-T, all right. Now, there were two other brothers and sisters, who were born to another man and my grandmother. And one was named William Green [ph.], who eventually moved out here to Hopkins Park [Illinois]. And the other one, the woman's name was Johnnie Mae [ph.]. So there was Frankie Mae and Johnnie Mae, you know. All right, now when, let me see. I had a format that I wanted to follow with them. The grandfather--let's see, my mother and her father was West, and then the other father was a musician; the great-grandfather was a musician. They said that they don't have his name. She didn't get his name because she moved away from her mother when she was nine or ten years old, and there's a lot of family history lost of them. But I have a genealogy chart drawn up on my father's side. I'm trying to think. And incidentally, my mother lived to ninety-three. So, she was--and I have a sheet on her, if you would like to take it.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, okay. I got a chance to meet her. Privilege to meet her back in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right, she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, for that awards show.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right, it was a big night. You know, that thing about you ain't the man that your mama was. (Laughter) That's what I think about every time I see that. Because when I was little, she wouldn't let me do nothing, boy. She'd take all them heavy jobs--chopping wood, and anything. You know, she'd tackle it. I had to take her off a man one time, because the guy said something to her outside her house. She was going in the house about nine o'clock, and the guy said something to her. And she carried a smoothing iron inside her purse. You've seen those old irons, you know.
Speaker 1: Irons?
Speaker 2: The iron things. You'd set them on the stove and let them get hot and then take them--she had them in bottom in her purse. (Laughter) And this guy said something to her, and she hit him and knocked him down with that iron thing. And while he was down, she was going at him. So I had to run up there and pull her off of him, because he was immobilized, you know. (Laughter) But that was the way--my mother was a survivor, very tough, strong, and learned. She was a scholar also, (laughter) which didn't set well with anybody.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go to school in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the valedictorian of her class. When she got to Oxford, she became very popular there. And supposedly married a great guy, see. So the Cohran family were important people in Oxford.
Story_ID: 402489
Speaker 1: We'll talk about them. But just, since we're talking about education, was Oxford [Mississippi] an easier place for black people to get an education than say one of these other smaller towns because of the university being there? Or did that make any difference?
Speaker 2: It made quite a difference. You coming from Dayton [Ohio], I can understand why you say that. (Laughter) Because it's the same in all the big schools, you know. The big schools dominate the town, and all the employees are erudite (laughter). You had the maids and everybody, you know, into that. And that's the way it was in Oxford. And I used to think about that when I was in high school [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri]. In college I said, you know, seems like the people that I grew up around, they always discussed different type things. You know, there wasn't ever any garbage in their conversations; they always talked in substance. That's the thing that got me, because, you know, it's just that there was no garbage. You know, people would talk about somebody, you might hear, now like, we had one thief in town, and everybody knew he stole compulsively, you know. And so, whenever something was missing, they'd just go to his house and get it back, you know. But it's just, it's just a strange. One of my friends my age--my age was like a wave. All of them that came out of that--I won't say they were extraordinary, but they were different, quite different. Roland [ph.], who is my age, he had a--they thought he had a mental problem, but he was different. He didn't have any girlfriends, he wasn't gay or nothing like that. He was just, his mind was just somewhere else. And he was into substance all the time, you know. He was a very great conversationalist, and played cards and all of that. And so, they drafted him. And when they got him in the [U.S.] Army, they tried to shape him. (Laughter) So, he went off on the preacher. He told the preacher he was lying and didn't know nothing about God, and all that stuff, you know. So, they wrote him up as being mentally deranged. And not wanting to pay pensions and stuff like that, they just put him out. And he walked all the way from Camp Campbell, Kentucky [Fort Campbell, Kentucky] to St. Louis [Missouri]. Well, that branded him, you know, his feet was all messed up and stuff. So, once they branded him they started sending him back and forth to these mental institutions. You know, and one time when he was out--he'd just come downstairs. But the landlord he was living with and playing cards with every day, he comes downstairs with his shotgun and just took the damn thing and blew the cat away. That was Roland. (Laughter) And there was another one, Shelley Porter [ph.], he was close to me, all right. Shelley came to Chicago [Illinois] long before I did, you know, after he got out of school. He came here and started working for Western Electric [Western Electric Company]. And he wasn't there a year before they made him a super supervisor. He was running practically the whole plant at Western Electric, you know. And he used to tell me that he didn't have anything, he didn't know anything to do. So every weekend he would come home; he had this huge check. He put almost all of it in the bank, and would go around and pay all the bills and give his auntie or whoever, and then he'd get him a couple of fifths of Old Grand-Dad, and that was him for the weekend. (Laughter) So, he got a cold once; that was back about in 1958. Man, he got a cold, and he couldn't make it through the cold. His body was just decimated with that Old Grand-Dad. Now, this is the fourth guy in my group. His name was Bubba [ph.] (laughter). Bubba lived up on top of the hill, and I lived in the valley, you see. And we were about half a block, maybe three-quarters of a block away from each other. And so, we used to shoot at each other with BB guns. (Laughter) We were friends, you know, that's what we were doing back in those days. And lo and behold, when James Meredith integrated the University of Mississippi [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], they killed Bubba. They caught him out in the country, and--
Speaker 1: Was he in St. Louis or in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: In Oxford.
Speaker 1: In Oxford?
Speaker 2: In Oxford. That's where--you know, when James Meredith integrated the University of Mississippi, everybody knew that would be the supreme test. Because there had never been anything close to acquiescing in Mississippi. And, I lost that thought--
Speaker 1: You were talking about your friend getting shot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bubba. They caught him out in the country and killed him, and mutilated him so bad, and put his body on the train tracks in the hopes that the train would run over him and they'd think that's how he died. But the train, the guy saw something laying on the tracks, so he got the train stopped before he got to him. And they took Bubba into the sheriff's office, in the morgue, and it was about three or four days before they could identify him; he was so mangled. Now, that's four people that I was (laughter) born with in Oxford. We used to run together and play together every day, you know. So, what I was saying is that it was an unusual group, an unusual wave of energy that came with my birth group out of that environment. There was another one who worked at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], and he became an official there at Notre Dame. He was very good in football. I taught him how to kick. So he was kicking, and he could throw. And so, with his kicking and his throwing, it got him a big shot. And he came out of school and went straight into the best jobs and everything. But he died, too.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: None of them lived long.
Story_ID: 402490
Speaker 1: I want to get back to your mother [Frankie Green Rogland]--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and her side of the family.
Speaker 2: Oh, she was powerful. I didn't tell you how the--about West [Hugh West (ph.)], her father.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: See, her father evidently was making with her mother on the side. So what happened, she had these children for him. And he had six or seven children of his own, and they became well-to-do. At the time when the cotton gins were run by wood and coal and stuff like that, they developed this diesel engine in Great Britain. And they started bringing, buying diesel engines over here in all the cotton lands to process the cotton. And West was working in one of these places as a handyman. And so they brought this new gas, I mean, diesel thing. And they had taken training and everything, and they got it set up. And they had to stop all the cotton from being ginned while they were setting this up, see. And so the lines started forming out there from the cotton and, "Well, we're up to quite a few wagons. And then the night came, and people say all through the night these guys were trying to get this motor to run." And so, the next day they were still trying. They called back to London [England], called New York [New York] and everywhere. So, West, her grandfather [sic.], he says, he told his boss, he said, "I'd like to try it," you know. He said, "They ain't doing nothing with it, so I'm going to try it." (Laughter) And he asked them--the cotton gin owner asked the two technicians. He said, "Well, he wants to try it," you know. He said, "He's pretty good around here, you know, so I want to get your permission." They said, "How do you think he's going to start it and we've been taking two months of training and we can't get going." (Laughter) He said, "Well, just--you ain't losing nothing." So, he let him, he asked him a couple of questions, and they told him the answer. And he went around and fooled around, and he went outside, and bam, and the thing went off, and all those wagons were stacked up to your chin. (Laughter) You could hear it all over the town. They said you could hear it all over the town, and people cheering. And everybody knew what it was when they heard the cheering. And from that day on, he was the fix-it man. Anything that went wrong--and you got to understand the dynamics of the industrial age. There were a lot of gadgets when we were young. Now gadgets, they got twenty gadgets inside of one little thing, (laughter) you know. But in those days they had a lot of gadgets, and everything was made to be taken apart and repaired, you know. They didn't get hip to this other stuff until later on. So, having that gift, and, oh, boy, this is just terrible--
Speaker 1: So, he had a real knack for fixing things.
Speaker 2: He became the fix-it man for the city, and everybody paid him huge money. And I was explaining about the industrial age, because so many things could be fixed back in that time, you know. I'm talking about 1920, 1921, '22 [1922] back then like that.
Story_ID: 402491
Speaker 1: Were there any stories in your family passed down about slavery, or what it was like, or any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we got a lot of stuff, yeah. We got a lot of stuff.
Speaker 1: On your mother's [Frankie Green Rogland] side you're talking about?
Speaker 2: But I didn't tell you. See, we're still in slavery, (laughter) because we're still working for nothing. The only thing now is that we're in debt. (Laughter) At least we weren't in debt. The reason you know you're in slavery is because you can't determine what you're taught. You really don't, you can't determine how you're governed, because you're manipulated out of every political position you can possibly obtain. See, the troubles of America would have been over a long time ago had we cleared up the fact that people are people. But some people just think they're supposed to be better than others. And that's a fallacy that will actually endanger the species (laughter). Because we can't fight each other like we used to when we were isolated. See, history dictates that. And that's what's wrong with Iraq, trying to fight with a military power. Nobody (background noise), people have to agree to that, and nobody's going to agree to it--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So West [Hugh West (ph.)], once he became--
Speaker 1: We're rolling now, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Once he became the fix-it man, he made quite a bit of money. And in that day, black people didn't trust any banks in Mississippi, so they would take their money to Memphis [Tennessee] and put it in a bank, you know. So he decided to come up to Oxford [Mississippi]. He had heard good reports about his son, Jack Green [ph.], and his daughter Frankie Mae. She was valedictorian, and had joined all kinds of organizations, you know, a powerhouse and stuff. And the little--and Jack became a gambler, and couldn't nobody beat him. So, he wore white suits and white clothes every day (laughter) to let everybody know that he wasn't involved in labor. (Laughter) And he used to put piles of money--back in that day the silver coins were powerful, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, silver dollars, they were--
Speaker 2: Silver dollars, you know, and they even had five dollar and twenty dollar pieces, and gold pieces. And he had a pyramid of coins up on top of his chest of drawers away from the kids, they couldn't reach it. (Laughter) But people would come in his house and see all these gold coins and silver coins up there. Man, it was something. But he had, he ended in a tragedy. Somebody threw a brick and hit him in the eye, and he lost all of his money trying to save his sight. Then when he lost all his money he moved to St. Louis [Missouri] where we were living, and became a wine head. And he drank himself down slowly, and his wife went down with him, just slowly. Just, she didn't know nothing else, but to just go with him.
Speaker 1: This was Jack Green?
Speaker 2: Jack Green, and his wife was named Willie Jane [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is your uncle, right?
Speaker 2: That was my uncle, he was born on May the 8th, you know, maybe twenty years earlier.
Speaker 1: Let me ask me about your--now, your mother was valedictorian of--what was the name of the school in Oxford she went to?
Speaker 2: I think it's called--I got that information around here somewhere. Because I got some grades, some grades I got from--I kept them to show them to my kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: I imagine there was one black school in town, right? Was that it?
Speaker 2: That's all there was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One black in the county.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was Lafayette County [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had, I remember Wiley [ph.], his name Wiley, was the principal. And my, in fact, the powerhouse teacher was named Mrs. Peterson. She was an outstanding intellect, and her son became Judge Peterson here in Chicago [Illinois]. He's, he was a distinguished judge for quite a number of years. He died about three years ago. And he was a distinguished--a great violinist also, William Peterson [William E. Peterson]. But I didn't get to finish the story. This might be a little long story about my Uncle West [ph.], but that's the only thing I know about him. Because West, the dentist, who was on Jeffery [Avenue] there, at 70th [Street] and Jeffery, he was the brother to my, younger brother to my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, they had about six or seven kids, and the youngest one was my mother's friend, they were like friends. But what happened when the father, West, decided to come to Oxford to check on his children that had moved away from Lexington [Mississippi] after the mother died, he was very pleased. He stayed about a week there with them, and he was very happy to see how well they had developed. Because most of his other kids had become some soreheads and a whole lot of other things, since they had that money, you know. (Laughter) And what happened was he went to the bank, to Memphis, to get some money to draw out so, so my mother could go to college, and Jack would have something, you know, because he was quite well-fixed.
Story_ID: 402492
Speaker 1: So anyway, I was talking about when Hugh West [ph.] decided that he was, liked the children, and he wanted to give them something. He went to Memphis [Tennessee] to take out this money, and he took out several thousand dollars, I think. And they found him on the street, he had been shot. And the people in Lexington [Mississippi], they checked on him and said that three of the sons were missing when the man was shot. They were missing for a couple of days.
Speaker 2: So, the implication was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it looks like the sons didn't want him to give any money to the other family.
Speaker 2: Those were the sons in Memphis?
Speaker 1: Right, they killed him. They didn't live in Memphis, they just went to the bank, because that's where the bank was, and they killed him in Memphis. But they came from Lexington, where my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] was born. And in Lexington, the people said that these three sons were missing during the time that he was shot mysteriously in Memphis, when he was going to get some money to give to my mother. So that's all I, I just missed that. But it was known that Hugh West could fix anything. (Laughter) He had that kind of mind, you know, all right. Okay. Now, that's as much as know about him.
Speaker 2: But in terms of your mother, so she was valedictorian of her class?
Speaker 1: Yes, she was the valedictorian of the class. Well, she was--
Speaker 2: And what were her--
Speaker 1: --prominent in the society, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, what--
Speaker 1: They had like the organizations there. There was Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and--
Speaker 2: The UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]?
Speaker 1: The UNIA. But there was another one in the South. They didn't permit people in the South to have the UNIA. They would kill folks about stuff like that. This was one was the--name some of those other organizations. Like the Hall Masons [Prince Hall Freemasonry], it wasn't that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: It was something where they had a lot of women.
Speaker 2: Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Some kind of lodge she belonged to. She was the secretary of that. And so, they were very prominent.
Speaker 2: They had the Elks.
Speaker 1: The Elks, I think that's what it was. I got a big picture of them.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That's what it was. So that was her thing, you know, she was an angel, and he was the devil (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, what were her prospects when she graduated from high school? Was she--you said that her father was going to try to send her to college?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But she never got the money because he was killed. So what did she do?
Speaker 1: Oh, she, just like I said, she married my father [Philip Cohran, Sr.]. And they made it about three or four years, something like that. I can remember--only one time on Easter, I remember walking down the street, and we both had on white suits (laughter).
Story_ID: 402493
Speaker 1: Let's go maybe to your father now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: To your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Philip Thomas Cohran [Philip Cohran, Sr.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, the same. So you would be a Jr.?
Speaker 2: Officially I'm a Jr. Actually on the birth certificate it's spelled with two Ls and Jr. So, his name is spelled with two Ls. And he was wrong, because he was named out of the Bible, and the Greek Philip is one L and the English Phillip is two.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story behind the name Cohran? That's, cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a good story, it's a good story.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because it's in the Bible. And because of me being a spirit person, and so many things running into each other--like, everything is the same thing. This man, he married, he was going to school. His name was Cowhorn, and he was going to school in New Orleans [Louisiana]. And there was a lady from Virginia, I believe that's when I was. She was going to school there, and they met and married. And when they married, the family in Virginia sent a slave named Jennie [ph.] as a gift, a wedding gift, to take care of the bride, from the plantation in Virginia, okay. So--
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Cowhorn? Just the way it sounds?
Speaker 2: Just like it sounds, Cowhorn (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C-O-W-H-O-R-N?
Speaker 2: C-O-W-H-O-R-N. Now that's a very powerful name for a Scot, because it means, see, the Scottish have the same rituals as Africans. They're more recent Africans than the other people. And so, they had this--Cowhorn meant, you know, the shofar. So, it was a very honorable name. But when they got to the frontier where there was nothing but ignorant and unlearned people, they didn't even have any schools or anything. So the people laughed at them, "Cowhorn, what the hell is that?" (Laughter) And he--there were so many times that people did that to him, that he decided to change his name to Cowrun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they carried it like that when they got married and lived in Taliaferro County, Georgia. They moved to Lafayette County in northern Mississippi, and when they moved he changed his name again to--rather the people couldn't get the Cowrun, and it was reduced down to (pronunciation) Cohran. And that's where Cohran--
Speaker 1: Spelled C-O--
Speaker 2: H-R-A-N. C-O-H-R-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the people couldn't, they couldn't really deal with it, you know. When they see Cohran, the call it (pronunciation) Cock-run, all kinds of names. I had all kinds of problems in school. Even when I graduated, they made everybody laugh for calling me Cock-run, you know. But when I became a band leader, no one could remember my name. And so, I said I'm just going to emphasize the last syllable instead of the first one. And so, I started calling myself Cohran.
Speaker 1: So, it would be pronounced Cohran?
Speaker 2: Cohran.
Speaker 1: Okay. But you really changed it to Cohran.
Speaker 2: What kind of name is it? It doesn't have any meaning. It's nothing but garbage. So, I mean I never attached any importance to it, but I like the truth. So, I like to know what happened (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's interesting. I've always thought that perhaps--since I know that you were a Muslim at one time--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, and then I moved and I changed my name. But see, I don't believe in change like that.
Speaker 1: Because of the Koran [Qur'an]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's the reason it was identifiable, because everybody had heard the name. See, people have trouble with names that they don't know the language of, you know. And I feel sorry for my mother [Frankie Green Rogland], because she was born in Lexington, Mississippi, you know, and I got twenty-three children, and they got all the names you never heard before. (Laughter) So, she's like, "That one over there." (Laughter) I feel sorry for her. Now I'm going through the same thing with my kids, with naming their children. Boy, you have to stop and collect yourself before you can talk to them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they're doing good though, you know, they just came back from overseas.
Story_ID: 402494
Speaker 1: Now, let me go on with your father [Philip Cohran, Sr.]. Now, your father, he was born--well, what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father was, I'm just going to have to guess on him. Because I got some stuff--do you want me to go and get my genealogy book out?
Speaker 1: No, you can give us an educated guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, educated within a year.
Speaker 1: And you can give us copies of that later.
Speaker 2: He's about a year older than my mother [Frankie Green Rogland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was born in '08 [1908], and it was on March the 3rd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that Aries? No, that ain't Aries. It's April the 3rd, I'm sorry. April 3rd, in '08 [1908].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because he's an Aries, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The last time I saw him, he was driving around the corner on two wheels (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, how far back can you trace the ancestors? Now, you go back pretty far. We were just talking about the slave owners--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Cowhorns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can go back--
Speaker 1: That's going back a couple generations--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --back into the 19th century.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, no, that's going into the 18th century.
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: Jennie [ph.] came over in the 1700s. She didn't even get married--no, let's see. Jennie's children, her first child, was born in '22 [1822], in 1822. So, you know, she had to have been just about born in the other century.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, or right on the cusp.
Speaker 2: Right on it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But let's see, now. Jennie was, she was, yeah, that's the oldest one, I know. I got a Will [ph.], I'll bring it in here.
Speaker 1: Just for clarification, Jennie is the African woman that was sold to Cowhorn?
Speaker 2: No, she was a--
Speaker 1: She was a gift?
Speaker 2: No, she was a wedding gift.
Speaker 1: A wedding gift.
Speaker 2: A wedding gift from the family.
Speaker 1: To the Cowhorns.
Speaker 2: And that was quite, that was practiced a lot. Because you know, they assigned slave girls to grow with different girls, you know, to be their shadow or whatever, and to care for them. And when they got big enough to get married--they had it in 'Roots' you know. They let her go off with the girl, and the girl she'd grown up with thinks this is quite a privilege for her to have her own pet slave, you know, stuff like that. And in 'Roots,' Kizzy, I think it was, she appreciated it. (Laughter)
Story_ID: 402495
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back to my father [Philip Cohran, Sr.], see, because they run into some other stuff. His mother was a great woman. Her name was Lugenia; I got cards from her. And her thing was, and it's funny how I can almost measure my growth from reading her cards (laughter). Because when I was younger, it sounded kind of remote to me, you know. And the older I get, the more relevant her cards are. (Laughter) That's really something, almost unbelievable. Because I come right to dead center, to what she was speaking about in her letters to me when I was in high school [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Okay. What would she talk about with you?
Speaker 1: Spirit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was, she was a spirit woman. She had a college degree from Rust College [Rust University; Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi] in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: What was her maiden name? Lugenia?
Speaker 1: Mason, Lugenia Mason [Lugenia Mason Cohran].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And her husband was Robert Cohran; that was my grandfather. He didn't say much, but I'll tell you something about him. They had five or six sons. Well, you know, you had to have a lot of sons with those farms down there, because that was the only way you could make it. And they had their own land and they farmed out there. And so, Marvin [Marvin Cohran], the youngest son, probably had been favored quite a bit in the family, being the youngest. And so, whenever my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] would take me out there to visit my grandmother, she'd just put up a big fuss over me, you know, because she was so glad. They said, the people of Oxford [Mississippi] said that my grandmother was such a spiritual woman, that God rewarded her with a perfect son, and his name was Mark [ph.]. And he died at age sixteen from some ailment, and they don't know what it was. But they tried all the herbs they knew, and they couldn't save him.
Speaker 2: Now, why did they say he was a perfect son?
Speaker 1: Because he lived with no complaints. You know, nobody could think of anything bad about him. He worked hard, he did everything he was supposed to do. He was very mannerly and dutiful. And they said that he was like that because it was a reward for her work in helping people. And I was born in the room where he died. And that was about the only thing that took place in that house that I know, was my birth and his death. I didn't, I didn't figure that out until a few years ago, you know. But that's what it was, it was a spiritual thing. But I was telling you about my grandfather, Robert, his nature.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happened, they would bring my mother and take me out there and leave me for a few days, you know. And my grandmother would just have a fit over me. She'd fix all kind of food for me and stuff, you know. And so, my uncle was jealous, and he picked me up and threw me in an empty well, pit, with barbed wire at the bottom.
Speaker 2: That's a pretty, that's a lot of jealousy.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking I must have been what? I must have been about, I'm sure I was about six or seven, something like that. And so, my grandfather came home and found out what had happened. And while he was taking the harness off the mule, Marvin went out and tried to explain what had happened, you know. And he pulled the reins off the mule and throwed them all over Marvin, and knocked him down and almost incapacitated him with this rein. You know how you take reins off of a mule, all of them big heavy leather things, the reins, you know? He hit him, and you could hear him up here in Chicago [Illinois] with that rein. But that was just the type of man he was. He knew, he knew that Marvin was this, he said he'd teach him a lesson. But who gets lessons like that, man, being hit with the reins? I'll never forget that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How did you survive being thrown in a well with a harness around your neck?
Speaker 1: Well, that wasn't nothing compared to what happened to him (laughter).
Speaker 2: But it sounds pretty, it sounds pretty bad.
Speaker 1: You should have heard that blow, man. (Laughter) I mean have you been around--have you been around people taking gears off of mules, you know, that plow gear stuff that's got them big heavy reins in it? I mean, one of those reins could take you out alone, and the thick leather and stuff. And he pulled it off and just swung it right against the man's head and knocked him down. You know, I never heard anything like that since. But that was the type of man he was. And the other thing was that he developed some problem with his foot. I don't know, probably diabetes or something. And they tried to get him, they asked him if they could cut it off, and he said, "Unh-huh." He said, "Wherever I'm going, I'm going to be in one piece." So he sat out there every day on the porch, because his feet were smelling bad and it smelled up the house. So he sat out there and let it rot until he died. And so, grandfather was a tough old dude, boy (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, how did you survive being thrown in a well? Now, that's--what did they tell you? You might not remember, but--
Speaker 1: Oh, I remember it (laughter). Yeah, I remember that, I remember the thing. I remember the reins coming off the horse. Nobody expected it. Everybody was standing around wondering what he was going to do, you know. And Marvin was standing out there talking to him trying to explain, so and so and so, and he just pulled the thing off and threw it all the way over on his head, his shoulders and everywhere, man. It was awesome, you know. But that, again, was the type of values people had back then; you do what you're supposed to do, and nothing else. If you do something else, you know, you're subject to get killed.
Story_ID: 402496
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Philip Cohran, Sr.] have a chance to go to school in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a degree from Rust [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them, my Uncle Sam [ph.], my Uncle Marvin [Marvin Cohran], Uncle Paul [Paul Cohran], and Uncle Nathaniel [Nathaniel Cohran]. Well, Nathaniel didn't go to Rust, because Nathaniel was the one that raised all the hell in the jail cell. And he went over to the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] as a boy, maybe twelve or thirteen years old. And they guy that ran the power plant there liked him, and began to show him things about electricity. And so, Nathaniel worked there for about five or six years until he ran the whole university power plant. And finally when the war broke out, all the other electricians went to good jobs, and left Oxford [Mississippi] without an electrician, except this one black. And he was maybe twenty-one or twenty-two, handsome, you know, looking like Frank Buck, you know, and all that stuff. (Laughter) So you know, the people were really into him. He built his own home, a bungalow; he built an eighteen-foot boat. I mean he could do anything he felt like he wanted to do. And they caught him--I think the people in Oxford were just jealous, because he used to walk around like he owned everything, and he had his own boat. People knew that he made his boat, you know, they knew all about him. So they caught him coming out of a house and said that he--they charged him with rape. And the people that charged him with rape, and the man and his wife tried to intercede in court on his behalf, and they wouldn't allow it. They sent him to jail. See, my family was very strong in the Bible. They were like, they took it literally. So, that was tough stuff. When they sent him down there, they tried everything they could to get him out of it, and they couldn't get him out.
Speaker 1: Now, he must have been accused of raping somebody black, I guess?
Speaker 2: No, white.
Speaker 1: White? And he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was coming out of a house where he had wired it. And they knew that, the neighbors knew that only the woman was in there. So, when a black man comes out of a house where a white woman was, that's an automatic charge.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And they wouldn't let him or her testify on behalf of my uncle.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: It must have been around 1940, or '41 [1941].
Speaker 1: Well, you know why I'm asking that question?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That, you know, maybe they were black, because you said it was a white woman. But in those days they would lynch you usually for that kind of thing. Or they would send you to death for rape. I mean, I just wondered why they--
Speaker 2: Well, no, see, they had a technical law--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that if you, if you're in the building, if there's just two of you in the building, then you got to be charged with rape. That's what it was about. It wasn't that they knew he raped her or nothing like that. It's just that she was in the building and he was in the building. And that's rape (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, it's against the law for him to be in the building?
Speaker 2: That's a charge (laughter). So, they made up anything they wanted to.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard people talk about eyeball rape or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's all kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: But you can be charged with that, for looking too hard.
Speaker 2: They make up laws, man, for anything, you know. That's the America that they had; they had their own America. So anyway, this, I'm trying to think of, see, I get lost when I get on those questions.
Speaker 1: So your uncle was in jail, and you were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was explaining why he was so, why he raised so much hell. They didn't say what he did, but evidently he must have been smacking guards around, and a whole lot of stuff, because he was strong. He was a, he looked like, he looked like Jim Brown or somebody, you know. He was really strong and tough. (Laughter) And so, and he didn't play around, he didn't play games or nothing like that. He had a nice family, you know. But when they took down there, man, he turned into a monster. And they said they never seen nothing like that before. And just the fact that in Mississippi, they asked him, "If you will go somewhere else, we'll let you out." (Laughter) And when he came back to Oxford, do you know what he did? He went to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] to set up a whole bunch of electronic stores. I mean, he eventually had that, you know, in his possession. And what happened, he came back to Oxford in a red convertible Cadillac with the Oklahoma Kid written on the trunk. (Laughter) I guess that was his way of getting back at the people in Oxford, to let them know that he was doing fine.
Speaker 1: To let them know that he was living in another state.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they said, "You better get out of here, man, these people don't like you. They know who you are." But he was just like that. He was simple like a kid, but he was brilliant. And he loved food. His wife was the biggest girl in town. And you know, back in that day, people didn't tolerate fat. And so, everybody was like, "This handsome man done married this big, fat girl," you know. And so they all talked about it, "Why would he do that," you know, "with all these fine girls. Everybody wanted him, you know." And when I went to stay with him, I realized why: because she could cook. (Laughter) She could really cook, man. And every day was like a holiday in that house. The children and all of us, man, we had a ball every day. But she never had anything to do but just keep the house cool, you know. So, really, people lived better in those days than they do now. With all the conveniences now, people are sick, and spending all their money on remedies and things. Then, people very seldom got sick. When somebody got sick, it was news.
Story_ID: 402497
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up during the Depression [Great Depression]. There wasn't a lot of money, but there was foo- enough food and resources (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was always fortunate. I don't know where that came from, but I was always fortunate. My father [Philip Cohran, Sr.], they had their land out there. They had land coming all the way from the, what's his name? What's the guy's name? Revels, Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels]. Lee [Lee Coren] and--Lee, my great-great-grandfather, and Berry [Berry Coren]--there's three greats, Lee, and two greats, Berry, and then Robert [Robert Cohran]. Am I getting it right? Yeah, I'll see if I got that card; I'll get it together. But anyway, Lee was born in 1822, and he was the father of Berry and his wife--Lee and Kitty [Kitty Coren]. Is that her name? Yeah. Now, they had another son other than Berry. In fact, all of them had five or six sons. One of her sons, I'm trying to think of his name now. One of his sons married Sally Hemings' granddaughter, and they were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. See, the Hemings people, all of them come off that plantation, and they got clout. And they had all the good jobs down through the years. I mean, they were clout-heavy.
Speaker 1: So, she married a Hemings?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sally Hemings' daughter.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, granddaughter.
Speaker 1: Because there are two different groups. There're the Hemings and there're the Woodsons.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they come out of that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's definitely a Hemings.
Speaker 1: She was a Hemings?
Speaker 2: Hemings, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they, they kept clout in D.C. And so, even when I went to the Naval School of Music [United States Naval School of Music, Washington, D.C.] there, they offered me to live out there in D.C. with them. But you know, these clout people, they got a lot of--I mean it's like they checked me out through the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and all that stuff when I was in school, to see if it was all right for me to live with them. (Laughter) I mean, that's the kind of people, it was a bougie thing, you know. And all those years, down through the years, they have held the best jobs and everything.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a relationship to--you mentioned Hiram Revels.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I know he's associated with Rust [Shaw University; Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi]. I think he was the first president [sic.] of Rust. And he was the first black senator.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: During Reconstruction--
Speaker 2: He took on the Jefferson, he took Jefferson Davis' seat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: See, Jefferson Davis was, he was the hardcore racist that was in charge of the whole South thing.
Speaker 1: He was the president of the Confederacy.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was the one, he was the man. And so they embarrassed him by giving Hiram Revels his seat in [U.S.] Congress, you know. And my great-grandfather and the great-great, that's Lee and Berry, they were on his team.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they were headquartered there in Oxford [Mississippi] because of the university [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], and they had a place over, maybe thirty miles away. I can't remember, I have to get the map out and see. But it's, some of them towns in Mississippi is where they headquartered when they did their campaign there. Because it was Grant [Ulysses S. Grant] and the other guy, Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman]. Sherman was about thirty miles over here, and Grant was over there in Oxford, and they had their teams. And Revels was the runaround, he was hooking everything up. So, when they got out of the war [Civil War], they got a large parcel of land, and he eventually built a cotton gin on it. And he was, he was well-to-do. He married a Choctaw princess, and she gave him seventeen hundred dollars. I got all of that in my stuff. And--
Speaker 2: There's a strong black Choctaw connection in Mississippi (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, very strong in Mississippi, yeah, yeah. They had to have a grievance, that's what it was, see. They made a grievance with him, and as long as they filed that grievance, there was no problem. But then when they got ready to have a problem, they just picked them all up and moved them out to Oklahoma. And that's the reason they, and when the people would go to Oklahoma, they didn't leave. If they brought them out of there, they brought them out in a box.
Story_ID: 402498
Speaker 1: So what did your father [Philip Cohran, Sr.] do for a living? I mean you say he came out of Rust [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He eventually wound up--
Speaker 1: What did he major in at Rust? Was there--
Speaker 2: I don't know, we didn't even discuss that. Because in those days, a college education was about like a, I don't know if I can think of anything--like a wrapper on a candy bar. (Laughter) What you really wanted was what's inside. You couldn't get nothing out of the wrapper.
Speaker 1: Opportunities weren't that great?
Speaker 2: No, none. When I went to Lincoln [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri], even when I went to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri], it was loaded with Ph.D.'s, you know, and a Ph.D. staff is the measure of a university. Well, you know, Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] requires 100 percent Ph.D., and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] too. We had possibly 100 percent Ph.D.'s at our little black school, Lincoln University, because they couldn't work anywhere else.
Story_ID: 402499
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met, that they passed down?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't pass that down to me. My mother [Frankie Green Rogland], you know, when people split up, they don't talk like that.
Speaker 1: Well, they were in two different towns. Do you know what town they got together in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Oxford [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Oxford, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when she came there, you know. Like I said, they cut a wide figure, she and her brother [Jack Green (ph.)] cut a wide figure in Oxford. They grew up there, you know, from about ten or eleven, you know. I think she got married when she was eighteen. So, it was about ten years.
Speaker 1: So they were only together about--
Speaker 2: Three years, three or four years.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then she married a man by the name of Edward James Rogland [James Rogland]. Now his mother [Winnie Rogland] was a distinguished lady, I can't remember her name. Anyway, she was one of the wealthy people, well-to-do people. And he had stayed, he was in World War I [WWI], and stayed over in Paris [France] to learn gourmet cooking. And so, he stayed over there about ten years. And when he came back to Oxford, he was red hot (laughter), you know, from cooking in Paris. And so he came back to Oxford where his mother was. And while he was there, it was just a matter of time before he was going to leave. Because this is what, 1920, you know, and there were ten people in America that could, with French cuisine. So, she married him.
Story_ID: 402500
Speaker 1: So we were talking about Mr. Rogland [James Rogland], your stepfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, now, he was a distinguished guy. And to show you how he was regarded, they let him have a store in the town square. And there was only one other black person in the town square, and his name was Rob Bowles [ph.], and he looked like a white guy, you know. And he had this shoe store, he repaired shoes and shined shoes. And those were the only two black establishments in the--
Speaker 1: So your stepfather, he was, he had a catering business?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't have a catering business. See, this town--now, he had a restaurant downtown. See, when you mentioned the Depression [Great Depression], this is the only experience I had with the Depression is sitting in that restaurant and hearing people go in the garbage cans. Because they would wait until the sun went down, and they'd go and raid the garbage cans in the restaurant. And these were all white people. And the black folks, they didn't even know there was a depression going on. That's what I remember in Oxford [Mississippi] (laughter). See, and I was born in '27 [1927], so it hit in '29 [1929], you know, and all my childhood--
Speaker 1: I've heard if you could grow your own food, it wasn't as bad, you know. Was that part of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't even know it was a depression, you know. And like I said, the only thing I remember is that they told me--I could hear these cans popping out there in the night. They'd knock them over and stuff, and sometimes they'd be wrestling over it, you know. And I asked my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] one time what it was, and she said, "They trying to get something to eat." And I remember that; it stuck in my mind. The other thing that stuck in my mind is Chicago [Illinois] has a story. They say that the girls were turning tricks for a dime, and said they was taking them to the hospital, because they couldn't find no money. I mean they were, you know, taking them to the hospital because they were dehydrated and everything else. They couldn't make a dime turning tricks. You know that was some bad--(laughter) Chicago.
Story_ID: 402501
Speaker 1: What's your, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That's about it, that white suit with my father [Philip Cohran, Sr.]; we were walking. I remember everybody--he was a very meticulous dresser. He always wore expensive clothes and stuff. And he became a Pullman porter, you know. So you know what they were. They traveled the country, you know. And he never did anything. When he married my mother [Frankie Green Rogland], they listed him as a houseboy, but he probably was on the railroad then. He just didn't look like the type of guy that would go and do other people's things. And he was an Aries (laughter), you know, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were about three or four when they split up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was about my age, about three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother went a couple of years and then she married this guy, Ed Rogland [James Rogland]. And when she married him, bam, we left Mississippi and went to St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, can I just--
Story_ID: 402502
Speaker 1: And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Mississippi is like heaven. That's what it would be if there weren't any white people there. In the old days when I was there, it was just beautiful. The people were African people. Everybody loved the children. The children got all, from anybody. You'd get a whipping, or a cake, or a pie, or something, you know. But everybody had an interest in the children, and all the children were like bonded together; it was a certain situation. But to me, it was all play, and that's what they let us do. And I know that's the African way; they let us play every day in the summer. We'd study in the winter, and play after school. But the summertime was play, man. We had all kinds of ways to play. There were little creeks up the railroad tracks, you know, all kind of fruit, pomegranates, muscadine grapes, all of that. Just, I remember a childhood of just extreme exploration. Every day, "Where are we going today? What are we going to do," you know. Very nice. The friends were nice. We'd spend the night with each other, and the next morning, the mothers at whoever house we stayed, they'd fix an extraordinary breakfast for us, you know, all that kind of stuff. I just can't remember--even the guys, I remember one guy named Eddie Lee [ph.]. He was no more than seventeen or eighteen. Every time he'd come through our neighborhood, he'd have some candy. So we'd run up to him, and he'd say, "I ain't got none today." (Laughter) And we'd grab him and we'd get our candy out of his pocket. But I mean, nobody does anything like that now. You know, you could never hear of anything like that in Chicago [Illinois], you know. So the thing that I remember most about Oxford [Mississippi] is that it was a place where everybody was concerned about everybody. You know, any conversations at dinner and stuff like that, they talked about other people's problems. You know, very seldom did you hear them talk about our problems, you know. So, they were always trying to help somebody. My mother used to give away stuff; she was just, she was notorious for giving away stuff. Somebody would come and say, "Oh, Frankie [Frankie Green Rogland], that hat, oh that's so beautiful." She'd say, "If you like it, take it." You know, and it would be something that cost a lot of money and she went to a lot of changes to get, you know. But when she'd see the joy, the prospect of joy in another person's face like that, she'd say, "It don't mean that much to me, you got it." (Laughter) So I told her one day, you know, I said, "Why did you, why did you give away that hat? You know you wanted that. You done fussed over that hat and all that stuff, and you want to then turn around and just give it away." She said, "Well, son, if you notice, I always have something to give." That's all she said. That's a powerful lesson brother. What else about her? I guess she was supposed to be the hot belle of the town or something, because both my father [Philip Cohran, Sr.] and my stepfather [James Rogland], those were the two most prosperous men in town. So, you got to say there was a little gold digger in her. (Laughter) But they gave me everything I ever thought I wanted. And I have his picture now on my, on my music.
Story_ID: 402503
Speaker 1: There's a little case I carry my songs in, and I had his picture on the front of that, 'cause he [Cohran's stepfather, James Rogland] paid for my lessons. And I had a very extensive education in music.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you start taking music lessons? What was--
Speaker 1: Well, I have to tell this everywhere I go. I won a contest in Oxford [Mississippi] when I was five years old. I don't even know what I was doing. I don't remember anything about it, except the footlights. (Laughter) I can remember looking out at the footlights, and you couldn't see anything passing, you know. And in the old days, that's the way they used to do lighting. They would shine the light up to reduce your fear of the audience, because you couldn't see the audience, you know, but the audience could see you. The only thing is, is that when the light is shining up, it makes you look grotesque in some cases (laughter); you don't look natural or normal. So, they took the footlights away, and don't nobody use footlights now. Everything's got to come from above or the side.
Speaker 2: So, you got an award when you were five for some performance, but you can't remember what you did?
Speaker 1: No, they had a contest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A talent contest, and I won the contest for the city. They had college students in it and everything. So, I don't know what I did, you know. Anyway, everybody said I won. And the people in the neighborhood said, "Put him in music school, put him in, give him an instrument." So she [Cohran's mother, Frankie Green Rogland] sent me to Miss Brooks [ph.] to take piano, and I couldn't handle that, man. I'm sitting up looking out the window at them playing softball out there, and I'm up here making the wrong notes, and she'd crack me on the finger, bop. So I let my mother know I wasn't pleased with that, and finally she let me quit.
Story_ID: 402504
Speaker 1: So when we left, that's when I was about six, you know. When we left Mississippi, we eventually moved to Troy, Missouri, outside of St. Louis [Missouri] where there was a camp that they had worked in, called Camp Derricotte. Troy, Missouri is about seventy-five miles north of St. Louis, the same distance Oxford [Mississippi] is from Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Now did you have--when you moved--so this was, you were six years old?
Speaker 1: About--
Speaker 2: So that would be about 1933 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I moved, I was about nine.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so that's nine. That's--
Speaker 1: Yeah, '36 [1936], I think.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, 1936.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: No, I had a brother that was born before I was, and he died.
Speaker 2: Okay. So, it's just you and your parents?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: It was mostly me and my mother [Frankie Green Rogland], because my stepfather [James Rogland] cooked all day just about (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was one of them guys.
Speaker 2: So you moved to Troy, Missouri?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What prompted the move, I mean why did you move?
Speaker 1: Well, then they moved to St. Louis, they got a job at Camp Derricotte, which was a summer camp. And while they were at this summer camp, there was a restaurant, a highway restaurant, which were very prominent back in that day, because the highway was everything. This highway restaurant hired him to cook after the camp was over.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's in Troy?
Speaker 1: That's in Troy, on Highway 61 [U.S. Route 61] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, what I was asking was why did the family, your family move from Oxford to St. Louis in the first place?
Speaker 1: Well, I told you, because of my family. The family had, the family had difficulties. The name was not a welcomed name. You're going all the way back to Hiram Revels [Hiram Rhodes Revels]. (Laughter) I mean down through the ages they had, he bought all this land. He had the cotton gin, and the cotton gin got wasted in the flood when they flooded the water for the dam.
Speaker 2: Oh, that flood in 1927, that big flood?
Speaker 1: No, that was the Mississippi River.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: This is, when they made the dam, they just closed off the access and it filled up. And--
Speaker 2: Oh, when they created the TVA?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the TVA, that's what it was, yeah, in Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Tennessee Valley Authority (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Valley Authority, right, I remember that. And so, they had all the area there. In northern Mississippi they got this, I can't remember the name of it, but when I was a Boy Scout, I camped out there. In fact, I caught an owl out there in the water. (Laughter) He was sitting up on one of them stems sticking up out of the water; sleeping, you know. And I grabbed him then. And I didn't know about those talons. Whew, I grabbed him and he grabbed me. (Laughter) Boy, I turned him loose. I mean, and they were sharp. They stuck holes in my, in about three or four places. But I didn't know they were like that. Anyway, that's--
Speaker 2: Let me ask about this. Now, this is, you're saying that their land was flooded by the dam?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it--
Speaker 1: I can, I can get the map out and show you these places.
Speaker 2: Did they get any compensation for the land?
Speaker 1: Oh, this is Mississippi, man, you don't--don't talk about justice when you talk about Mississippi; just talk about what people do--
Speaker 2: That's why I asked.
Speaker 1: --and how they get over it.
Speaker 2: You know, I'm asking for the sake of history--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --so you can--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because Mississippi was--look, they had guys who used to come down on the weekend and beat up the people. I mean, they beat up brothers, you know. They knew which brothers to, "What you doing?" They know exactly what he's doing, you know. He was making some, what do you call it, that hot liquor?
Speaker 2: Corn squeezing.
Speaker 1: Corn stuff, yeah.
Speaker 2: White lightning.
Speaker 1: You know, they knew he was down there, and they'd come down there and bust up a few kegs or whatever, you know, and then they'd beat the guy or either take him to jail and come on back. It was just something to be doing; they didn't have nothing to do. Wasn't nobody creating nothing there, you know, in a town like that.  What can you do? But it was very hard. And like I said, they had a thing on for Cohrans. Now my mother, they say they were all cool. But the Cohran thing wasn't cool at all. In fact, I talked to some of the boys I told you about who grew up--those four or five stories. They all went through changes, and I would have gone through far more than they did, because of my past.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they hold grudges down there, very deep, several generations (laughter).
Speaker 2: And as you say, everybody remembers everybody else.
Speaker 1: Everybody. Yeah, that's a, it's an African village in a way. And see, when I got grown and began to do research on various cultures, I could recognize the similarity in their value system from what I experienced as a child. So, one of the ways I learned a lot about African culture is just thinking back, the parallels of my Mississippi upbringing.
Story_ID: 402505
Speaker 1: Troy, Missouri--
Speaker 2: Is another thing, now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's coming into another energy field, another world.
Speaker 1: Well, what were the sights and sounds and smells of Troy?
Speaker 2: Well, Troy, the Indians [Native Americans] were recently there. They had stayed in a place called the hollow that had been, they didn't get them out of there until the '30s [1930s], 1930s. And this is mid-America now, and they're still down there in the hollow. Every time they'd send an army or anything in there, they couldn't deal with them, because they had a lot of hills, (gesture) just like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Because the idea was back in the 1840s was to take all the eastern Indians and take them to Oklahoma, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But they couldn't round them all up, because some hid out right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Oklahoma turned out to be the best spot. And a lot of them were killed on the way, and some were just sick. Most of them died through these European illnesses, pneumonia, syphilis, gonorrhea. I can't remember the name of it, but there's a book, I got a book back there in my library where a Catholic priest described, there was only two ailments here in America when they got here (laughter). And he chronicled all the other stuff that came over on the boats. But--
Speaker 1: So, what group of Indians was there? Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Which group was where?
Speaker 1: In Troy.
Speaker 2: In Troy?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in that place near Troy, the hollow.
Speaker 2: Those, I can't remember the name. But I do remember that President Zachary Taylor had a famous battle there, and he won his position, you know, distinction, there in Troy. They had a fort [Fort Cap au Gris, Troy, Missouri] there, and the Indians were very prominent there. It used to turn me on, to go and dig up their arrowheads. They had arrowheads everywhere, man. I had a box full of arrowheads, and my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] wanted to throw them out. (Laughter) Later on I did research in that area, and I found out that it's very--the biggest secret in America was that they had white slaves, and nobody ever talks about them. But most of the white slaves were there in Missouri, and were sold on the St. Charles [Missouri] market. And they said that there were more whites sold in slavery than blacks, because they couldn't run off out in the woods. See, the whites couldn't run off, because they'd find them dead. But if the blacks ran off, they could go and live with the Indians. So, it was a wholesale--they just shifted the buying in St. Charles. The market had been there for some time, but what they'd do is they'd only sell these blacks to people in town.
Speaker 1: Were the whites like indentured servants or something?
Speaker 2: No, they were slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Total slaves. See, do you know anything about hillbillies?
Speaker 1: A little.
Speaker 2: Well, you know that they spurn education. I mean the education was there for them for free, and they wouldn't go. They wouldn't come out of the mountains. I'm talking about these Ozark hillbillies. They're some willfully ignorant people, and that's the reason I take issue with it. Because when I moved to Troy, we had to take a big step down from the attitudes of the children and their families. There was no, the scholarships went way down, almost nonexistent in Troy. And so naturally I developed a lot of enemies, you know, for being--I mean they shot me through two or three grades, up. You know, what they did, when I went to school they asked me questions in this grade, and I answered. And then they'd put me in the next room and ask me a question, and I'd answer. They just kept moving me up wherever I answered the questions. And that made them--by the time the school day was over, man, I had twenty enemies (laughter).
Story_ID: 402506
Speaker 1: Speaking of school now, what's the name of the school you started in Oxford [Mississippi]? Can you give us the name of it?
Speaker 2: I'd have to get that out of the box, I can't remember that stuff. But I would just say Oxford Training School [Oxford, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's all they were doing was training us like dogs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to school in St. Louis [Missouri] before you moved to Troy [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Maybe one day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Vashon [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Oh, you went to Vashon?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's interesting. It's named for a hero out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, a black hero out of Pittsburgh, John B. Vashon [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean George B. Vashon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what they named it, after him, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, that was a tough neighborhood, you know. And so, I got the treatment when I went there. But my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the--
Speaker 2: My music teacher--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school in Troy, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: I'd have to, I'd have to see if I could dig that up. You know, all they had were names like Troy, the general school, or the Troy county school. You know, that's all--
Speaker 1: Was the school in Troy integrated?
Speaker 2: No, there was no integration. Integration didn't come in the schools until 1960. When was it?  Sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: So Missouri was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-two [1962] yeah.
Speaker 1: --pretty much like other southern states?
Speaker 2: Missouri was a southern state.
Speaker 1: Okay, because people say it's a border state.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, that border, that border didn't mean nothing, man. It's still a southern state (laughter).
Speaker 1: In those days--
Speaker 2: I grew up where people dropped money in my hand; they were afraid to touch me. They didn't want to get close to me. (Laughter) And when I went to school--well, let me tell you. My teacher was the principal of our school, and he had been a prominent musician and football player at Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri], and he had just graduated. And so they made him the principal of our school, and he'd just got his bachelor's [degree]. But he worked with me for about three years, and when I went to Lincoln--he recommended that I go to Lincoln. And see, we had friends in St. Louis, but they had to pay room and board and everything. And I went just like a college student, from my freshman year in high school [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Now the school in Troy, did it have like a, was it, did it have like a sub-titled colored school or something?
Speaker 2: It might have. But I'm going to look at my genealogy and stuff while you're packing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I got a little case with genealogy, you know, and I could find it right quick.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, tell us about grade school. I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, grade school, the most important thing was that the first thing you do when you go to school in Mississippi was to sing these songs. And you sang the songs the old way, you know, (singing) "Way down yonder by myself, I couldn't hear nobody pray." When you heard my singing groups, you heard me singing the songs that I was singing as a child. And I taught this, that those songs had the necessary ingredients in them to preserve our spirit. And so, we got rid of those songs. But that's the only way we could have got through slavery, was with that type of energy coming from the songs, because our bodies are conditioned to receive that kind of energy. So, we used that during slavery to preserve our psyche and our self-worth. Now, people talk about that like it's everything. But the slaves evidently told the people to put singing in the schools. And that's what schools suffer from now, they don't have singing. But every morning we'd march, and we'd march out in the yard and line up a certain way, you know. And Miss Brooks [ph.] would play that piano, (imitates piano sound) and we'd march in (laughter). And the classes were basic. I remember we studied things that I didn't see in other schools. Penmanship was one thing that I didn't see in other schools. We were taught to run those slants all the same way, a whole page of slants, you know, circles, half circles, all that. We had to do that for weeks before we were even into the letters. We had to learn the forms that the letters were based on. And so, everybody out of my school had excellent penmanship but me, because I refused to go along, along with, what do you call it?
Speaker 1: Refused to conform with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The longhand form of writing. What do you call it?
Speaker 1: Cursive.
Speaker 2: Cursive, cursive.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I couldn't, I didn't want to, I didn't like it. And something in me just wouldn't let me do it, so I always printed. They said, "Well, you better, you'll never be able to print fast enough to take notes when you get to college." But I did, I was, I was a chemist (laughter). I took notes all the time, (gesture) just like that.
Story_ID: 402507
Speaker 1: When you describe your family, you're very cognizant of the fact that a lot of them were kind of very nonconformist. They didn't really conform to--they got in trouble, because they were maybe a little bit different.
Speaker 2: What do you--well, no, I don't know quite hear what you're saying there.
Speaker 1: Well, you were talking the Cohrans and the name and stuff, and how (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, those are the things that are outstanding to me, but I didn't mention the other. There's a lot of normal stuff in there. But I don't think people are interested in that (laughter), like what did you have for dinner, you know, or how you lived, you know. Like my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] used to wash clothes in one of them big black pots out in the backyard, boy. And I remember bluing, we used to turn the water blue; that was for the whites, you know. We had fig trees all around the house. But I want to get back to the historical significance. Because once I began to study history, and once I began to deal with culture, I could see back from my own life what was going down. For instance, like I was telling you about St. Charles [Missouri] and the hillbillies. I had always known that there were people, there was a large ditch between the three groups; the white owners, the blacks, and the whites that don't have anything. They call them white trash, they were hillbillies. But they had no ambition for nothing. The only thing they did was eat, sleep, and have sex, you know, and drink. And so, that was their whole mindset. Like, all the families, I mean the whole family did that kind of stuff. So, it made it a big mystery.  How do these people come from that? How did they get there? And so, eventually they worked on it until they got them all out of there, and got--there's no pocket of hillbillies anywhere now. There're no groups except maybe in the [U.S.] Army. That might be the only place they could form now, is to get into the Army and form them some groups. But the attitude was that they were not going to work. What they would do was get drunk (laughter) and do other things. So, when I did research on du Sable [Jean Baptiste Point du Sable], that's what I found out. There was an old lady who lived up on the top of this bluff in St. Charles, Missouri, overlooking the two rivers, the Mississippi [Mississippi River] and the Missouri [Missouri River]. And she had been the daughter of a wealthy Swedish, what do you call them, businessman. And so, when I went to the Historical Society [St. Charles County Historical Society, St. Charles, Missouri] and I asked about du Sable, they said, "Oh, you want to talk to Miss Olson [Edna McElhiney Olson], because she is, du Sable was her hero." So I went up there, and she's the one that told me about it. The first thing she said was, "Do you know that there were more whites sold on the slave market than blacks in St. Charles?" And they were sold in French, the language was Old French, which is different from this language. So, I had to pay to have those papers translated. But the research brought out that these people were sold because they could not run away. And so they were like, I don't know how you describe it, but when you live around them and you live around black people, in the old days they were kind of like zeroes almost. They didn't, they didn't, in effect, nothing. Their kids would play with anybody. They didn't have any type of--like, they didn't have any, they weren't civilized; that's what they acted like. They really weren't, they didn't have any order. And so I noticed that for the first time when we moved to Missouri, that there were three classes. But in Mississippi, there were only two. If you were white, it didn't make any difference what. Now the thing about Troy [Missouri], they had one big guy who owns everything, you know, and his relatives and all that other stuff. The people, the black people in Troy, seemed to be affected worse than the hillbillies. You know, it's a difference in the way blacks from the South were, and the way they were from these little farms up here in Missouri and Iowa, and places like that, the Dakotas [North Dakota and South Dakota]. It was a different thing. And that difference, I think, will tell you the difference. It can tell you how the people really are, if you, if you study that. Because they, it's getting me--I need an outline myself. But however it goes, the difference in the culture really didn't affect me that much. I just noticed it because I went away to high school to boarding school, and that was 1941. And incidentally, that date that you asked me for had to be after '41 [1941], because it was after the war [World War II, WWII], see.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your boarding school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Lincoln University Laboratory High School [Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we stayed in the freshman dorm, but we were all in the basement. There were sixteen of us, and we were all in the basement of the freshman dorm. And they had six rooms down there, I mean about eight rooms rather.
Story_ID: 402508
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Now you had, you started to tell us how you got the chance to go to Lincoln [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were getting ready to tell us that.
Speaker 2: My music teacher, he was the principal of the school that we attended in Troy [Missouri]. And so on Saturdays--they thought that I had a little talent. After they had started the band, they had plans and stuff, but he told my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] that he would give us lessons, give me lessons on Saturday, and they'd pay for it and everything. But he was so hard on me. I tried to get my mother to let me stop studying with him. (Laughter) And she just laughed. I told her he beat me and he'd throw stuff at me, drumsticks, anything, you know. And he was terrifying. And all I wanted to do was get old enough so I could take him out, you know. I said, "One of these days I'm going to get him back." And when I got to Lincoln, the first day after I put all my suitcases and stuff up, I went over to my teacher, you know. She was Mrs. Rubye Harris Gill, from Baltimore [Maryland], a very distinguished violinist (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that name?
Speaker 2: Rubye, R-U-B-Y-E.
Speaker 1: Harris--
Speaker 2: Gill.
Speaker 1: Gill.
Speaker 2: G-I-L-L. Their daughter is a prominent lawyer in Baltimore now, and their son is an educator. He's, I can't remember what. But anyway they, Miss Rubye Harris Gill put a stand up there and said, "Can you play this?" I took my horn out, and I played the stuff on the stand. Then she went and got another book. She said, "Can you play this?" So I played that, and she pulled some pages over and I played that. Then she went and got another book. She said, "Can you play this?" So by this time, the kids are all in the doors and the windows and stuff. I don't even know what's going on, you know. (Laughter) So I kept on playing, you know, and I played all of it. And she said, "Oh, well, okay." We made all our arrangements and things for the class and all that. And I went home, and ain't nobody said nothing. So that afternoon, maybe five or six o'clock, as we were coming from the cafeteria, one of the guys came over and said, "Man, why didn't you tell me you was the best musician in school?" I said, "What?" (Laughter) He said, "Everybody talking about you, you know, we got a new musician." And they couldn't figure out who it was because they thought they was in college, but I was in high school. (Laughter) I didn't know--all this time I wanted to shoot this guy, you know, for beating me and everything, but he had actually taught me music well. And I had my fundamentals down pat, and so I spent I guess the rest of my life wishing I could thank him enough. I never could thank him enough.
Speaker 1: And what was his name again?
Speaker 2: Lewis A. Laird [ph.], L-A-I-R-D. Because I mean we sweated it out many Saturday mornings, I'll tell you. (Laughter) It was almost like man and wife, I'm telling you. That's old school stuff. They don't have that no more. Sun Ra was the last of the old school operators. Because old school was extreme. We knew that we couldn't make it just being good. In order to make it in the old days, you had to be exceptional, so you started out in the beginning preparing yourself to be exceptional.
Story_ID: 402509
Speaker 1: You were co- coming along was radio a big influence on your music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, radio meant a lot. Fletcher Henderson came on every day, I think at ten o'clock in the morning. (Singing). And we'd hear that, boy, and we'd come out of the room from playing marbles or whatever we were doing; we were going to come and listen to the radio. Now everybody didn't have radios then. Radios were like, almost like plasma TVs. That's about the same thing. So, whenever Joe Louis would fight, you'd have to set your radio in the window so the neighbors could hear the fight (laughter). And it would be a whole, maybe fifteen or twenty people out there on that side of the house, you know.
Speaker 1: So, did you all have one? You all had a radio.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a radio, you know. I told you myself that I had this restaurant.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We never had any money problems, never did. He [Cohran's stepfather, James Rogland] blew all his money in his later life. You know, after my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] left, she kept monitoring on him, and he just, I guess they couldn't handle the situation after so much time. She left and came back here, and eventually he came back here too, and she took care of him until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got pictures of them when they--I brought them here in '67 [1967] after I wrote the music for the Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] show. I brought them up here for a week's visit.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you. Who are your favorite musicians? Who are the ones that influenced you the most coming up?
Speaker 2: Pops first, and Duke [Duke Ellington] second.
Speaker 1: Pops, Louis Armstrong?
Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because he played such impeccable trumpet. I mean every note he played, he meant to play. And when he sang, he didn't have a good voice, but he sang so good. (Laughter) It was something. And all of his stuff was on the head, man. He didn't, his tuning was perfect, and his rhythm was perfect. So, when he played something, it was just, just like opening a door to something. And Duke Ellington wrote music that was so strange that it had to be coming from some other place, man. Some of the songs he wrote like 'Passion Flower,' let me see, and 'I Didn't Know About You' [Duke Ellington]. I mean, just such strange melodies he had, you know, and I admired him for that. But you know, I've been so, I'm so old now it's hard to remember my idols. I stopped listening to other people forty-five years ago. Since 1961 I only listen to myself.
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about what people call the old Negro spirituals that you always sung (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, that's our roots.
Speaker 1: The big band music.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 402510
Speaker 1: The church--did, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, no. You had to go to church every Sunday until you were old enough to quit (laughter). That's all that was. (Laughter) And everybody--the girls would continue to go. But the boys, once they got about twelve or fourteen or something like that--as soon as they were big enough to say no, they said no, because they didn't see going. They'd be singing out of tune and all that other stuff, you know, and it just didn't seem real (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it seems to be a pattern, even now. I mean that's true now, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's always going to be true.
Speaker 1: Why do you suspect that's true?
Speaker 2: Because it's catered to women. It's catered to their needs. It doesn't satisfy any of a man's needs. A man has got to be confused to go in a church like that, you know. So, (laughter) it's true. And so, they got all of this set up for weddings, and look at how many divorces they got. Well, I mean, why don't they just shake hands or something? You know, why they got to go through all this legal stuff, and all these lawyers, you know? I mean, this is stupid, man, this is really not a civilization. A civilization is an order that provides the necessary space for thousands or maybe millions of people to live together. It's an order. And that's what we don't get here. We don't get the order. And I, I've discovered what my theory is from studying the way the brain operates, and studying the cultures, how they manifest these brain operations. I see that people have always been singers. And so, songs shape the neocortex, because we got three brains here. And the last one is the neocortex, and it exploded sixty thousand years ago. Now, what caused that explosion? And why could they reach such massive developments since then? It has to do with melanin, and it has to do with exposure to these old-time values. Now I keep getting lost on these subjects, but I guess what it really is, is I'm tired. There was nothing I could do to stop that, man, and I almost collapsed yesterday. But if you keep me up on the subject, I can handle it. Maybe you should write something down, but I see my mind keeps--
Speaker 1: Well, let's go--I was trying to talk about the influence of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I want to talk about it too, but I just get, I get lost.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: If you can carry me--
Speaker 1: We're going to focus on the--
Speaker 2: If you can carry my words and pick me up, I can go right on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we can, yeah.
Speaker 2: But I'm tired, I'm telling you, I can feel it now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought it was that when I started out, because usually I'm fresh and strong in the morning. But last night got to me, yesterday.
Speaker 1: How do you feel now? Do you feel okay? I mean do you feel all right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'm feeling okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's just that I can feel myself, as I talk, I feel my voice taking me out.
Story_ID: 402511
Speaker 1: We were talking about the influences on you, the musical influences.
Speaker 2: The musical influence (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was talking about the Negro spirituals and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And jazz in those days, jazz was the most popular music, black music, and it was all over the airways.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't, it was--jazz came about, its prominence came out of the war. Because once black folks were employed--and that was the first time they were employed en masse. Once they were employed, all black people spent their money on entertainment, see. Because the way they live in Africa, they respect musicians over land. You know, if a musician's playing, if he comes up and plays at the edge of the village, the people in the village are obligated to come out and listen to him and leave some compensation for him. Just like if I'm in the African cafe, their people give me more in donations than I get paid, because it's an African custom to always make the musician feel good. They depend on musicians, and they know that.
Speaker 1: Well, in that era, there were a lot of giants playing, great musicians playing.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there was a lot of--oh, man, I couldn't even start to name the guys that I came up with. But McShann [Jay McShann], as I was telling you, introduced me to most of the greats, because I started playing with him in 1950.
Story_ID: 402512
Speaker 1: Before that, before we get to Jay McShann, you were a chemistry major in college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a chemistry major, and I was--
Speaker 1: Now, when did you graduate high school, from Lincoln [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I only got up into the next year, in '46 [1946], and I had to leave for the second semester.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you leave to join Jay McShann's band?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. My mother [Frankie Green Rogland] and my stepfather [James Rogland] split up because of their differences, and I didn't want him paying for my chemistry. And we had such a tough teacher, he had decreed that no one would pass his class without five hours of study a day, and he meant it. So, I didn't see how I could work a job and come home and deal with a thing like that, I really didn't. And I went home, and I was very sad, man. I was devastated, because I could only see myself with a Ph.D. (Laughter) I was going to change the world, you know. And that was the same year of the first sustained atomic reaction [sic.], and I was deep into the atom and the molecule, you know. But it taught me one of the best lessons of life. So, you've got to be able to take it. And so, once I got that take it thing down, things changed. I run into a guy, and he was one of the guys who had failed at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]. He saw me all sad, and he said, "Man, most people in the world have never heard of Lincoln University." (Laughter) "Come on, let's live." (Laughter) So we started working on that boat down there, you know, that goes down the Mississippi River. I forget what it was. The Admiral [SS Admiral], yeah. And we made more money than anybody else, because we were young and could run fast and everything. So, back in the day, a hundred dollars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you like a porter or something on the boat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, serving; waiters serving drinks. And the top deck, usually people liked the sun up on the top deck, and there'd be, you know, fifty or sixty of them up there. And they liked coffee, and the kitchen was in the hole. So, that's four stories you got to go up walking with maybe twenty cups of drinks, of coffee with the, you know, coffee cup and the little saucer. That's pretty heavy, if you want to check it out. We would take it from the basement up the steps, all the way to the top of the floor. And everybody, they would give us tips for bringing their coffee up there. Because the coffee was only ten cents, but they'd tip us a dollar (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: To bring it hot, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they knew it was hot, and it took a long time to get up there. So we were the coffee boys, man, and we made a lot of money. Then when we'd get off, we'd go around and play rich, see. (Laughter) I know there was one bar we used to go to that we'd require the waitress to stick her tongue in our drinks. (Laughter) Stupid as the day is long. But when you're young, you know, you perfect spending. Everywhere we went, people would smile when they'd see us coming (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you were--were you playing music at this point, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was playing, but I wasn't hooked up with anything; I was just playing then. See, I had, basically I had a lot of experience with the symphony and the band at Lincoln. And I'd played with them for years, so I was like a straw boss. Now when I got out and I was in St. Louis [Missouri]--and when you get hooked up, you go to East St. Louis [Illinois] and work. And so what happened was I started playing with bands around St. Louis, and got into something. But I, it wasn't exciting enough for me, so I finally got a chance to go to, to come to Chicago [Illinois]. And that was a picture, man. Because this was a seven-night town, and you couldn't tell the weekends--you know, you couldn't tell what day it was. You'd wake up in a hotel or something, and you wouldn't know what day it was. (Laughter) There'd be so much drugs and drinking and stuff like that the night before, man, you'd be lucky to wake up (laughter).
Story_ID: 402513
Speaker 1: Let me ask you something about--I have some notes. I did a lot of reading about you on the net [Internet].
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And just from talking to you over the years--
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: But, in the '40s [1940s] or the early '50s [1950s], I guess in St. Louis [Missouri], did you know some of these guys, James DeShay, Little Walter, Alvin Cash, Grant Green?
Speaker 2: Uh, I--
Speaker 1: Louis Jordan?
Speaker 2: No, they're all--
Speaker 1: All a little later?
Speaker 2: All later.
Speaker 1: Later, all right.
Speaker 2: See, I'm seventy-nine. And you know, just like you said, Pates [ph.] looks healthy, but Pates is about twenty-five years younger than me (laughter), if not--I think he's--
Speaker 1: No, he's not--he's about the same; he's about the same age.
Speaker 2: He's seventy-nine?
Speaker 1: He's, he's, Pates was born in--he's about seventy-five, yeah.
Speaker 2: He is?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know Andy [ph.] is a lot younger.
Speaker 1: They're about the same age. I think Pates is a year older than Andy, you know, yeah. They were born in, let's see--
Speaker 2: About '35 [1935] or '36 [1936]? That's where I had him.
Speaker 1: Yeah. It's not twenty-five years, though (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah. I think '32 [1932], or '33 [1933]. They were born around '32 [1932] or '33 [1933].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I thought, something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know I was ahead of them, but I thought I was much further ahead of them.
Speaker 1: Here are some clubs in St. Louis, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: The Peppermint Club [St. Louis, Missouri], the Harlem Club [East St. Louis, Missouri], the Bird Cage [ph.], Wagon Wheel, Blue Heaven [sic. Blue Note, East St. Louis, Illinois], Red Top [East St. Louis, Missouri], Louise's Monaco Lounge [ph.]. Do you remember any of those places?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Louise's Monaco Lounge, or Helen Hurst's [ph.] Moonlight Lounge [St. Louis, Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, somebody--whoever put that stuff down is all in another age.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I left St. Louis in 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay. But these are supposed to be clubs that are in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: They didn't exist.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what were some of the--
Speaker 2: What you had was the Blue Flame [Blue Flame Club, East St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Blue Flame was the big--if you didn't, if you didn't go to the Blue Flame, you hadn't been in St. Louis. Because that was in East St. Louis [Illinois], and you had to go over to get your--you know. But it was straight out Broadway, 15th [Street] and Broadway. And that was the, that was the show for--and we were in there for three years, my band, called the Rajas of Swing. So, we had, they always had some male singer and some female singer and a dancer and a band.
Speaker 1: The Rajas of Swing?
Speaker 2: That was it. And we also played in Fireworks Station, which was a little suburb like Robbins is, Robbins, Illinois [sic. St. Clair County, Illinois]. So, this place called Fireworks Station, they called it that because they had fights out there every weekend. So we played there four nights a week, Thursday through Sunday. And the whiskey was free for the band members, so you can imagine what that was like, man. Let's see, there was the Hilltop Lounge. Let's see, the Waiters' Club [St. Louis, Missouri], very prominent, and the Riviera [Club Riviera, St. Louis, Missouri], that's where I played with Oliver Nelson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a, yeah, he's quite a musician, yeah, Oliver Nelson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Oliver was outstanding.
Story_ID: 402514
Speaker 1: So from '46 [1946] to '50 [1950], now, when did you go into the [U.S.] Army? What was the Army?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-two [1952]?
Speaker 2: No, wait a minute, I'm sorry, October 27, 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got out the same day, October 27, 1952.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, but I read--now tell me if this is true--that 1950 was the best year of your life, when you joined Jay McShann's band.
Speaker 2: I guess it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess it was. But now, I can't say that now (laughter).  You know, I've had too many victories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've had too many good things happen to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in those, up to that point it was--
Speaker 2: Up to that point, it was--because, see, McShann was like a--you worshiped him, because Charlie Parker developed in his band. And so you know, for Bird to develop out of that band, it had to be a perfect kind of outfit; they had to have all of the ingredients. And then he was known so well. And--
Speaker 1: So, Charlie Parker, did he play for McShann just before you joined the band?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was about, I guess about, actually about a year or something like that.
Speaker 1: A year difference?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And were you playing the same instrument when you were coming into Jay McShann's band?
Speaker 2: The trumpet.
Speaker 1: Trumpet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Well, Charlie Parker played the sax.
Speaker 2: The sax, yeah, he was alto sax.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's--
Speaker 2: But see, all the stories were about Bird, because he was such an outstanding person. And Walter Brown was just as strong as Bird. And McShann was just as strong as Bird, but Bird was the one that everybody liked (laughter), you know. And so, we all were stuck on Bird, we were in that generation. The thing that made it good is that McShann was the master of swing. See, swing is something that's only known by some musicians. All musicians don't swing. And in the old days when the cats asked, "Can he play?" It wasn't, "Can he play?" it was, "Can he swing?" And the swing was the most important thing. It was introduced out of that environment, and that's why you got like the one o'clock, (singing), you got to sit in that one place, you know, until you make everybody feel like you feel. (Laughter) That's what swinging is. Well, that's, that was McShann's forte. He could pump the piano so perfect, man, that it would make you pat your foot; you had to. Walter Brown sang so sincere and so, just uninhibited, that people would cry every time he sang certain songs. Wherever we went, the whole audience would cry. And I never seen that anywhere else. We'd go to New Orleans [Louisiana], Atlanta [Georgia], Savannah [Georgia], wherever we'd go, man. And when he'd come up there with that song about, tell my mother I've been, let's see, (singing) "If I don't see you no more, no more." It's one of them old, old blues, man, and the people cried like babies, they couldn't help it. (Laughter) He was a junkie, and he was evil every morning. I used to drive his car, and we had two cars. McShann had a Buick, and Walter had an Oldsmobile. So I drove Walter's car all the time. One night he was driving, and woke me up and asked me where he was. (Laughter) So, I was driving after that. Can you imagine somebody waking you up and asking you where they at (laughter)?
Speaker 1: And they're driving?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're driving, and you been sleep for some time, you know. Yeah, that was kind of like Walter.
Speaker 1: So, you did a lot of traveling that year, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's all we did was travel, man.
Speaker 1: And you really hadn't traveled (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We got to California and we had to go eighteen nights straight.
Speaker 1: This is the first year that you had really traveled a lot?
Speaker 2: That's what you call the road.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where you get your experience. Because when you go on the road, you get hip to the girls, you get hip to the food. I mean it's a whole thing you have to overcome, because as a musician you're going to be traveling all your life. You can't, you know, it's--you can't avoid it.
Story_ID: 402515
Speaker 1: From what I have here in these notes and stuff, from something I read, is that you all played like backups for people like Big Mama Thornton and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And one lady bought us some instruments. What was her name? Nellie, was it Nellie Lutcher? It's either Nellie Lutcher or the lady just like her. See, I'm getting bad on these names, now. But she came, she played with us. So, we were playing in Kansas City, Kansas, up on a hill, and she came up there. And everybody knew McShann [Jay McShann], you know, they'd been together and all that stuff. So, she came up there and sat in with us, and we wiped her out, boy. She sang one song, she was popular, you know, and she looked around and she said, "McShann, you ought to be shot. I can look at these instruments and tell you ain't paying these boys nothing." (Laughter) He couldn't say nothing, you know. So, she gave the money to the baritone saxophone player and said, "You go down there, y'all go tomorrow to the music store and get you some instruments." And she said, "And if you got anything left, split it up and have some fun." (Laughter) I'll never forget that, man.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never heard of anybody buy instruments for a band. You know, we were playing with four horn players. What's his name? We had trumpet, alto tenor, and baritone sax, and we really got some sounds, too. And that was my thing, you know. People didn't know I played with McShann, but I was the one who cleaned his band up. Because they didn't know, in the old days, they didn't know how to rehearse bands. See, and they didn't really have any developed technique for it, they just did it. And I'd been rehearsing all my life (laughter). So--
Speaker 1: So, were you the only formally trained musician (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just about. Well, they were formally trained in other environments. You know, they had, like Pete, he had a high school education in some little suburb in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Is that Pete Cosey?
Speaker 2: No, Pete was a--
Speaker 1: He's a drummer, that's right.
Speaker 2: We had a Pete Anderson [ph.]. Pete Anderson was playing the bass with us. And then we had Chuck Tillman, he had played along--he had gone to some high school with the guy that's famous. We just got through talking about him, Oliver Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Chuck and Oliver had gone to school together, and Chuck was, he was our tenor player for a while. We had another one from Oxford [Mississippi] named Pete Turner [ph.]. But I rehearsed the group, and they got real sharp. And once they got sharp, man, we were cutting it. Everywhere we went, they held us over. We started making money. And so, that's when I realized the most important thing about music is that it's clean, because people like good music.
Speaker 1: So you made records for Peacock Records?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Peacock.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this other one--
Speaker 1: It's down in Houston [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you want me to tell you about that?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: All right. We were playing at a joint, a gambling joint on the Sabine River in, well, we'll move on to the name of the next city (laughter). Um, Port Arthur, Texas, on the river. And I think it's about sixty or eighty miles, maybe a hundred miles from Houston. And so, what we would do was every day we'd get up around eight o'clock and drive to the studio. And I guess we'd get there, you know, and they had a background singer there for us. Each time we'd come, there'd be a different singer. Somebody wanted it on a record, so we'd listen to their song, and then I could put a background to one, and somebody would put one, and you know, they'd work out a thing. And then by the afternoon we'd go ahead and cut, you know, six or eight songs, and then we'd be headed back to Port Arthur, Texas. The next morning, there would be another artist. (Laughter) So, we made a lot of money. We were getting, what was it? I think it was twenty-five dollars a session. So, we were getting a hundred and twenty-five dollars just for recording. And money, that was pretty big money back then. And we were getting forty dollars for our gig, so we were doing all right, you know (laughter). And on our off night we'd go in the black community, and we'd usually get fifty for that, because it would be packed, man. And--
Speaker 1: So you didn't, you didn't play in the black community. You played in the white community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of--
Speaker 1: Now, that's a distinction that's important. You know, for us to know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it is. It is, but you know, you would do half and half in some cases. It depended on the city mostly. Because like in Kansas City [Missouri], you very seldom worked in the white community. In New Orleans [Louisiana], you never worked in the white community. There were different places you'd go, and they'd have a different format set up. But you traveled that route so much, you know, you'd keep going around it, and it was about every three months. The circuitry really was about three months, and you'd go back and repeat. So, yeah.
Story_ID: 402516
Speaker 1: So we, we're talking about recording. And I guess in October, you said in October of 1950 you were drafted.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right in the middle of all this new experience--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were drafted.
Speaker 2: While I was making all this money, man.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: How do you think? It, I caved in, man, I caved in; I actually lost my cool. It took me some time to regain myself, several months. Because here I was, I had got me a good tailor, and I was getting suits every week just about. And I called my mother [Frankie Green Rogland] up to--told her I was going to send her some money, you know. And she said, "You got a letter from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]." (Laughter) So I had to go on in, you know. They had, I was in the draft. And each time they sent me up to report, I had a gig in another city. So, I'd just go on up to the other city, you know, and sign up there and say, "Well, you know, I got to follow my job, this is the way I eat." And they didn't have no provisions for people traveling. "Stay here," you know, and I'd have to spend all kind of money to stay there for those days. So I just kept traveling with McShann [Jay McShann], and they sent me a letter and said, "Stop fooling around, and report to such and such a place." (Laughter) That's the way I got in the [U.S.] Army. Now, the Army really changed me, because they didn't care about music. They would, the American troops were getting beat so bad in Korea when I was drafted, that everybody who went to sleep became a captive. You had to stay awake and walk, because the line was changing every minute (laughter), and you had to be there to retreat. And they showed pictures every week of long lines of people just retreating out the mountains, you know. And those who would fall asleep, they'd wind up in a stockade pen somewhere. So, they were desperate for soldiers. And I went in October 27, and they were trying training some troops to have them overseas by Christmas (laughter). Two months, man.
Speaker 1: Not much training though.
Speaker 2: No. And I went--well, first of all they thought I was white, because my name was Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran], see. And so, they stuck me in with some other--and I was the only one in the white barracks, basically. Now, everybody knew this was wrong, but didn't nobody know what to do about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now this is, now this is important, we have to talk about this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1950, supposedly the--
Speaker 2: That's when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the troops.
Speaker 1: The Army, yeah, I think he officially announced in '48 [1948] that he was going to integrate the Army. But--
Speaker 2: He might have, but it didn't happen until then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, see--
Speaker 1: So it was still segregated when you--
Speaker 2: See, Little Joe [Taswell "Little Joe" Baird], who was the alto player in the band, he got picked up the next month, and he was in an integrated unit. I come in on October 27, and I'm in an all-black unit. And the thing about it is that everybody knew something was wrong when they'd come in the barracks and see this one black guy in there with all these white guys (laughter), you know. But they didn't know. See, the Army, you just wait and be cool, you know. So finally one day after several days there, the guy comes, the sergeant says, "Cohran, (pronunciation) Cohran, get your gear, you know, and follow me." So we took off walking, and we got over a hill there. And when I got up on top of the hill, I saw about thousand black people on it. (Laughter) I said, "This is it." (Laughter) So, they were holding all the blacks in one place until they got enough for a black regiment. The 85th Infantry [85th Infantry Division], that's what it was. So when we moved over there to the headquarters they had picked out, the heat wasn't on; they hadn't been serviced. So we had to sleep under mattresses. They didn't have any, any sleepwear or nothing. So, it was pretty tough for a while.
Story_ID: 402517
Speaker 1: Well, the first thing that happened, they were training me to blow up enemy installations behind the lines. And as the guy was breaking down the electrical and non-electrical explosives, all of my fellow classmates were sleeping and nodding and getting high and stuff, you know. So, when it came the day for the test, they put us out there with the dynamite, you know. And them brothers were scared, because they had been sleeping through class (laughter). And wasn't none of them--they wouldn't set it off. So they told them, they said, "When you get over there, your MO [modus operandi] is going to be dynamite, and that's what you--you can learn over there, or you can learn over here." (Laughter) That's what it was. And I got in there and I really didn't want to be with them, because they would sleep in there, and I thought they were dangerous. And lo and behold, the lieutenant said, "I see where you're a professional musician. Do you think you could play a bugle call?" I said, "Sure, I can play anything if it's written. You got any bugle manuals?" "Yeah, they got a manual. Get you a bugle and a manual out of the supply room." He said, "The guy that runs this is an old [U.S.] Army man, and if he hears some bugle calls, it might get him. If we can get his attention, then we can get you out of here and into the band." See, 'cause I was making a living as a musician, so they're supposed to be partial to you, you know. Anyway, we went on into this--each time I look over this way I get lost.
Speaker 2: So, did you, you got the bugle then, right?
Speaker 1: I got the, thank you. I got the bugle, and I got the manual. And I started going down to headquarters in the field there, and playing this bugle, (imitates bugle call), reveille every morning. And he would come outside of his office and stand at attention while I was playing. I said, "I got him." (Laughter) So, one day he calls me in his office and he says, "I really like that bugle playing, you know." He said, "But I see here where you're a professional musician, and they've been asking for you over at the band, at the other part of the post. So, do you think you could train some bugle players?" I said, "Oh yeah, (laughter) I can train some." He said, "Okay, if you get me six buglers, I'll let you go." So I went back and made an announcement, and everybody up there said they played trumpet in high school. (Laughter) I doubt if any of them did, but I got me six buglers, and I got them ready. And when I got them ready, I was ready to go. And I told the man that there was another professional musician in Company D, and that he needed to be there too, because he was a very good musician. And he said, "Well, one more won't be the end of the earth. What's his name?" And I said, "Leroy Cooper." And he got Cooper out, and both of us went to the band. Well, when the thing came down, the order came from Washington [D.C.] to send your best musicians to the Naval School of Music [United States Naval School of Music, Washington, D.C.]. And understand, this is the Army dealing with the [U.S.] Navy, so we don't want any flak, you know. (Laughter) And it had a six-month course in military music. So, that's where I landed up. Now, I had made up my mind in Houston [Texas] that I was going to study composition, and that's just what I got. When I really solided my--solidified my quest for composition, they had a program there at the school, where you'd play from ten to twelve every day. You'd play music you never seen before. So you'd sit in your chair, the same chair, and they'd put different music there every day, you know. And that's where you'd get to play everything that's been written (laughter). I mean it's, you know, you take--sometimes it might go fifteen songs. You just play it one time, bam, and throw that away. And the next one, "Ready." It wasn't nothing but sight reading. Very strong. So the Navy, you know, they were very serious about music, because every ship has to have a band, because there's so much boredom being on the water, you know, and the band takes it out. So, you have to have good music, not just some cats playing horns. We always had good bands, too. And see, what else did we have?
Story_ID: 402518
Speaker 1: So did you travel any, as a musician in the [U.S.] Navy? I mean in the [U.S.] Army (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, in the Army, yeah. Yeah, well, after, after the Washington [D.C.] thing, they had me come back and tighten the band up. So I was a band director and I rehearsed, selected the songs and all that. And after so much time, you were supposed to be given warrant officer status, and then you could go and have your own band. So they offered me, after the school [United States Naval School of Music, Washington, D.C.] they offered me to be the first to go to Spain if I--what was the requirement--if I signed up for four years. I said, "No good." (Laughter) But think about it, man, Spain, the first American outfit in Spain. Can you imagine what that was like? I mean, that's some awesome stuff over there, man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spain is like close to heaven.
Speaker 1: But you didn't, at the time you didn't want to go?
Speaker 2: Hey, I don't want nobody telling me what to do. Well, you know, they sign you up for four years, and you go to Spain for two weeks and wind up in Istanbul [Turkey] or somewhere else or something. (Laughter) Ain't no telling where you wind up. But they'll promise you--and you know, promises don't mean nothing, because you got different commands. One command comes with one thing, and this guy comes in and blows all that out and comes in with something else. And you just have to endure it. So, the [U.S.] Army is not good for that. But anyway, we did get rewarded some for our teaching. And the Army band was outstanding. They traveled us through--we would go to cities. We might have gone to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], you know, different cities, and march in parades on Decoration Day [Memorial Day] or something like that, or 4th of July. And then the trumpet players would have to go and play for funerals, play the 'Taps.' And so, we traveled all over for that in just a car, usually a car, and a sergeant or something would drive it. And those were good gigs, because you'd have nice food and you'd lay back until it was time for you to go. And then you'd go up and play, and you'd come back and eat a nice meal again (laughter), and then go back to the camp. So we were all over Missouri playing those 'Taps.'
Speaker 1: So, sounds like the Army wasn't too bad?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Army is good, because you don't, you don't, you don't have any stress. You don't have to--see, that's the main thing about it. Out in life here, you got to have money to pay the rent, and you got to pay a lot of--in the Army, they pay for everything. So you don't even think about that for years. It's not even a conversation. (Laughter) So, it's kind of relaxing to people who don't want to be accountable for their own thing, you know, and there're a lot of people like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean there was one guy I knew, he'd eat porterhouse steaks. And he couldn't afford to get out (laughter), because that was the only place he could get his food (laughter).
Story_ID: 402519
Speaker 1: How were you treated in the [U.S.] Army? I mean, I mean as a musician I know you got special status but--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But were the, you said the segregation thing was breaking down. Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was terrible. Yeah, it was terrible on that part, you know. But see, when you're in the segregation thing, you learn how to deal with it, just like we learn how to deal with it here. A lot of people are not even bothered by it, because they've found ways to get around it, you know. But it's still there (laughter), it ain't going away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we were in that phase of our Army, everybody thought about--I got to change this scene over here. (Laughter) Every time I look over there, I lose my thoughts.
Speaker 1: We were talking about segregation in the Army, and how you were treated. Did they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, for, on a personal basis--you know, like you go to the place where they have the food and the--
Speaker 1: The BX [base exchange], or the PX [post exchange]?
Speaker 2: The PX. You go to the PX, you know, and they'd throw you some bad flak. This was still hillbillies; this is still the Ozarks, you know. And their employees that would come in there--so they brought their normal prejudice with them. But so far as commands and things like that, they had policy, but the policy was no longer focused on racism. That was just the nature of the people that were dealing with the stuff, not the policy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] changed it, I don't know how it changed, because I was in school [United States Naval School of Music, Washington, D.C.] during that six months. That's when they sent me to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. And when I came back, everything was mixed up.
Speaker 1: But the attitudes were still bad even though the rules had changed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same thing. That's not going to change, you know. You can't legislate that kind of stuff, but they do it all the time. And it does something; I don't know what it does, but you can't change people like that.
Story_ID: 402520
Speaker 1: So what happened when you, in '52 [1952] when you got out, in October (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, now in '52 [1952] when I got out, I got home, sat my suitcase down, and the telephone rang. "I heard you getting out. Man, you interested in working?" (Laughter) I said, "Yeah, okay." So he said, "Well, come on out to the Barrel [Barrel Club, St. Louis, Missouri], we're going to rehearse at two o'clock."
Speaker 1: Now, who is this that called?
Speaker 2: Jimmie Bell, he was the biggest pimp in St. Louis [Missouri]. And he had a band, and that's the way he'd recruit. But he paid top dollar. His name was Jimmie Bell.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played with Jimmie Bell?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: See, Little Joe [Taswell "Little Joe" Baird] got me that job, because Little Joe was with McShann with me, see.
Speaker 1: So you didn't think about going back with Jay McShann's band?
Speaker 2: Oh, no. When I--I wanted to form my own band. It was such a difference in my growth. If you think about being on the road a year and then going in the [U.S.] Army two years, man, it's a tremendous change in my--I went through several stages. And so, the Army faded way away from me; I wanted to get in the mix, man. This was the time when Sonny Stitt and Gene Ammons were doing their battles, you know. And Art Blakey and all them would--so I wanted to get in that mix. And this guy Cooper [Leroy Cooper] that I got over in the band with me, he turned out to be the big fat guy in the movie, 'Ray Charles' [sic. 'Ray'].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, he played the baritone sax for Ray Charles. They came to my house in '58 [1958] when I didn't even know who he was. I asked him, "Who are you playing with?" He said, "It's a guy named Ray Charles." (Laughter) I said, "Who is that?" (Laughter) He said, "Well, he got a hit out, man, he's doing all right. He's pretty cool, you know." And they came to my house, Marcus [Marcus Belgrave], Bill Grave [ph.], what's his name? "Fathead" Newman [David "Fathead" Newman]. And they were playing in Gary [Indiana], and couldn't even play Chicago [Illinois]. But they came, they stopped by the house to eat, you know, and they went on back over to Gary.
Speaker 1: Were you in Chicago by then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came to Chicago in '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Now, this is odd. I heard that you came to Chicago--I read that you came to Chicago to study the Schillinger Method of Mathematics [sic. Schillinger System of Musical Composition] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, everybody knows about that, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I read it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's something else.
Speaker 1: But what is the Schillinger, and why would you come to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, the reason it disappeared is because it's so valuable. But the thing that makes it terrible is it has no spirit. It's a mechanical system of music. And I had been playing, you know, going around experiencing, and every time I'd run into this sound these people had, I talked to people and found out it was the Schillinger System. You need another pen?
Speaker 1: No, I'm fine.
Speaker 2: So, I said I had to check it out. So I went and ordered two books, and they were very expensive, Book 1 ['The Schillinger System of Musical Composition: Volume 1,' Joseph Schillinger] and Book 2 ['The Schillinger System of Musical Composition: Volume 2,' Joseph Schillinger], and I did experiments with it. They had workbooks, and it included a system of extending melodies. Take any melody, valid melody, and then use the mathematics and make another melody out of it that would have the same energy, but it would be different. And so that was, that was one of the openings I had, you know, in doing research and changing my music. But the main thing really changed when I, when I found this African instrument and made me a version of it.
Story_ID: 402521
Speaker 1: So in '53 [1953] when you--and I know at one point you joined the Nation of Islam? Now was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: When did you join the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: I joined the Nation of Islam in the spring of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's too far out. We want to stay in the '50s [1950s] now.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Well, in the '50s [1950s] a lot happened. As I told you, I worked at the Barrel [Barrel Club, St. Louis, Missouri]. There was a place called the Barrel; it was beer, you know. And that's when I got out of the [U.S.] Army with Jimmie Bell, the pimp. And I didn't want to stay there. You know, St. Louis [Missouri] had become so corrupt that I didn't want to stay there. And all of my friends were junkies or something. And I had the feeling it would just be a matter of time before I was involved in something negative. So I said, I'm going to get out of here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was going to ask you, how did you avoid being involved in--you said you even drove a car for a junkie?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Jay McShann's band, Walter [Walter Brown], yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So how did you manage to stay away from that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I almost OD'd [overdosed] (laughter). And that saved me, see. Because I had, I laid on my mother's [Frankie Green Rogland] bed for two days, and she didn't say a word. She knew I was fighting for my life. And I, I just, you know, what happened was, we used to sneak off the post, you know. And so my buddy was getting drugs from his girlfriend, she was mailing him drugs. You know, it was in the '50s [1950s]. So we got this cocaine, and everybody split up their parts, you know, and we'd come on home to get ready. And when we'd get ready, we'd go pick everybody up and then we're going out and have a ball. So I snorted three rows of this cocaine, and it was strong. It hadn't been cut at all, it was pure. See, and if you cut--back in that time you cut cocaine three or four times, you know. And they used milk sugar (laughter). And after I bathed, I got up and I snorted these rolls, man, and I just went down like that, so fast. I knew that I was going. You could feel yourself losing, you know, so I just come out, and I left some of my clothes in the bathroom. And I come out and I went in the room to lay on my mother's bed, across her bed. So, she couldn't sleep in it. She sat there in the rocking chair. It was a Friday night, and she sat there in that rocking chair off and on until Sunday afternoon. That's when I got it together, I had enough. And I got in the shower, so I could get enough to get back to the camp on. I never had trouble with drugs after that. (Laughter) Because I felt death, you know, I knew that I was going. I was slipping away, and I couldn't do nothing about it.
Speaker 1: How do you account for--now, you're the exception the rule, I would guess on that? I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Don't you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely. A lot of people got caught in drugs, I don't think that they were bad people or nothing like that. It's just that this was something hip, check it out. You know, if it makes you feel good, it must be good. (Laughter) But I almost OD'd, see, and that's what stopped me. A lot of people enjoyed drugs a long time. But I'd been smoking pot for years, and it never had done anything to me. We had some other stuff we used to smoke. I don't tell people about it now, because they would misuse it. (Laughter) But we had several ways of getting high, just out of a normal substance, you know.
Speaker 1: Was that like widely spread in the South, in Mississippi in those days? I mean did people get high there, or was that in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: This is St. Louis.
Speaker 1: St. Louis, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: You never heard of that kind of stuff in Mississippi? Or did you?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to Mississippi, it was like a visitor, you know. When I was little, we didn't even know what drugs were, see. The last time I was there in Oxford [Mississippi] really to remember anything was when I graduated from high school [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri]. And I went out and interacted with my [paternal] grandmother [Lugenia Mason Cohran] a lot then. But I was talking about these--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you overcame the drug habit.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Once I got rid of that, I could help people with that. You know, I'd tell people the story and help some of them.
Story_ID: 402522
Speaker 1: Let's pick you back up in Chicago [Illinois] now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right.
Speaker 1: You were, you came here to study the Schillinger method [Schillinger System of Musical Composition]?
Speaker 2: The Schillinger System, in 1953.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: See, what I had started on, is that when I was working with Jimmie Bell, I said "Well, I'll go until New Year's Eve, and then I'm getting out of this place." Because the guys would come--I'm driving down the street, "Hey, Phil [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]." And I'd stop and it would be a junkie running up and get in the back seat, scratching and everything, "Man, I need to go, I need to go somewhere." So I said it's just a matter of time before they going to bust me with all these people, you know, because I knew all the junkies, you know, the hip crowd and everything. So, I talked to my Uncle William [ph.] who was working down here on Western Avenue at the milling place. And lo and behold, he said, "Yeah, we got a good job openings now. You can make a hundred dollars a week here, you know." So I said "That sounds good." So I got all my stuff together, and I had me an old blue Chrysler I'd just got me, and I just got out. And I threw all my stuff in that car and got on the highway. And lo and behold, it was one of them storms, man, I had to drive through a storm. I got past Springfield [Illinois], and the highway was so messed up that you couldn't go anywhere. I mean you just couldn't go anywhere, you know. The tires were slipping, and tractor trailers were all in the ditch all along the highway. And I finally ran down, slid off, too, and they pulled me out for fifty dollars. I just bent the bumper on my car, that's all. Everything else was fine. I get to Chicago and it's eight a.m. Everybody's flying. I don't even know where I'm going. (Laughter) They got me flying, man. I come up and come around a curve over there on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and I land right up where my uncle lived, 1544 Trumbull, and so, 1444 Trumbull [Avenue]. And that's when Douglas Park [Chicago, Illinois] was being invaded by cheap labor from the South. They wouldn't hire nobody from Chicago. The only place you could get, where you could get a job, is to tell them you're from Mississippi. And Muddy Waters was holding forth on Ashland Avenue, him and Little Walter. And we'd go over there to hear him play, that's all. But they played country blues, they didn't know any formal system or anything. And I couldn't really appreciate them until I got into musicology. But that was an interesting part of my experience there, trying to find ways to really be what we're supposed to be. I can remember many a day playing and trying to figure out where's this going to take me? Where am I going? What's going to be the focus, you know? Because I do all these different things, but I don't know what to do, or what should I be doing? And it turned out finally--it showed me that music is where the power is. And if you do it, treat it right, you get all your stuff done.
Story_ID: 402523
Speaker 1: So you're here in the '50s [1950s]. Did you s- you formed your own band at some point, didn't you? How'd that happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I came here, yeah. Well, I said--I had just stopped at the problems I had getting here in the snow and all that stuff. But when I got here, I worked for a steel milling company. And I noticed that--I was working the midnight shift, because you made more money on the midnight shift than any other shift. And so, we would get off every morning at eight. And what happened was the crowd would be outside the door when we came out asking, "You got any openings in there, man? Any openings?" (Background noise) And we said, "No, we ain't got no openings. You know, you have to see the boss." And he'd come in. And so the boss would come in, and he didn't have nothing. One day, one day the--that phone got me. The--oh buddy, this is terrible man.
Speaker 1: That's okay. I mean, can you sit back a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just saying cause--
Speaker 2: That devastates me man. I'm on a lecture circuit you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, seventeen years. I can't--I'm just tired.
Speaker 1: Well, this is a longer interview than you probably--
Speaker 2: I'm just tired. No, I was tired when I started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't get tired like this, man, I could go three or four days. I fasted seven days with nothing but a cup of coffee. But when I get tired, I just have to admit it. And I keep running out of gas, and just slide down like this. But I wanted to tell people about this, because I have had so many rich experiences that actually demonstrate the fact that we are still, we haven't changed from the old society. It's just altered so that it'll look better from the outside. But the inside is the same, the core is the same as in the worst of the racist days. And that's who runs, that's who makes the difference in America, these people. They control the policy. Now, you want to know about Chicago [Illinois] when I got here. Well, I first started as I said with that company. (Unclear).  Now, let's see--
Speaker 1: The steel mill?
Speaker 2: In '53 [1953] I was offered two jobs. The nut company--see, I started out on the overnight thing, the night shift. That was the second time I came here. Because see, the first time I came was in '53 [1953], and I started working for this--
Speaker 1: The steel mill?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the steel mill. And we had to throw steel. That's the reason my shoulder is low now. I can't carry my laptop bag, it'll slide off. (Laughter) So, my shoulders are round from, I'd pick up them big steel sheets and sit them in racks. And they'd take the rack up with a crane and sit it in a solution to pickle all the residue off of the surface to make it shine better, something like hydrochloric acid or something.
Story_ID: 402524
Speaker 1: I think we left off with you and Sun Ra's Astral Infinity Arkestra [sic. Astro Infinity Arkestra].
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know if it was that then, but--
Speaker 2: Well, Sun Ra, had a name a week. (Laughter) He was very creative. You know, and he saw different visions of what he was projecting, so he'd change the name to fit that, you know.
Speaker 1: I'm sure we probably asked this question. But what's your impression of Sun Ra? What was he like, and what was the--being in the band like?
Speaker 2: He had a lot of properties he exhibited. Some of it was controversial. I say first of all that Sun was a very sensitive, gentle person who would not hurt anyone's feelings on purpose. He was very, I'd say, like a soft guy. But if you did the wrong thing, he would turn into a raging (laughter), you know, not losing control, he never lost control of himself. I never witnessed that in two and a half years. He was mature. And there's one thing that we both agreed on, that most of the people in this society never grow up, because they break out and have these outbursts like children, you know, when they're forty and fifty years old. They never learn that an adult is a person who controls himself. And as a child, they give you enough time to get it together. But America is not like that. America does not encourage people to ever become mature. They just encourage them to follow certain rules. And then they got laws to back up things. But in other nations, they don't have the laws; it's a cultural (laughter) fact, of being courteous to people. Now, I want to point that out, because as vitriolic as Sun could get, he was a very sensitive and caring person. And the things that he cared about was life itself. He cared about people, I'm sorry about that, he cared about people, and he wanted to help them go right. And so, the music that he wrote was to take their mind out of the realm of all this dissatisfaction and confusion and take them to another place where they could live right, called space.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, now this a question. I know when I first heard of Sun Ra--I was in Dayton, Ohio when I first heard of Sun Ra. But you know, on the album cover it said that he was from Saturn.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he appeared in Chicago [Illinois] in 1956--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was abandoned.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, what do you know personally about Sun Ra's background?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing--I think I said, I should have said before was that he was a hero in Birmingham, Alabama. The real music came out of three or four, about four centers, and Alabama was one of the earliest centers after New Orleans [Louisiana]. But you had the Oklahoma group, which eventually came into the Kansas City [Missouri] group, and you had the Mississippi group that came straight up to St. Louis [Missouri] and to Chicago. So, you had three, or these four forces of a creative people finally being able to express, seventy years after slavery. During slavery they were repressed from that, and they had to go in the woods and things to continue these habits that they had in playing creative music. And understand that creative music is a part of our diet. It's not something that you choose because you like it. It's our ancestral food that we need to be balanced in in any world, not only this one. So, it also controls our eternity. Our eternity is expressed through our music. So therefore, during slavery we were raised without a knowledge of our being divine, or knowledge of our being perpetual or eternal. Most people think of death as the end. And so, and that's not our African people, we don't think like that.
Story_ID: 402525
Speaker 1: I know the motto of the AC- AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois] is, from the ancient to the future (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the future, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know, Sun Ra seemed to typify that type of--he often dressed as if he was an Egyptian pharaoh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. He lived what he was. I mean the name Ra and all that, Sun Ra, you know. He was enforcing what had been exposed to him as a part of ancient history. But it was exposed as belonging to other people. No one knew that we were the Egyptians, that we were the pharaohs, that we were the builders of the pyramids. There would have to be somebody different than us, because in this society we are low, low-minded, can't even learn the math systems, and can't learn. How can we build a pyramid? And what they didn't realize is that this society uses a different approach to knowledge than we did, and we have a thinking process that is quite different. And so, we will never be good European people. We'll only be second and third rate Europeans. And that has to be taught. That's why there're people out here like me, because I don't think like Europeans. I think another way, and so therefore I'm successful. I'm using my ancestral tools, you follow? And that's the key to going back in the past. So, Sunny, I doubt if he could explain all that. We grow by generations. You take the generation where the mule and the horse was out there probably walking the streets along with a lot of black people, who wouldn't get in cars because they said they were evil. (Laughter) You know, we've come to a place now where they're the main drivers. (Laughter) But generations learned more, and they act different from what they learn. The problem is that we were coming from zero when they brought us over on the boats. They would not permit us to bring anything with us, except some little cultural tidbit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what your--is the philosophy you're articulating now, is that part of Sun Ra's philosophy?
Speaker 2: That's part of everybody that becomes conscious. That's what you call conscious. Conscious of what? Conscious of the fact that you are a godly person who didn't steal, cuss, or anything like that. You were a godly person coming directly from God, and living that way, even through all of the migrations and places that they moved, and the societies that they set up. Everywhere they went, they took God with them. They took another expression of God, but they were always godly people. Now, you come back here and tell somebody living down the street that they're an angel. (Laughter) They'd laugh in your face, because it's a ridiculous thought.
Speaker 1: What you're talking about seems to be in direct opposition to the idea that we are a jive people.
Speaker 2: Well, naturally. Because if we don't know our origin, if we can't, if we can't get tied to those 5 million years we been here, if we can't tie up to a knowledge of the heavens and a complete developed, over generations since, then we can't be who we are. Because no one is aware that we are the astronomers. We're the ones who put astronomy and astrology and everything else on the table. We put technology and the computer on the table. The first analog computer, I can show it to you back there in the back. You know, these are, the whole thing is to denigrate the Africans' thinking capacity. And so, they have never been given credit for any science. That's why I worked down there at the, did volunteer work at the Adler Planetarium [Chicago, Illinois], because they were the first to acknowledge that Africans did have some modicum of astronomy. So I went and wrote the music for the show that they had, and we made certain that they were accurate in their projections of African astronomy. Although they didn't really touch the serious part, they touched, you know, how they provide for their food and their festivals and things like that. But to me, to learn what the African was in astronomy was empowering, because it gave me the sense to solve problems that I couldn't solve before. I had a diagram. Now, Sunny got me into that. I loved space when I was at Lincoln [Lincoln University Laboratory High School, Jefferson City, Missouri]. My best teacher was a scientist. And even the next guy in high school, his name was Pullam [ph.]. The first day he put the heavens up there on the board and named those planets, it pushed me out of the classroom it was so strong. So, I've always been attached to that. But getting back to Sun Ra, he reinforced that in me, because I had come up in the era of this life where everybody is running after this and then running after that--fads, you know, and girls (laughter), joints and all that stuff. And so, Sunny came with knowledge. But I hadn't been around anybody speaking about knowledge. People in school, they didn't deal with knowledge that much; they dealt with training. They dealt with they'd been taught, or what was in the books. To me, knowledge is what comes from your eternity. It's what you can reach that nobody else has but you. (Cough) And so that was why when I ran into Sunny, he was out here talking knowledge all the time.
Story_ID: 402526
Speaker 1: When did you meet him, how did you meet him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I told you I was playing with Gilmore [John Gilmore]. See, Gilmore and I--this guy--I named him before. I'll come back to him. He's a drummer and he had a hit, and they set up a thing with his company to take him to New York [New York]. And you know, you got a treatment when you went to New York. They peeled you down and ripped you off. So, anyway, while he was still here setting up with his family, the horn players left. So he got me and Gilmore to replace the horns. And they had a lot of gigs, they were popular and had a hit. So, we were working all around here together. And then Sarah Vaughan came to town. She married this guy, a cab driver, Atkins [Clyde Atkins]. And Sarah used to have a birthday party every week. (Laughter) And we were the ones who used to play for it, you know, down at the Sutherland. Because he owned the Sutherland for a while.
Speaker 1: The Sutherland Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Off of Drexel [Boulevard]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, off of 47th [Street] and Drexel. So, anyway this is how I met Gilmore. He said, "Man, come on down to Sunny's [Sun Ra]," you know, because he was serious.
Speaker 1: This is John Gilmore?
Speaker 2: Yeah, John Gilmore. He was serious, and all the rest of the guys were serious. And that was what Sunny's problem was. As we look back, we see that most of the musicians were not serious, and didn't even have an idea of what being serious meant. Most people are not serious, you know. What I mean is they look at something and say, "I'm going to be the best, and I'm going to do everything I can to fulfill that." That's the way Gilmore, myself, Marshall [Marshall Allen], Ronald Boykins [Ronnie Boykins], Jon L. Hardy [Jon Hardy], and Sun Ra, all of us were serious. That's the reason it was no problem for us to practice six hours a day. You know, we were glad to do it (laughter). See you'd go home to eat, playing--
Speaker 1: So playing with Sun Ra, say, was a part of--did you have to practice a certain kind of lifestyle above and beyond like--
Speaker 2: There wasn't nothing left (laughter). There wasn't nothing left. What else could you do but go home and maybe eat, sleep, change clothes and come back? Because we'd rehearse six hours a day and we'd play six hours a night, seven days a week. So that's twelve hours, man, and that's twelve solid hours. But we knew we were growing. I was growing out of a person just playing music into someone who had visions. The music was strong enough for me to see things in it. And it forced me to be creative because Sun Ra had a creative format, and he refused to let people have borders, you know what I mean? Borders like, "Well, I can't play that." He'd say, "No, play it." (Laughter) That was Sunny. "Play it and see what it sounds like. Do you feel good? Was that it or not?" He knew--and I guess possibly Sun Ra probably had been drawing from his eternity since he was a teenager. Most of us are not enlightened enough to get into that type of thinking until, you know, we become elders.
Speaker 1: Did you know much about Sun Ra's own inspiration for what he did?
Speaker 2: Well, he talked about things from time to time. But he didn't have to talk about his inspiration, because we all had the same thing.
Speaker 1: No, but I think it might--people might want to know if you have any idea, or if he ever talked to you about who his teachers were. Or, who inspired Sun Ra?
Speaker 2: He had, Fess Wiley [sic. John Tuggle "Fess" Whatley], I think was the man's name. I heard him say Fess Wiley. Well, see, all of the heavyweight people in the old days were professor, and they called them Fess for short. That meant he was heavy from inner knowledge, not what other people teach. But he was real strong from his inner, from his eternity.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's Professor Wiley, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fess, as we called him, Fess Wiley.
Speaker 1: And who, I mean who was he? He was a teacher of Sun Ra's?
Speaker 2: Actually, I would rather--I got it in the books there. I don't know, I don't remember exactly, but I think that's pretty good. That's the first thought that popped in mind about it. Now let me tell you, Sun Ra didn't really need a teacher. I think his sister probably started him first, I don't know. But he could play all of the classical compositions. He could give you, I mean he knew the classical literature. In the old days, their standards were extremely high. You know, that's the same thing as the 'St. Louis Blues.' What's his name?
Speaker 1: Handy.
Speaker 2: Handy, W.C. Handy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) W.C. Handy, yeah.
Speaker 2: Very extensive education. And you look at those old players with Duke Ellington. Most of them could play oboe, and violin, and bassoon, and stuff like that, besides the trumpet, you know. And if you look at some of those pictures, they got eight or ten instruments back there behind them to add to the music. But all over the years, it melted down to certain instruments and a certain sound to express the music. And that's what melted down to swing. That was the last--well, bop was the last addition. Swing was in middle from Kansas City [Missouri], and then bop came out of Kansas City, going to New York [New York] (laughter). And that produced the bop.
Story_ID: 402527
Speaker 1: So what are the, some of the compositions that you played with Sun Ra? What did you, you played trumpet and coronet and--
Speaker 2: Just trumpet (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And harp--
Speaker 2: And other instruments. I made the frankiphone before I left. And it's on, let's see, it's on one of the albums. It's a--not my good version, but one of them. But the first instrument was my violin uke. And that's on the 'Angels and Demons at Play.' But basically, Sun Ra was old school. And all the old school composers wanted trumpet players to play their melodies, because the trumpet is a clear and regal instrument. So, they wanted to hear their melodies played by trumpet. And that's the same thing with me. You listen to any of my records, and you'll hear me playing the trumpet on them. Because all of the bands I come up with, that's what they wanted me, as a lead trumpet player. I wasn't really that much focused on creative playing, only trumpet. Because everything they played on trumpet didn't sound that cool to me except Pops [Louis Armstrong], he was playing down there. But I wasn't that type of person. I thought the closest to me was Miles [Miles Davis] playing ballads. When he'd play fast and all that, (imitates trumpet sound) that didn't move me at all. (Laughter) But he could tear those ballads up, man, you could get inside of them. And the whole thing was to get inside of the music, because that's an ancient tradition. These people don't even know what jazz is. They're around here calling themselves jazz musicians, and they don't even, they can't go two steps into their eternity.
Speaker 1: Tell me about, Sun Ra created something he called his solar sound instrument, which is, or he called--he had an electrified keyboard.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he the--
Speaker 2: Well, the man, Moog [Robert Moog], who invented the synthesizer heard of Sun Ra, and came around and asked his advice on the instrument, because Sun Ra was the best keyboardist in the city, wherever he was.
Speaker 1: So, Moog, M-U-U--
Speaker 2: Yeah, M-O-O-G.
Speaker 1: M-O-O-G, Moog.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came around, he would be there. Sometimes you'd see him a couple of times a month, you know. He'd come and he'd talk to Sunny, and then he come back that night to play. He had a new instrument to show him. I remember when--it was the clavioline or something like that, and it had a really pristine sound.
Speaker 1: Clavinet?
Speaker 2: Clav- that's one of them, too.
Speaker 1: Clavinet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever. But it had that pure melody sound, you know, and Sunny liked that. But basically it was his rhythms, he was more revolutionary. And he was revolutionary in his melodies, too. See, by him being a pianist, he was--the piano has the harmony of this society in it. And he played melodic piano a lot, you can listen to him. (Imitates piano sound) (Laughter) He didn't play a lot of chords like most piano players do. And so, that approach threw a lot of people off. Then you had the rhythm. See, he'd play multi-rhythms, (imitates piano) you know, a 5-4, or he'd either run into a 7 or a 9--you know, a 17, and he would play that type of music. And people didn't know where he was at, they didn't how to get with him. So all they could do was measure whether he was good or bad. And it was all good just about, because it was a part of our missing heritage that we enjoyed when we were in Africa. And they cut it off here, when we got here.
Speaker 1: Now, did he modify the moog synthesizer any himself?
Speaker 2: Well, he must have been an advisor. Man, I wasn't on top of him. I was doing my thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So (laughter).
Story_ID: 402528
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about the frankiphone then, because I--because you invented that.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You came up with that. Now how did you, what inspired you to invent the frankiphone?
Speaker 2: Well, I had already picked up this idea in studying. I went back to the beginning in music. And actually, I had quit. I guess I had quit, you know, two or three times, back and forth. But I had left his band, and I said I wanted to find my own way, because I can't deal with it as he [Sun Ra] was dealing with it.
Speaker 1: What was the problem? What was the--
Speaker 2: Well, it was his idea. I'm drawing from my eternity. It wasn't the same, you know. When you get to the level where you go inside and bring something out that nobody ever heard before, that's called a wizard. It doesn't matter what it's in. Like the guy who deals with them snakes.
Speaker 1: I'm going to put this out here and see how you respond to it.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I guess when I have seen Sun Ra play, we see this tremendous leader who pops out of a puff of smoke.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: His band of twenty-something guys and some women--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's way down the road (laughter).
Speaker 1: And they follow him, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, the thing about it, he's a leader--
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: --and they're followers.
Speaker 2: It's a way of life.
Speaker 1: And you didn't see yourself in that--
Speaker 2: No, that was not my life. You see, I was reaching inward before I met him. And I was doing things to live until I could get to that place where I could go pure into study. Because I had come out of school early, and it was in my mind to go back and complete my studies on my own. That's why I came to Chicago [Illinois], because of the museums and libraries and universities.
Speaker 1: So the frankiphone, let's get back to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all right. So then a friend of mine, Lou Wentworth [ph.], he's a Ph.D. in Los Angeles [California] now. We used to play together. He's a tenor saxophonist, and we would play gigs at some places, you know. So, anyway, his wife was working at some art institute, and this was at the very inception of African exploration on a modern level. And somebody had this exhibit on Africa. I think it was Uganda or someplace like that. So they brought back a whole box of instruments that they gave to her, because they didn't know what to do with them anyway. They just gave them to her, "You take them." So she thought it was really nice, because it was at the very beginning where we were beginning to accept the African thing. So, he told her, "Well, Phil [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] would know what these instruments are, because he studies African music." And so, they brought the box over to my house, and they had a couple of old flaky models of some pianos in it. You'd hit it and it would go, "Boom." And one had a little sleeve on it, and it would go, (imitates piano) when you hit it, you know. But they had possibilities, but they sounded really amateurish, you know. They just sounded like something a child would do. And I said to her, I said, "I can do better than that." And so they gave me about half the instruments, I guess. So, they named them and they took them on back and put them on the wall and made a display, or something like that. And so, I was exploring those instruments. I didn't have any tools, so I got me a little hand, set of hand tools. And the first day I decided to make me one, I went out and found these staves, these steel staves laying in the street. And I picked up one and I followed it, and I must have picked up maybe fifty or sixty of them, just following them down the street. They probably had fallen off a truck. So that was the beginning. I measured the sizes. By me having math as a background, I understood the mathematics of the vibrating tines. So I went down to the library and researched to see had any other instruments like that been introduced into American culture. And they had one in 1936 that was similar, and no one knew what to do with it. They just patented it (laughter) and put it on the books. So I went back and dealt with the properties of vibrating times. And I guess the ancestors were with me, because when I lined up the keys, I decided to use thirteen keys, and they were in perfect alignment. When I got them in tune, they were in perfect alignment, and the music that they created created an energy field. It wasn't like a trumpet. You take a trumpet, it'll play anything, (imitates trumpet sound). But the frankiphone would only play these keys. Each key had one sound. So therefore, I had to line the keys up in compatible fashion so that they would always reflect a particular energy field in sound.
Story_ID: 402529
Speaker 1: And so I walked the streets of Chicago [Illinois], like from my house on 75th Street down to the library [South Shore Branch, Chicago, Illinois] on the lakefront, and I would play these thumb pianos with me. And that energy field that's in there would get so deep in my mind that I had to play that instrument sometimes two weeks, I couldn't turn it loose. It was almost like drugs. And I realized how strong music is. What had been happening to me is that we had been playing shallow music, it wasn't strong enough. Sun Ra's music was strong, but even his music wasn't strong enough. It was his spirit that made the music so strong, and his energy that he applied to the music. But the music itself has energy, and that's what I was exploring. That's why I play string instruments and instruments with specific tuning, because I understand now the field, the energy field that comes out of what people call modes. See, I was the one that started that. Sun Ra did it, Clark Terry did it. Other people did it, but they didn't understand it. I explored it. I dealt with the scientific breakdown of it. I went into the ancient tuning system. I saw what other people did. I read Plato and Pythagoras; I read the whole manual by Zollino [ph.]. So, I worked to get some type of understanding. And I think because of the hard work that I did, the ancestors just let me see the whole picture. And so, I began to write out of that picture, and I had a picture like Sun Ra (laughter). He was space and place, but I was earth. And that's why I had to leave, because I saw that I was diametrically opposed to what he was doing, while respecting him at the utmost for his genius and the fact that they opened me up and gave me an opportunity to see life on a higher level. Now that frankiphone, everything I do, I try to improve. And so anything that I make--like I made this stuff right here. Anything that I make, I see a better way the next time. But if it turns me on, I'll go ahead and do it. But I'm always trying to improve, you know. At seventy-nine, I'm still trying to improve. And I've learned some things this year that I didn't know before. Now that's how the frankiphone came about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it had to be based on my concept of music, not general music. You go to school and learn music, this is this and that is that. That ain't worth a damn for creating anything (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay. Now the frankiphone, in terms of chronology, that comes like--is that before Sun Ra or after Sun Ra, or during--
Speaker 1: After that.
Speaker 2: After.
Speaker 1: And during--you know, because we were all creating. Marshall [Marshall Allen] had created a clarinet that has a flute--no, it had a flute with a clarinet mouthpiece. Yeah, it was called the fluziphone [sic. flutophone] or something. And it got a good sound, and he could play that, you know. Marshall is a tremendous musician. All these guys were dedicated to music for life. People are not like that now. They want to be famous. They want to be, you know, they want to get on TV. I don't care if I ever get on TV. I'm trying to generate the music in my heart that draws beautiful people to my presence, you understand, to give me a better circumstance of life. Because that's what, what I'm emanating is what will come back. What do they say, what goes around, comes around.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: So, let's get on back to the why?
Speaker 2: All right, so--
Speaker 1: I had to define music for myself. So, I went back to a single note. And I don't want to write a book on it, but I will tell you that David Baker, our distinguished musician at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] in '69 [1969] told me that he wanted to dedicate a chapter of his book to me. And I let him have an interview, just like you. And then one day I was teaching a class maybe ten or twelve years later, and a student said, "That's what David Baker's got in his book." (Laughter) So then I didn't have time. So then I got the book and found out he didn't mention my name (laughter).
Speaker 2: So he took the concepts, but not the--
Speaker 1: Not only him, everybody else. Who, who else originated modal concepts? Name one that you know.
Speaker 2: You got me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't tell me Coltrane [John Coltrane], because he was all into chords.
Speaker 2: I'm a not a music theorist, anyway.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's above my--
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people out there consider themselves composers. But they're not; they're copiers. They go--and then in the business, they're total thieves. They pay people to go and steal. I've seen them in my rehearsal. I can tell their energy the minute they step in the door. They come to hear my rehearsal, you know, so they can take something back to their studio. Well, none of the studio people dealt with me. I dealt with my music like Sun Ra. But it was so strong, the thing that it did, it pushed other people into doing it.
Story_ID: 402530
Speaker 1: Well, my greatest revelation about music, in order to have my own music--because I was with a genius, and I knew he was going to be known throughout history, whereas other people took Sun Ra lightly. They weren't scholarly enough to realize how deep he penetrated into the very essence of life itself.
Speaker 2: So, what kind of reaction did he--I mean did he get--I mean some people must have thought he was crazy.
Speaker 1: Most people thought he was crazy, even musicians thought he was crazy more than anyone else, you know. And he had a lot of problems. People hurt him, they want to hurt you. Yeah, they do mean things to you because you're different. And so, he dressed different, he talked different. He wasn't interested in any foolishness at all, but he was such a tremendous piano player that everybody respected him; they just said he was crazy.
Speaker 2: Well, was he Sun Ra twenty-four hours a day?
Speaker 1: Eventually he grew into that. Nothing just pops up like that.
Speaker 2: I was wondering, because it's such a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he grew into that.
Speaker 2: --different persona, that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, you just wonder if he's like that twenty-four hours a day? Or is it an act, you know?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't no act at all. He was definitely that; he grew into that. At one time, he was a Jehovah Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses]. And he revealed to me one day that he--and going so deep into the Bible, he decided to turn it around. And he got more meaning out of the lines that he reversed than he did out of the lines that he read straight. And so, that became his method of bringing out the truth (laughter).
Speaker 2: I can't laugh out loud.
Speaker 1: All right, I forget.
Speaker 2: That's why I just go through this.
Speaker 1: But it was funny, you know. Because any time you want to do it, you can just sit down and look at it. And if you have the type of depth--you know, he was, Sunny read all his life, you know. He talked about Egypt when people didn't know what it was. There used to be a little book called, 'Kim,' [sic.] I don't know if you've ever seen it passed around.
Speaker 2: By Marian Hockenhull [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know about it.
Speaker 1: All right. Well, that was out here a long--that was out here in the '40s [1940s]. Let me see. And it was almost an unbelievable thing then, because there was such an energy generated on black people as being so mentally deficient that no one could even picture anybody--I mean, it had to be a joke, you know.
Speaker 2: Kem, K-E-M (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) K-I-M [sic.].
Speaker 2: K-I-M?
Speaker 1: K-I-M, the black land.
Speaker 2: I thought it was--okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I got one of the copies back there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway, very few people except scholars were studying Egypt. And his music was about Egypt, so most of the people, you know, they want to hear some Ella Fitzgerald or Count Basie or something. They don't want to hear nothing about knowledge, you know, to hell with that. And he kept playing, he was a such a good piano player that he was--first of all, he was brought here as Fletcher Henderson's pianist. Now, Fletcher was a great pianist himself, but bandleaders were too, you know, they didn't play, they just stood up and directed. And he played for that man. And then they became the house band at the DeLisa [Club DeLisa, Chicago, Illinois], and he was the one who had to write all the extra music. If the dancers needed a new tune, he would write it out for them and give it to the band at the next set, and they'd play it. So, he was known as one who could just write anything. He and I, I helped him write the things for Count Basie; I think I told you about it on the other session. But Count Basie was heading up a show at the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois], and they had some dancers to open the show, and they wanted seven songs for their opening. And I remember one of them was 'Haunted House' [ph.], (laughter) that was one of my songs. I can't remember some of the other ones, but anyway--
Speaker 2: The music--Chicago [Illinois] was jumping in those days when it came to music.
Speaker 1: Oh, man, jumping wasn't the word. We never came down. (Laughter) Everything was up.
Speaker 2: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate?
Speaker 1: Sure, I knew Johnny Pate. (Hums tune) I can't remember the name of the song, but that was his song. I played with Pate. He was a bass player, wasn't he? Yeah, John Gilmore and I played with him. They had a place up on 55th [Street], and we used to play with him from time to time. And then Wilbur Ware would come in and take the bass out of his hand, and we'd have fun. (Laughter) Back to this music concept. See, when I saw that Sunny--as I got to develop into higher and higher stages, because by this time we had maybe 120 or a 130 songs we knew by heart, of his music. We practiced it so much that all he had to do was just hit a little (imitates piano), on the piano, and we'd take off on it; we didn't have to pause for the music. And music was much more natural when we played it from memory. That's why I had all my bands play from memory. I never let them read, except in rehearsal. Anyway--
Speaker 2: Oh, was--
Speaker 1: --when I got to this--growing into where I began to develop--just like the rest of the band, everybody was developing into this concept. We were playing it six hours a day, six hours a night. And as we got tighter and tighter in this concept, Sunny began to challenge me. I would play (imitates trumpet sound), and he'd (imitates piano sound) you know, he'd put some negatives behind it. And he knew I didn't like those dissonant sounds. I never liked dissonance. And so, he would throw dissonance in behind me when I was playing. And I said, "Well, I see where he's at. He wants to control me." So I said, "Well, he's a great master, and he certainly did all I needed done," which was to open up and take those borders out of my mind, because I definitely came up in the old school borders. And so I said I have to go ahead and find my own music that's in me.
Speaker 2: Now, Sun Ra left Chicago what, in nineteen sixty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 2: --one [1961]? All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, soon after that.
Speaker 2: And he went to Toronto [Canada], I believe?
Speaker 1: Right, he went to Toronto.
Story_ID: 402531
Speaker 1: When did you join the Nation of Islam? That's in here someplace, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's see. I have to go back to that, because it was in 1962. I was deep into musical study, and after about oh, a year's time, I had penetrated into all the depths, and defined what I was doing. I had my basis, and that's why I went into Asian concepts, because I wanted to see what people had done in different cultures. And then I decided what I was going to do. But I saw a matrix of sound that I've never seen anywhere else before. And so that became my pattern, my basic pattern--the relationship of any note to its partials. And I built my music up out of that, and it coincided with the ancient African concept. So then, everybody recognized some of my music, especially when I played it on the frankiphone, because they knew they had heard it from another time; they just couldn't tell you what it was. People can sense their eternity.
Speaker 1: So, there's a kind of timeless quality to it?
Speaker 2: There's something that responds to the body. And I've had mothers who'd bring their children up, little babies, after my performance on the song, and tell me that the baby wiggled all the time the frankiphone was playing, but didn't respond to nothing else, you know. And they said he'd be pushing vigorously and all that stuff, trying to dance, you know. So I knew that this instrument was evoking ancestral response. (Background noise) And I designed my songs the same way--(unclear) disconnect that. Can we take a break here?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were talking about the frankiphone and its effect on people, leading up to you joining the Nation of Islam in 1962 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all right. Well, I had played gigs just to eat, because I was committed to not working anymore, just playing my instruments; I stayed in music. I said I would starve and eat off the ground before I do anything else. And that resolve got me here (laughter). But I studied all of the leaves on the branches of the trees that I had built with my sound and rhythm. And as I dealt with that more and more, my whole historical perspective expanded. And at the same time, I looked up in the sky and became an astronomer, because I felt the energy, the same that I felt in music in the stars. So, I figured they must be related, or I wouldn't feel this energy field that comes out of certain notes. And so, it's the same way in certain parts of the heavens. And putting that together with research, and history, and musicology, and astronomy, I formulated my sound. And of course, the whole study is based on the relationship of partials in a single sound. Well, I had to teach that, because nobody knew it. And I couldn't find anybody who wanted to learn it. Everybody wanted to learn what the other cats were doing--Miles Davis and his, what do you call that? That Spanish thing. What was that?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Something about Spain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Sketches of Spain'?
Speaker 1: 'Sketches of Spain,' yeah. Him and Gil [Gil Evans], they, they turned everybody out with that.
Story_ID: 402532
Speaker 1: Okay, so I had to go to my friend, Lou [Lou Wentworth (ph.)], because he understood what I was doing with the frankiphone. I kept him aware, but discussed it with him. Also, Brother Gene Easton, who came from St. Louis [Missouri] with me, we used to have discussions about it. And so from the frankiphone and the zither, because I got these instruments to discover the properties of musical alignment and musical combinations, not chords, and that's what it taught me. And I worked gigs playing the regular music, and there was a guy--oh, brother, I shouldn't even mention his name; I can't think of it. But it was a trumpet player, who was friendly. And he said, "Man, I want you to meet some people." And so he took me over to the temple. And I was a serious type of person, I guess that's why he took me over there, because all of those people over there were very serious. And I listened to what they were talking about, you know, and it seemed to me that they were discussing the problems and they had some other angles into it. But somebody in there, one scholar, I guess, jumped up and was offended, and told the minister that asked a question like Socrates, you know. He thought the minister couldn't answer. And the minister answered it according to the doctrine that he had been taught by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. So, this guy jumped into him. "I know you got so and so." And he had some little facts out of his history book that disputed what the minister said and the way he said it. So, he thought he really had him. And I just jumped up and read the brother down, and told him what studies he'd been in, and how faulty they were. And I told him where he could read and get the truth, I mean, what authors could straighten him out on the subject. And so there was nothing for him to say. And everybody in there favored me for putting the guy in his place. So they came to me and said, "Man, we need somebody like you, because you studied ancient history." And--
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting, because I think one of the principal critiques of the Nation of Islam is that the history described by Muhammad--
Speaker 1: Was weak.
Speaker 2: --was weak.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was weak. But you see, I was looking at the people, and what he was doing to them. See, I looked at prostitutes who came from Cicero [Illinois] who became very honorable women, by their attitudes alone. And so, I looked at the brothers who would die for you without even thinking (claps). I didn't see people like that in the normal society.
Speaker 2: What you're describing is cultural change (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A cultural identity.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, a hundred and eighty degrees different from--
Speaker 1: See, well, they became themselves, and that's all he was talking about. He says, "You don't know who you are." See, well, he didn't either. (Laughter) No, I won't, no, let me take that back. He knew enough to change the world. But at the same time, I think that I reached an identity in our eternity, that if we applied it, I think we'd get much bigger results. Because one thing that I petitioned the Nation of Islam to become the musical director, so that I could go around the Nation and form choirs and bands. I had different techniques for every single instrument there is. Anybody that plays with me would excel in their world, and they all have. I can name a hundred, two or three hundred of them; they always go to the top. My latest is Afrah Bariki [ph.] who is the top baritone sax player in the--what do you call them? Salsa. And they're pretty hot around the world, you know, he's the top guy. I know David Hersey [ph.] who was playing, just fumbling around with his horn, and really didn't know what he was going to do in life. He got with me, and now he's a music teacher, possibly the best music teacher in Chicago [Illinois] in high school. All of these guys had to go completely into the very essence of all aspects of music. They had to wring it out, and get a meaning out of it. And so that's why they all excelled. Then I don't think some of them, the more advanced, didn't give me any credit for it, because they were good when I met them, but they didn't know where they were going, or why. Anyway, the Nation of Islam, they made me a lieutenant. And I was waiting for this reply. I made a frankiphone for the Honorable Elijah Muhammad to show him who I was, and he couldn't identify it from that. So I figured that if he couldn't identify that and didn't know who I was, I better move on.
Story_ID: 402533
Speaker 1: Now that, it's interesting. I was just thinking about what you were saying and your experience in the Nation of Islam, offering them your services as the minister of music. And they had identified you I guess for historical information, and that sort of thing. But now that we think about it, I mean I--you know, of all the black organizations that I know of, the Nation of Islam is probably the least known for any kind of musical artistic expression.
Speaker 2: And there's a reason why. Basically, they didn't understand music. They understood its effect. Now you got to understand, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad came from Georgia, and what he was exposed to, he did a tremendous job. But there were many things that he wasn't exposed to. And then having the divine enlightenment from Master Farad [sic. Wallace Fard Muhammad], whatever they did or used with music, that was something that was secondary, it wasn't primary. But see, African people are primary musical people. Like I said, it's a part of our diet. And very few people understood that, unless they got out like I did and went back and studied. So, then once you know this, you can't just convince people of something that's different from what they know. They fight for whatever they know very vigorously, you know. And so, I waited and waited, and then they brought me the ministry books. And I said, "Wait a minute, I'm not here to become a minister." (Laughter) I know what I was to be for life. And I said what I've discovered is what's playing out here right now. I can turn the radio on right now and show you what I put in on the mix. Nobody gives me credit, because certain people did not want me to enjoy any type of remuneration from the music. But they sent people to my rehearsal. They stole from me, and they still come around me now. I wouldn't be surprised if they use this interview to piece together some more of my concept. Because my concept has always related. I've never had any failures in dealing with black people. And this is the greatest music on the planet now, because it comes from the original, or the trunk of the original tree. And that's what I was reaching for; I was reaching into my eternity. I don't think most of the people who deal with music even know what eternity is; it's just something that's remote. They have to go to the dictionary to find out the definition, you know. Like I'm saying, an artist has a doorway that opens up. And in that door, he can penetrate forever.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened next? Now, okay, so you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, back to the--
Speaker 1: It's not a place--the door kind of closes at the Nation, because they're really not ready for music.
Speaker 2: They were not. And the songs that they sang were so bad I could hardly sit there and listen to them, you know. But I said--and the main reason I wanted to form this orchestra of Islam is because I'd already been into music twenty or thirty years. And I knew that the minute they heard something new, they were going to copy me, and I didn't want my music copied. I knew that if it had been identified as the music of Islam, nobody would have touched it. (Laughter) I just didn't get to make the grade. (Laughter) See, then I would have been able to just play my music and enjoy it. I would have brought everybody. Everybody, all the black people would have been in the Nation of Islam, I guarantee you. I didn't find a single person against the music except those people who play noise.
Story_ID: 402534
Speaker 1: I hope this isn't a diversion from the chronology. I'm trying to stay on the chronology here (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all right. That's good.
Speaker 1: But the symbol, there's a symbol behind you on the wall--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that I first saw when I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that before I knew anything. And that's why I teach that. See, in 1958, I saw those symbols and I knew that was the sine curve. I knew that it was also the African (unclear). I knew that it was the four phases of the moon. I knew it was the straightness of the people, the divine people. I saw all of those things, because Africans speak, spoke through symbols.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you adopt that symbol?
Speaker 2: I adopt it then, in 1958.
Speaker 1: In '58 [1958], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean and it's something I love. I felt that just like people hear the frankiphone and like it, I saw that symbol. And I was studying mathematics, and I knew that that was something ancient that had been overlooked, and people didn't understand. All right, so once I kept that, that kept me grounded. It always kept me as an African of ancient times that had been omitted in history.
Speaker 1: Is there an origin for the symbol? Where does it originate?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it comes from the (Unclear) people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's art in everything. Everybody now can go and study what I studied, you know, forty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: I know the people of South Africa--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we now call the--
Speaker 2: Kalahari Desert.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I mean the knowledge has always been there, it's just that people weren't interested in it, because they made us look so bad and stupid that it wouldn't even make sense (laughter) for us to say something like that.
Story_ID: 402535
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after the---
Speaker 2: Well, I quit. I went home one day. And I lived around the corner from the temple. And I went home that day and I was feeling disgusted, because they'd brought me the books to become a minister. In order to become a minister in the Nation [Nation of Islam], you have to take, you have to study a lot of prophesies, and religions, and studies. And so they gave me these books to start studying. And I said, "Hey, I'm already into what I'm doing," you know. But I looked at them, and it benefitted me quite a bit. Because I was hostile when I was there, and I had come out of Mississippi and I'd been humiliated at least a thousand times in my life. And so, my attitude was not good about being a mix in America. And when I went there and I got these books. They were all about prophesy, explaining how, when, and the details of the demise of all of the diverse people. And so, when I see this conflict, like Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], it was a part of that. And I saw the book back in '62 [1962] or in '63 [1963] at the same time, before Malcolm [Malcolm X] left. I left in the summer, and Malcolm was sent down in the fall. I was one of the few people--I think he sent about five pictures here to Chicago [Illinois] from Jeddah [Saudi Arabia] when he went to Jeddah. And I had that picture, and someone took it out of my office. But he had an inscription on it.
Speaker 1: What was it--I mean did you get a chance to ever, I mean to talk to him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with Malcolm a lot of times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I even recorded a couple of his--
Speaker 1: Speeches?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not recorded them for me, but I mean I took--I was wearing that, what do you call it? That wire recorder. Malcolm had a lot of speeches out there. We went to some place, and he just, he would embarrass somebody coming to him wrong. You had to be very respectful and bright to talk with Malcolm, because he would make you look like a little kid. You know, not, not just to be, you know, hateful or anything like that, but just to show you how much you hadn't thought on your own subject that you brought up. Anyway, yeah, I--we went fishing together. And a lot of time on Saviours' Day, we fished a lot. That's two or three days when everybody's coming for, you know, for the big celebration.
Speaker 1: So you'd go fishing on Saviours' Day (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Well, fishing meant getting new recruits (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's what it's called. He'd just walk up to a bunch of wine heads and say, "Look, man, you need to get up out of that space." (Unclear). And we'd have two or three cars parked down there. And he'd pull in the first car with six guys in it. And he'd walk all down 63rd Street, 47th Street--anywhere you got a bunch of people that's just lost. He'd walk up and there and put them in the temple. You see those people a month later, s- be your best ally.
Story_ID: 402536
Speaker 1: Do you have an opinion about the--there are some now that argue that Malcolm X really built the Nation of Islam, I mean he swelled the ranks (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Shakes head) Anybody knows that he swelled the ranks, because he related to the generation. Whereby, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad swelled the ranks--I'd say he was between Garvey [Marcus Garvey] and all these other, what do you call them--different black organizations like the Pullman porters. I mean, these are all organizations that bordered on religion. It seemed that in the old days you couldn't have an organization unless it had all of those aspects in it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had a spiritual aspect to it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that. See, so I would say that all of the people in there were united. They were united in finding their way back to their original selves, and it was through good behavior. We were taught to be courteous to everybody, to not be unkind to any person, but to bring the truth out, and not let people slide around the reality that they think that they're better than you. You know, you had to look him in the eye and make him know that he'd better respect you if he valued his life. That's the way the FOI [Fruit of Islam] was, and that made the women really stand up, because they knew we would protect them and provide for them. We didn't have any abuse like that in the Nation. We treated people fairly; we treated everybody fairly. And the strangest thing you would, of that was that we were the most choice employees, because our behavior was set. They knew we weren't going to steal, we weren't going to lie on anybody, we weren't going to give them any problem. We'd go on the job and do the job and come home. So, Muslims were preferred employees. I worked in the police department while I was a lieutenant in the mosque. (Laughter) Now, you know they knew I was there. They had more policemen in the mosque than they did at the FOI. So, I mean I was aware of all that intrigue and all that crap, you know. But the thing that fascinated me so much was that you could sit with five thousand people and hear a pin fall on the floor. That's just fascinating, for me to see people that disciplined. And I know I hadn't been anywhere--and I don't mean for five minutes; I mean for two and a half, three hours. If they had to move, you wouldn't hear anything. You didn't hear anybody talking. Everybody sat and listened, five thousand people. And we used to do that in the Trianon Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois], places like that.
Speaker 1: I think, yeah, a lot of black people respect the Nation because of the discipline.
Speaker 2: Discipline, exactly. That's what's missing. Now, you can't let a slave have discipline. So you know, slavery, naturally is continued up to today, in my opinion. I don't see people any better off than they were when they brought them over here, because they're in debt now. They at least didn't owe nothing. You got a good job, you can't do nothing with it. Your child may come up and cuss you out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you have no control over it.
Story_ID: 402537
Speaker 1: Now, let me just jump to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, let's move on (laughter).
Speaker 1: We'll move into the mid-'60s [1960s]. As we get into the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you have to give me the chronology of what happened.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But, but the thing is that I know that you become an icon--
Speaker 2: Of the change.
Speaker 1: --of the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Of cultural change.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: People are--you're a cultural leader--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago, without a doubt.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Especially as the '60s [1960s] keep moving on, you become more and more of a cultural leader. And how did you--you developed your own band, didn't you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was all a part of the same thing.
Speaker 1: How did you get your own group together?
Speaker 2: See, you want to deal with it in a specific way. When you go back and study history, you're studying your people. So then once you see how beautiful your people are, and how exact they were, how caring and loving they were, then you want to see that for yourself. And that's all we were doing. Me and my wife, her sister, Delores [ph.], she made the clothes. This jacket here was made at that time. I saw Brad Pitt wearing one last summer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, when did you get married? We didn't talk about that. That was like, when did that happen?
Speaker 2: The same, in '62 [1962], yeah, '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]. Africans--well, like in 'Kemet' [ph.], the woman picks up her clothes and take them over to his house. That was all there was to it, wasn't nothing else involved (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was no ceremony?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't nothing else involved. The ceremony was in the commitment to each other. And we grew the music, and the costumes, the culture, the food, the health. All of it was one thing. And so, that's why we had a lot to do with teaching people to drink good water. We started reading labels. We taught people to look at the food they have, and all of these things. And so, we can come back and talk about the cultural aspect.
Story_ID: 402538
Speaker 1: Okay. Malcolm X. You wanted to tie up some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Malcolm X had to be painted as the worst person of the 20th century because he was opposed to white people's rule and domination of the African people and the rest of the world. But Malcolm was not a hateful person, with all the abuse that he had been involved in. There hardly was a person that he ever hit or struck, you know. Like when he carried his gun, he would just, you know, was going through acts. But later on as a minister you could see and you could feel the tenderness and the concern that he had for other people. And that's why he could go on the street where the wine heads and all of them hung around. All of them listened to him, they could feel him, no matter what state of mind they were in, drunk and everything else. So, we all admired him for that. He must have been the man who was the spokesman for the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. He, Mr. Muhammad only had a third grade education and he, sometimes some of his words were very difficult because he didn't speak then what we would call proper English, you know. But his words were so powerful, whatever way they came out, people understood and loved it. I've listened to him talk for what, two hours and stuff like that. And he was just brilliant, because his mind was so powerful; it wasn't the language. And see, we've been taught to worship people who can follow patterns, who can be trained like a dog, you know what I mean, and then get up and bow, wow, wow, wow. But this man had a mind. And so, Malcolm was the best example of another generation adopting that mind and using it to its fullest ability. So naturally he built the Nation [Nation of Islam] up. But I feel that that was God's job to decide when the Nation should be built, or who or what, you know. So, it's just a pattern of things that developed. Even like Khalid [Khalid Abdul Muhammad], and like Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], the way they all developed, you know, I've seen everything that's happened here in America. I read two papers every day just about, and I watch the news, which ain't news. (Laughter) But I watch the events they consider--
Story_ID: 402539
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you feel about the assassination of Malcolm X?
Speaker 2: Oh, if you know somebody that was that good brother, everybody felt the same way. I never found any people, except those who thought he offended the Nation of Islam. And I think he was trying to bring the Nation to a higher place, and I think that's what it was. Because to me, I might have got the wrong impression. I don't consider myself perfect, but I do observe, and I've been here a long time and I've been exposed to a lot of things. So, from those observations and exposure, I would say that Malcolm was loved by almost anybody that he came up and met. Even Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], anybody that met him, he was that type of guy. He didn't have a bad bone in his body. But everybody in the news always got this one picture. The editor of the paper, when they selected the pictures that's going to go in the paper, it's always that tough one, looking like, "I'll kill you," you know, they made him look as bad as they could. And they brought Malcolm up as the enemy of white people, but he was the enemy of the things that white people practiced; (laughter) he was not the enemy of any man. Now, the dogma was set up to attract black people's attention. They could, they would never have gone anywhere with what some of those other organizations were talking about. So, it was a type of a device or propaganda, reverse propaganda, you might put it. But what we were interested in was the truth of ourselves, because you cannot excel without knowing who you are. And most people who are born, if they're really serious, they want to excel. But you're inhibited if you got the fact that your lips are too thick, your feet are too long, your butt's too big, and none of the clothes were made to fit our bodies. You know, everything was negative, just like Malcolm said.
Speaker 1: Can you remember where you were when you heard about his assassination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at home on that Sunday afternoon at three o'clock.
Speaker 1: How did you--
Speaker 2: I just told you. I wouldn't know that if it didn't touch me.
Speaker 1: No, I mean how did you find out? Was it radio, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the radio or TV, you know. They came on and said they were interrupting the program to tell you that Malcolm X had been assassinated in such and such a ballroom [Audubon Ballroom; Malcolm X and Dr. Betty Shabazz Memorial and Educational Center, New York, New York]. It was like somebody hit you over the head with a sledgehammer. And I had already written 'Malcolm X' ['The Malcolm X Memorial (A Tribute in Music)'], so I sat down and wrote the rest of it.
Speaker 1: So you wrote a musical piece called 'Malcolm X'?
Speaker 2: That was my best piece.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Because I respected him, and that's the only man I came in contact with that I considered a peer, you know. I shook the Honorable Elijah Muhammad's hand, too. So I would say those two people were in the mode of being divine, and I had never seen black people as divine before. They helped me out in growing, because as long--and after all these years of study, I realize that I am a divine person, and by nature that I'm divine. My first inclination is to do the divine thing. And by that same token, when I look at the society I live in, I realize I'm surrounded by evil people who do evil things as an affectation of things like that, and that I am different from the people of this society. This is not my home, this is not my way of life. This is not what I aspire for. And I don't think it takes but a day to change it, because it's all attitudinal and cultural.
Story_ID: 402540
Speaker 1: Now this gets, this gets us to an era--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --when--the people called the Black Arts Movement.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's what I was a part of (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When, when black people, not just you, but other black people, too--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of us--
Speaker 1: --were starting to challenge--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --popular culture--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and go the opposite way--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that they'd been trained to go.
Speaker 2: Our fight was not with white people. Our fight was with black people to change your behavior, because you're violating yourself. And so, culture--rather than condemn a person--you don't condemn people you want to work with. So what you do, is I made up songs. (Singing) "Ladies, the wig has got to go. Fooling yourself with the dead folks' hair and ruining your own 'til your head is bare." See, I wanted to point out that they're using dead people's hair from Asia, because they want long, stringy black hair. Now, is that confusion or not? They're born, you know, three or four million years ago with one thing, and they're going to come down here and they need something else. (Laughter) Do you see how ridiculous that is? Actually, the racism in America has produced the most ridiculous behavior of any people in the whole human flow, just to justify this thing that one is superior to the other, when it can't be proven in any way except through genetics, and then it's just the opposite. So, where I'm coming from is that these people have a propensity to be considered great, and I have not seen the divine movement yet out of the European community as a historian, and I never did find it. Go down and look at the pedophiles in the Catholic church. I mean, and I won't go no further (laughter) than that. But that's a violation of their own divinity. If they were divine, why would it be so difficult for them to act like they're divine? But that's not a divine act, to rip a child off, and to be responsible for it all over the world. No, that's a heinous act of the nth degree. So I'm saying that you have to, in order to progress in life, I believe everybody has to have a piece of truth in them and follow their truth. That's the only thing that's going to take you up in life, is the pure truth.
Story_ID: 402541
Speaker 1: We we t- talked about this cultural reform in the black community. What were some of the other, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was--
Speaker 1: When you formed--
Speaker 2: Anything we do is followed. I'll give you a good example, all right. The first thing was to put my music out there. It's a different concept, but I had words, and it brought about an accumulation of people, and I became popular. And at that time, which is very important, the timing--the Hebrew groups were coming up, and they were attracting people to their religion through this, breaking down the difference between the two people. You go on over to--there weren't many Buddhists back there in the '60s [1960s]. But, in our midst, but even then I went to the Ginza festivals on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], the American Indian [Native American] and all these people we related to. Africans coming here to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], they flooded us. Everywhere I'd go--when I'd play I had, you know, eight or ten Africans would follow me anywhere I played. Now, with all this developing, the population is changing. And so the programs that were given, for instance, like the Mother's Day program would all be about black people on Mother's Day. You go on to the 4th of July, and there's a black celebration for the 4th of July. So, we began to differentiate, or cut ourselves off, because as long as we were united with America, we were less than. And the only way we could be more than, or equal to, was to have our own thing. So that's what really erupted here in Chicago [Illinois]. The painters looked at us, and they started painting black people for the first time in their life. They'd always painted white people, or black people that looked like white folks, you know. The same thing with the photographers. Photographers would take color pictures and it made the paper look black, so they didn't want any color pictures. I mean, color pictures must have gone for what, maybe two or three years, maybe four years, before black people would get involved in it. And there's a brother here, I think it's Mason [ph.]. I can't remember anybody's name, boy. I should have wrote those down years ago (laughter). But--
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead and just describe what he did.
Speaker 2: But yeah, he was the one who took the developing solution of the picture and did not put the same amount of acid in the solution for blacks as they did for whites. And it brought out the beauty and the textures of their skin. And so, then blacks began to take color pictures. But at first, when they used the same strong solution, it made the black person look blacker, and that was the last thing you could do in America. You know, because there's constant pressure every day to be--I mean you're condemned to be black, I mean, just to walk down the street. And there're little boys that say, "Nigger," you know, just to look at you. They've been taught that you're something wrong, and he doesn't even know life yet. So, these are the type of things that we had to build not only defenses for, but to eliminate in our minds, so it wouldn't even be a factor anymore. And the songs liberated us, because they were our ancient food. And I tell people today, I'm still trying to convince people today, that we are a people of song. That is the only way we can communicate (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 402542
Speaker 1: Who are some of the people that played--I mentioned Amina Claudine Myers, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, she was a school teacher, and she was a good pianist. And she joined the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois], so you might say she's an activist. And--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute. I guess we have to go back to the AACM now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you, now you and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lou Hall [Louis Hall], I thought we did that before--
Speaker 1: Lou Hall and Richard Abrams [Muhal Richard Abrams]--
Speaker 2: But I'm doing so many interviews--
Speaker 1: --created the AACM?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was in 1965. Walking down by Oak Woods Cemetery [Chicago, Illinois], there's a long university, about three or four blocks long. And I saw these two guys way down there, coming my way. And I said, "Seems like it's something familiar with them." It turned out to be Steve McCall and Lou Hall and Richard Abrams. And so, they were two enlightened brothers. At the time, people didn't know too much about anything other than just the old regular every day thing. But they were two people who had traveled and played extensively, so they knew beyond the normal world. And we got to, when we got together up there, we laughed and talked and shook hands and everything. And they said, "Man, there's no gigs anywhere." And we had to lament it, because as youngsters we saw the whole thing. It was so beautiful here in the '40s [1940s]. It was unbelievable, man, playing with all these--I mean you know, it was just indescribable how good it was for musicians.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's been said that 63rd Street had--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --so many places to play.
Speaker 2: Oh, 63rd--
Speaker 1: You could play--
Speaker 2: You had these--
Speaker 1: 47th [Street]--
Speaker 2: You had 47th, 51st [Street], everywhere you go--Wentworth [Avenue], State Street, King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. The biggest thing on black people's mind was music and what you call fun. We are not a people who have labored hard through history. That's not our history. We have always been a relaxed, a fun-loving people. And we put more of our energy into fun and love than anything else, down through history. You look at the Australian Aboriginists [Aborigines], they are groups there who never worked for a living. You know, they go to different places where the fruit is ripe, or where the fish come, or where the animals brood, you know. And they had knowledge, they used knowledge to conquer their problems. It wasn't--and so people call them lazy when they get over here. They just wasn't used to struggling. It's a relaxed thing. And so, that's the tip that we use. Having studied people historically, all of my, most of my ideas were successful, because I was tuning up with where they are, and trying to get them to go somewhere else. Just like the Honorable Elijah Muhammad; when I went there, I went there to help them. I didn't go there to try to dominate them or stop them or do anything, but just to help them. And that's what I've been doing ever since. Everywhere I go, if anybody wants to help a black person find out who they are and what to do about it, I'm willing to help them.
Story_ID: 402543
Speaker 1: So, now Lou Hall [Louis Hall] and Richard Abrams [Muhal Richard Abrams] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you got me off.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: So, Lou Hall and Steve [Steve McCall] said, "Well, we got this situation here, and we can do something about it." I said, "Well, you know, I've got a big apartment." I had a, I was working for the police department, so I got me a big, a huge place, and I had about five children then. So, I said, "We can have a meeting in my living room. You tell all, we'll just get us a core group, you know. So, you write to all the guys you know that are serious, because we don't want no chumps up in there, we want people who are serious." And I wrote letters to the ones that I knew, and we set it for May the 8th, 1965. And they all came to my house, which was 740 East 75th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. And we sat there around the walls and things and we argued for maybe three hours on what is creative music. (Laughter) Because we brought that up in the title, see. We said, now if we're going to go to work and we're going to promote ourselves, we're not going to play that crap. We're going to play our own music. So, somebody said, "Well, what we should do is make a law that you cannot play anyone's music but your own." And that was the biggest move they made, because people create all over the world now, because we did that. We wouldn't let them play standards and these other songs. They had to play their own music, so that meant they had to write. That meant they had to study, they had the goal. We set up the schools, and some of them were trained very well in the schools. I didn't have much to do with that, because I only went six months. And when I went the six months with them, I couldn't handle the noise (imitates music). Now, some people call it music. That's all right with me, I don't mind it. But I'm not of that group. And--
Speaker 1: So some of the avant-garde music was a little bit too off the--
Speaker 2: Well, they called it avant-garde because they named it that. See, some people, like God, you know, they want to name things. It wasn't their music, and so they were looking for something to get behind. And they're looking for something right now. "Do you feel the love?" Everybody's getting ready to jump on something. I can assure you right now, this is February 18th [sic. January 18, 2007], and I guarantee you by the time it gets warm, there'll be another fad on the docket, because this society drives on fads. And back then forming the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois], we started off, we had a board of directors; we treated it very nice. I went to my lawyer, William Peterson [William E. Peterson], who became a great judge here. And he got our charter for fifty dollars, the biggest move they ever made. So, then I performed two sets of concerts with them. And when I performed, the rest of the guys would be on the tickets and all of that. And then when they performed, I would be the ticket guy. Well, when I was in charge of the tickets, some of my fans I had encouraged to come to these concerts would come out at the half, and look at me and say, "What are you doing to me, Brother Phil [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]? You know this ain't right." And I was embarrassed. I couldn't give them an answer, because I felt the same way. And so I departed from them, because I couldn't be true to myself and sit there and listen to that stuff. So, I don't think anybody else knew the difference (laughter). They were trying to make money or whatever. And so, they wanted their own style and they got it. But it wasn't--I never did hear much past Sun Ra, because we could, we could imitate Niagara Falls when we had to brother. But we were playing pitches, and those pitches went somewhere and said something, see. And they would come to our sets where we were performing, and stand all around the wall and listen to us. I guess they were dreaming about what they were going to do. But that's where they got it from. If they had, if it had come out of them, okay. But it came out of somebody else that they didn't really know that much about, see. Nobody ever asked me, "Brother Phil, you've played with them for two years, three years. What does this mean? How did you," nobody asked me nothing. So that, that's what I call a farce--
Story_ID: 402544
Speaker 1: In December I put incense on the docket, and I'm going to tell you how I did it. I did a lot of other things like that, but this is how I put the incense on it. I gave a concert in the St. John Grand Lodge [M.W. St. John's Grand Lodge, Chicago, Illinois] on Ingleside [Avenue] in this Masonic temple. And it was huge, you know, three stories, huge, you know. And so, you could burn incense in there. And this was in December, and there was no interfering aromas or anything. You didn't have the wind blowing, or a lot of other stuff coming in there. Because they had these thick velour cur- curtains, and it was large enough to absorb the audience's air. So I gave about a fifteen minute dissertation on how incense was used to control the mind and lift it into a higher frequency. And then I broke down how Sheba had taken a caravan to Solomon that took more than one day to pass one point. And on that, prominent in that caravan was frankincense and myrrh and gold. And so I showed the parallel in those two entities, and then I burned some frankincense and myrrh and played 'The Spanish Suite' for the first time I had written it. And when they turned the lights back on, just about everybody was gone. (Laughter) I don't mean the building, just their minds had taken a vacation. So then I woke them up after I brought them back. And that was the last time I played with them. They went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and got to performing in Mandel Hall [Chicago, Illinois] burning incense. And the next thing you know, I see the incense burning on TV for performing. Now, it went so far, they done killed some people with the stuff they do out there. But Maurice White got his flash from the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], you know, where they do all these explosions and things like that, and the disappearing act. That came from the Afro-Arts Theater. And the other stuff came from--
Speaker 2: Well, was Sun Ra doing pyrotechnic things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, that's me, I'm a scientist. See, I had a lot of training--
Speaker 2: I saw--
Speaker 1: --before I came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: I know I've seen Sun Ra in the early '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --appear in a puff of smoke.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and do the pyrotechnic stuff on--
Speaker 1: He would have a--
Speaker 2: --the stage.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well, he would pop some smoke, but that was way late. Possibly, I mean that must have been up in the '70s [1970s], man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, because, see--
Speaker 2: It was around '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: I don't know of anybody using those techniques the way I used them, except maybe for a wedding or something like that, or some specific thing. But I was using it culturally to get over an idea. And they, even like Maurice, they said he came in the theater one night late. And we were into one of those machineguns and smoke going all over the place and incense everywhere. And he thought it was real. People were screaming, "Oh," and running up and down the aisle. And he ran out of the building (laughter).
Story_ID: 402545
Speaker 1: Now, let's not get to Afro-Arts [Afro-Arts Theater, Chicago, Illinois] yet.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because I want to get you to--I think you, didn't you--
Speaker 2: But I was dealing with the fact that Earth, Wind and Fire uses, used, they became prominent for using pyrotechnics and things like that. They were kind of pioneers like that.
Speaker 1: And the frankiphone too.
Speaker 2: And the frankiphone, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they were adopting things that they got from the theater, and I was showing that he ran out of the theater and they had to restrain him. That's how much it impressed him. So, I'm more than certain that that's what stimulated those ideas. And going back to the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois], I cut loose once they got into Mandel Hall [Chicago, Illinois]. I never performed over there. And the people had already set up a combination of venues to make this the number one group in the world, because they had control of them financially, and they were going to give them the money.
Speaker 2: Who's this?
Speaker 1: Whoever they are (laughter). I don't want to identify those people, because I didn't sign one contract. One guy came over and asked me to go to Europe for a thousand dollars, and I told him I could make that in Chicago [Illinois]. And that's about all the contact I had with them. Now, the rest of them, they got farms and they, you know, would ride first class, and they'd been all over the world for many, many years. You know, I didn't go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of the--
Speaker 1: But my music did (laughter).
Speaker 2: Most of the AACM musicians--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --make their major money in Europe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they have to, because ain't nobody in Chicago going to pay them like that, or anywhere else in any other of these cities. Because our people are affected. The have a certain condition that has never been dealt with enough to change them into the people they were before they brought us here. We were an enlightened people, and like I said, we didn't steal. We didn't have any of these--we didn't have those prostitutes. They can lie all they want to. We didn't have that; we had family structure. Just like (unclear) now, that's all coming out, because we're reaching there and studying it. We found out we had the perfect system for community relations, we didn't have to learn nothing new. Everything old is what is true. And so, we didn't have those problems. But now because of this racism thing, it's got to be still justified, although they don't want to go back and admit that slavery was the worst thing that a person could do to somebody else. And so, to make it look like they were justified in doing that, then they keep us in this certain place in their minds. I'll tell you something right now. I already told you what the date is. I've been in Chicago, I mean I've been in this building for twelve years. And I guarantee you there haven't been twelve white people that would sit beside me on the "L" [elevated train] going downtown. Now, I know you didn't come here to deal with that, but that's reality. What else do you want on your film? Do you want to extend and lie a little further?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's--
Speaker 1: --and have to do some solutions down the road? (Laughter) No, let's clear it up now. We got technology. Let's bring the truth out. What would the world be like if the truth was here with us all? What kind of world would that be? We wouldn't have seven hundred murders a year, and twenty-five during the Christmas holidays. We wouldn't have all this stealing. We wouldn't have all this destruction, and people being sent to school to fit a certain slot in life. It's already decided when they're three years old what they're going to be, "Well, we need this and we need that." Like the Great Migration of the '50s [1950s]. See, you didn't come--The HistoryMakers don't want to deal with that. The HistoryMakers want to deal with the people, the HistoryMakers. But what did they do? What inspired them? What is the force that drove them to the heights they reach? See, there has to be something there more than money, because money ain't going to take you nowhere. So, that's what took me where I was going. And today, I'm the same revolutionary that I was then. But I see better how to do it. I try to harmonize with the cosmos; I try to harmonize with my body; I try to harmonize with my community. I understand why they don't want to sit beside me when they go down there, but it doesn't bother me. I notice it. How can you miss the fact that nobody will sit beside you when you go to the Loop [Chicago, Illinois]? What is it? My clothes or my dress, what is it, you know?
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm just, I'm just trying to get the story in the proper chronological order here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm talking to you, all right, okay. Now, so we move on. We move on to the fact that there's a great sense of guilt that's almost devastating in the white community. And they can't resolve the problem that has been here before they even got here, long before this generation. And so, no one with the mind to show them the way out has been talking to them. So, they hold up people like King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. (Unclear). I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 402546
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you meet Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Sure I met him.
Speaker 1: He was here in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was going to help my theater.
Speaker 1: That was the same year, is that the same year Afro-Arts [Afro-Arts Theater, Chicago, Illinois] opened?  Sixty-six [1966] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay.
Speaker 2: That same, it was the year before, '66 [1966], I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was here in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: In '66 [1966] when he got the apartment.
Speaker 1: And that was the year--
Speaker 2: But the effect--
Speaker 1: --that you had the concerts on the beach, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In '66 [1966], right?
Speaker 2: No, '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: See, here's what happened.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. marched with King, him and Jean Pace. And they had the best show in Chicago [Illinois] called, 'Joy '66.'
Speaker 1: Right, with Savuka [ph.] and-
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, you got them. And Coco [ph.] (laughter) the dancer. They were so popular that you couldn't get a ticket in less than a year's time.
Story_ID: 402547
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-six [1966], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] comes to Chicago [Illinois], big marches. You were saying [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. had the big hit, 'Joy' ['Joy '66'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you had to wait a year to get in. So, Oscar was tremendously popular, a great artist. So he set up, he wanted to start a theatrical company. And he put out in the paper that they were having auditions. So everybody in Chicago flooded down to the, that place in the basement there, I forget. Rush Street, on Rush Street. And I took my band down there and played for him. And the Spencer Jackson Family went down there to sing for him. And there were a lot of people. I mean it was a long line, it was several days, you know. And so Oscar came up to me after my performance and said, "Well, you know, well, I can't use a band that size. Man, that's a (laughter) whole lot of money."
Speaker 1: Now, how big a band did you have?
Speaker 2: I think it was about eleven or twelve pieces then. And so he said, "I can't handle a band that size." He said, "But I see that you write. Do you think that you could write music to some poetry?" I said, "I can write music to anything." So he said, "Well, why don't you," he give you some money, and said, "Why don't you go to the bookstore on 61st [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] and see a guy named Ellis [Curtis Ellis, Sr.]."
Speaker 1: Ellis' Book Store [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ellis' Book Store. And nobody knew about it (laughter). It probably had just opened, you know, a couple of months or so. Anyway, he said, "Get this book on Paul Laurence Dunbar and see what you can do with that." So, I remember this, Abena and I took the bus, she was showing me how to get to the store. And we took the bus down there and we got in an argument about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Abena Joan Brown [HistoryMaker Abena Joan P. Brown].
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got in an argument about Malcolm X (laughter).
Speaker 1: I can imagine.
Speaker 2: Anyway (laughter), I got this book and I looked in there. And the first song I think I wrote was about fooling with the seasons. And I took it back to him and he said, "Yeah, that's what I want." So he started giving me a salary like. And I would write, I wrote twenty-two songs in twenty-one days. And everybody that had sounded pretty good at Oscar's, he'd send them by my house where I tested them to see what they could do; I went through all of their abilities. So then I had a director, who was an artist here in Chicago in the black community. And from that, we were going to form this company. But what happened was, he got the idea, "Let's take it to the Board of Education [Chicago Board of Education], because they got instant money," you know. And there was a man there, a very enlightened man named Emile Serposs, who started the All-City Band [All-City High School Band], All-City Choir [All-City High School Chorus], and the symphony.
Speaker 1: This is a white guy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from Baltimore [Maryland]. I said enlightened (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell his name? Emile?
Speaker 2: E-M-I-L [sic.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and what was the last name?
Speaker 2: Serposs, S-E-R-P-O-S-S. He was from the Baltimore system. And if you know anything about education, they had a superior system there. Baltimore, I mean in Maryland and in Texas, those were two very strong educational systems. Black people who came out of those systems, or anybody else, they could talk to you. You know, anyway, we presented this to Serposs, and he said, "This is a marvelous idea." The reason it was strong is because we are ashamed of our dialect. And so, we didn't know that our dialect had any content in it, because we're black degenerates (laughter), and we didn't know anything that came out of us would really be that valuable. But that was the first thing that I studied--the original sound, the original languages, the concept of language, and the dialect and all of that. And so there's a professor Lorenzo Turner [Lorenzo Dow Turner] who did six volumes on the Gullah. And I was in love with the Gullah, and that's still, they're still my favorite people, because they refused to give up their original language. And the gypsies are like that, too. No matter where they go, in every country, they deal with their own culture. And that shows how strong their culture is.
Story_ID: 402548
Speaker 1: I got, got off track here. Pick me back up.
Speaker 2: The Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: A- well, before that, man. We were talking about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were talking about forming this group with Oscar [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.], to do--
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, that's '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah, '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: And we go Serposs [Emile Serposs] in the fall of '66 [1966] to get this Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] show. And he said, yes, it would take a little while to process it, but he'd put his people on it. And they came back around December and said, "You got the show." Well, the whole thing was going to be fifty grand [$50,000]. Well, that was a little money back then, and we knew we would be able to do everything we wanted to do. So it's personal, but I had, I had a stipulation that I wouldn't do anything without six thousand dollars upfront. And so, I took that six and bought that equipment back there you're looking at (laughter). And I recorded everything we did after that. And so now I have a legacy of the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s], the '80s [1980s], and '90s [1990s] on tape. I've got all the great musicians; I've got all the great speakers; I've got everything on tape. It's worth millions. Or I can burn it up, the hell with it (laughter). See, but I didn't put it out there in the market trying to make money off of it. I preserved it as a cultural heirloom. It's like, it's like a pyramid standing there in the desert. Everything that we did that I came in contact with is on tape, professional tape. And that's what I did with that money. Now, the show was immensely popular and successful.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the show?
Speaker 1: 'Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow.' That was the title of one of his books.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And everywhere we went--well, first of all, Emile Serposs said, "I wouldn't want to do a show in the dialect, because many teachers feel that those who speak the dialect would cause the rest of the blacks to digress. And they keep trying, they have such a hard time trying to teach them to speak English properly." I don't think they had a hard time. Hell, they just didn't teach them the dynamics. They left that out--both writing and speaking, you know. Because we had--some of it--we had just about all of it at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri]. But when you get out in the community and you speak like that, you're condemned in those old days. So, all of the scholars, they had to speak both the English and the dialect. And eventually I just said, "To hell with it, I'll speak what comes out." (Laughter) Like the other people--everybody understands everybody else, so why they got problem understanding me, you know? So that's the way I approached it. But from that show, Dunbar, that's what made everything happen. First of all, we had the money. Secondly, we went into black culture alone; we weren't interested in nothing else. And we got a schedule of schools, and was very successful. Teachers and everyone raved over the positive results they got out of those performances. And then the fact that I was a unique composer, writing music like nobody else, so music teachers, wherever we went to the school, they would come to me and tell me things that they heard sounds and talking and all that kind of stuff they never heard before from the music, because it was a different relationship established between music and the people. And so, that became the Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] thing. Most people turned it loose. I even had some stars to call me up and apologize for using that concept. But it was very successful at the schools. And then I got pictures; I've got all of this. I had a stereo camera, so I took pictures everywhere I went, and I recorded everywhere. Brother Clarence Bridges would record everything. So, when we were getting to the end of our Dunbar show, they set up the month of May for us to perform in the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois]. And that was really big, because they brought people in from everywhere. Oscar knew all the stars in Hollywood, so everybody was coming out to check the show, just to go in this museum and hear what we did. And it was just overwhelming.
Story_ID: 402549
Speaker 1: So when the summer was out, they gave me another contract called 'The Magic of Music.' Well, in this 'Magic of Music,' I described how Africa was the sole source of all music and scientific understanding. And they didn't like that (laughter). So, but nobody could prove anything was wrong. When I went to pick up my check, it had been changed from Serposs [Emile Serposs] to an Italian guy named Don Manigria [ph.].
Speaker 2: Well, do you think that might be a little bit of exaggeration about it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What?
Speaker 2: That Africa is the source of all music and all science?
Speaker 1: Why would it be an exaggeration?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: We were doing it maybe a few million years before anybody else. Why don't you read Spencer Wells' 'Journey of Man' ['The Journey of Man: A Genetic Odyssey,' Spencer Wells]?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] geneticist. See, people run from knowledge like that. But it's the genome, the human genome. All the people have been identified. Now we know where everybody went when they went (laughter). We know what they did, because we know what they ate, we know how they behaved. Yeah, history has expanded just like technology. And I've been right on top of it all along. Because my knowledge was there before they even said it. See, I told people that all music came from Africa at that sixty--the summer of '67 [1967]. And they had a problem with it. Why? Because music seemed too vast to come from one place. But that's where the science came from; that's where the astronomy came from.
Speaker 2: So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's where the math came from.
Speaker 2: You're saying that there's no such thing as Irish music, or French music?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it developed way later--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as a result of being exposed to African concepts. In fact, Irish music and Scottish music are the two musics that I first identified as African, because they used the pentatonic scale more than anyone else. Now, if you want me to, I can go into the pentatonic and I can show you how the music is structured. I can go into the rhythms and show you how they're structured. I don't have that out here for thieves. I don't have that out here for dishonest people, or ignorant people. I have that out there for people who want to know who they are. Because in life, you should not do one single thing as a serious person until you know who you are and what it means. That's just like Michael Jordan. He's a great guy, a multimillionaire, and doesn't know what to do with his money. It's the same thing with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. They're doing a whole lot, but they don't know what to do with it, because it's not going to send them where they really want to go. And all of us want to be able to enjoy the fullness of our lives, and you can't do that without understanding which direction to go in all the time. Every time you come to a fork in the road, you've got to make a choice. And if you don't know who you are, you'll make a couple of bad choices, and hell, you never will find out who you are or where you're going.
Story_ID: 402550
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're saying that there arose people on the board [Chicago Board of Education] that did not appreciate the message you were--
Speaker 2: Right. They sent experts around. I saw them at my, you know, when I was teaching the students about the music being developed from Africa. And I gave them the details, and they listened. These are Ph.D.'s, and they said, "Well, we can't find anything wrong with it, but we kind of, we've got misgivings." Just like you said, "How can you do all of that?" All that comes from--well, you see, music is--we look at history as a flat plain, and that everybody started at the same time. That's not the way history developed. You'd be shocked to know where the Irish came from.
Speaker 1: Well, where did they come from?
Speaker 2: Where could they come from? They were singing and dancing, weren't they? Who else in Europe sings and dances from an ancient perspective?
Speaker 1: Well, that's a--
Speaker 2: Gathering of clans, what is that? You go to Ghana, man, they've been doing that for thousands and thousands of years. They have a ritual for that. You see, it's just that people left the music alone. I don't know why; maybe it was what they had to do. But anyway, that's where I was. I was born in music and lived in it all my life. And so, once I broke away from Sun Ra and began to study on my own, I realized that I had a lot of facts that other people don't have. And that's what this house is here now. I can go in there and dig up books and show you how people used trance to indoctrinate people in the South. You know, I mean all kind of subjects--I can show you where the idea of the industrial use of machinery and things like that was originated in Africa. But you see, in the 1600s the European community decided to set themselves up as the knowers and the shakers. And so, they had guns and ships. And they had won some victories over the Muslims, the Spanish Moors, who really were the seed of the knowledge at that time. In Baghdad [Iraq], the caliph was supposed to be. But it was actually the Moors in Spain, because they were free and open, and they left it open to anyone who could create, and they did not restrict people.
Story_ID: 402551
Speaker 1: Now this knowledge that developed there is still there; it can't disappear, you know. That's why I tell people, like, "Last night, night before, twenty-four robbers at my door. I got up and let them in." What did you do?
Speaker 2: Hit them in the head with a rolling pin.
Speaker 1: How do you know that?
Speaker 2: I heard it before.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Around (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't remember it as a child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, I heard it around, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you heard it when you were a child, because we played that at sundown. It was always when the old people were sitting on the porch and the children wanted to have some fun out there before they'd go to bed. And they would play this hide-and-seek, and that was what you would recite before you, you'd put your hands over your eyes and recite this. Then when you finished, you'd go and look for it, and the first guy you find would become it. Well, that's an old game. I fooled around and found out they was talking about the arrangement of the stars twenty-three thousand years ago. Can you imagine how I felt about that?
Speaker 2: How does it do that? I mean, tell us.
Speaker 1: Well, you can look in Revelations [Book of Revelation]. It's there in the Bible also. Most of knowledge and prophecy is repeated over and over in different ways, you know. I mean I find prophesy in Aztec knowledge the same as in Dogon, or the same as in Kemet, or the same as Ethiopia. See, you study those systems, and if you get deep enough in them, you'll run into this common stream. But anyway, this game I told you about is the same as the fourth and fifth chapters of Revelations where they speak of the twenty-four elders. They said, "Last night," that's nighttime. "Night before," that's plenty night. "Twenty-four robbers at my door." That's identifying them. They were stars, the same as the twenty-four elders in Revelations. It says, "I got up and let them in." Well, where could you let them in? That means across the Milky Way. If you're on this side, you cross over to the other side; that's letting them in. All right, letting them in. Let's see, "I got up and let them in, and hit them in the head with a rolling pin." Now, that was very powerful, because the rolling pin was the first technical advancement of the human family. The rolling pin was the first technical advancement of the human family. Now they had weapons to defend themselves, but the rolling pin was a concept that they used for their bread, and it expanded into building great buildings and structures and bridges, all sort of things. It came out of the technology of the rolling pin. You can go and study it if you want to. I did it years ago. I mean there's tons of knowledge on the rolling pin. And most people don't even know what it is. See, so now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Well, let's--
Speaker 1: Let me--I'm going to wrap that up.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry to take so much time on it. But I said twenty-three thousand years old; it deserves some respect.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you've been singing it and didn't know it. And you think, how many black people in America sang that song as a child? Anybody who came from the South. And so I'm telling them, not necessarily you, I'm telling them who they are. Because the more of these facts you find out about who you are--see, like I told you, you are a divine people. They were talking about those twenty-four elders. I can go in Ethiopia culture and show you the same thing. In fact, I'm giving a lecture Saturday at the, what's that, the New Approach Restaurant [Chicago, Illinois]. And that's what it will be on, it'll be on African cosmology. Very few, if anybody, knows it. Even in the old customs, like the Indians [Native Americans], they've forgotten theirs, and a lot of Africans, there's only a few of those priests who have that knowledge. So, it's been lost. But I was studying something else, and found it all in the mix. So now it's time for everybody to know where they came from, and how they got to where they are. Because the knowledge is there genetically. All you got to do is follow the patterns of development, and go to the latitudes that all these people migrated to. Didn't nobody come here from anywhere else before us. And so, I was telling you about the Irish and the Scots. It's that they're singing African dogma and customs. And if they didn't come from Africa, they had a pipeline to it, because they didn't dance in Europe. The difficulties were too stringent for people to develop all of these pursuits that Africans did. See, like I told you, Africans didn't work; they used their minds to live. And so they had plenty of resources. They didn't have problems until the Europeans got there and destroyed all of their way of life as much as they could.
Story_ID: 402552
Speaker 1: Let's get back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, let's go on back.
Speaker 1: --get back to Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: All right then.
Speaker 1: So how did--
Speaker 2: Well, you didn't--
Speaker 1: --so what did--
Speaker 2: --you didn't go to the beach.
Speaker 1: We got you--
Speaker 2: See, the beach came after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, the beach, absolutely.
Speaker 2: That was '66 [1966], the fall of '66 [1966]. Once we got in the schools, we had all this prestige. Because the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] gave us a full page, everybody did. Nobody was prepared to launch a cultural movement but us. And we had struck oil with this first thing. And then they brought the second one on about 'The Magic of Music,' and they had problem with that. But there was a sister named Betty Montgomery [ph.] and her sister Bebe [ph.], who came over to our Dunbar show ['Lyrics of Sunshine and Shadow'] and said, "We'd like you to help us put together a prospectus for this summer. Because we've got a man who has money, and there's the 63rd Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois] which is a space that nobody's using." And they said okay. So we had several meetings and we laid out a structure. And that's how Useni Perkins [HistoryMaker Useni Eugene Perkins] and all the other artists, drama, we had sculpting with Douglas Williams and Curtis Bay [ph.], all these different people. These painters and everybody had a stall out there at 63rd Street. And it was the music that drew people in.
Speaker 1: So this was on special occasions, or was it all summer, or how did you--
Speaker 2: All summer.
Speaker 1: All summer, okay.
Speaker 2: Eight weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And on Labor Day, there were three thousand people there. I got pictures of all this stuff. I got recordings, too. And I asked them, "Would you like to have a place for year-round?" And there wasn't a single place in Chicago [Illinois] with 3 million people where black people could go year-round and celebrate their culture. That's how bad it was. They didn't even know they had a culture, you know. So when they said yes, then we went through a process, and I authorized them to solicit money in my name. And we opened up this theater; it was close to Oakland Square [Oakland Square Theater, Chicago, Illinois] down there. But I guess they thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right on 39th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue]? I mean Drexel [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they thought we were going to go down there and do some dipty-do or something.
Speaker 1: 39th and Drexel, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Around that area, right?
Speaker 2: But Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] came in there. And he said, "Get yourself a gun." Well, wasn't nobody talking like that.
Speaker 1: Well, before we get to that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what you all actually did there, and what you established there before it gets destroyed.
Speaker 2: Well, it was the whole idea, we was celebrating our culture. We weren't dealing with anybody else. See, what the fear was is that we wanted to get even, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, this was always--I told you that's guilt.
Speaker 1: I guess for the sake of history--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us, what did the show consisted of, or what did a performance consist of at the Afro Theater?
Speaker 2: It consisted of--well, before we get to that part, let's go to the beach (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: See, because that's what attracted people.
Speaker 1: All right, yeah, all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: See, that was the cutting edge. Nobody knew anything about this stuff that we were dealing with.
Speaker 1: We know it was a big deal, but what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, it's like a--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened first, what happened second, what happened--that's what I want to know?
Speaker 2: Okay. They heard the music and knew it was different. And so on their way home, they said, "I got to come back and check this out."
Speaker 1: Well, what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, when they came back--let me do this, you know, just let me flow. When they, when they came back to the beach, they saw me dressed like this. They saw a natural hairdo. "What's this dude doing?" But the music was good, and as long as the music was good, they bought into it. And so then the people started feeling bad, because they could come out there and they were wearing these suits and ties and shirts, which they never cared for, because it was the European mind being expressed. See, and that doesn't express an African. He never would have worn a tie around his neck, and some other stuff. So, anyway, all the people that came into the beach were being liberated from another way of life that was alien to them, and that was very important. I've even seen, witnessed brothers who would pull over on the other side of the Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive] and get out of their car and put on a robe. (Laughter) They'd take their coat off and put on a robe, and then get back in the car and drive into the beach parking lot, you know. Because they didn't, they wanted to identify with people who were identifying with their origin; it was very intense.
Story_ID: 402553
Speaker 1: Now, I have to tell you, in '68 [1968], all the music--I mean in '67 [1967], all the music, and paintings, and records, everything was turning over. Now, when we got to August, it had grown to about three thousand people. And I asked them, "Do you want to do this year-round?" Because they found a need that they didn't know they had. And so, everybody said yeah. And we got close to a hundred people who came over and helped us solicit funds. And we took those funds and went to the Oakland Square [Oakland Square Theater, Chicago, Illinois], which was rotting. It had a big hole in the floor the size of that, rats running out and everything. So, we signed a (unclear) contract. And there's a brother around here now, Thunder [ph.]. Did you ever hear of Thunder? Four Corners Rangers [sic. Blackstone Rangers]?
Speaker 2: Four Corner Hustlers, I've heard of, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that the same--
Speaker 1: It must be.
Speaker 2: On the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], there's a gang called the Four Corner Hustlers.
Speaker 1: Well, they kind of picked up from the others. Because this was at 39th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue]. They called themselves the Four Corners, and they had a leader named Thunder. And so, I went to them when I got the money and signed the lease for the building. And I went to their gang meeting and told him. So, I was always relating to gangs.
Speaker 2: So they owned the building?
Speaker 1: There were four gangs--
Speaker 2: Did they own the building?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: The Four Corner--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Well, okay, that's what I'm trying--I'm confused, because--
Speaker 1: The building, the theater, was owned by an agency.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: See, it was rented on an agency basis. I mean these people bought these theaters a long time ago as an investment.
Speaker 2: Okay, because you linked them together, so I don't know what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it had died because--it had died because their programming did not satisfy this need that Africans had to identify themselves. So, the movers had died in the black community. And therefore, there was this rotten thing sitting up there available. And I got this contract and went to them. And they were glad, because they were paying insurance, maybe five thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what did the Four Corners gang have to do with the--
Speaker 1: All right. I went to them first after I secured the lease. I went to them and told them that this theater was for them. It was for your families, your mothers, your brothers and sisters. And you're welcome to come there anytime you want to. This is not something that's over your head or out of your reach. This is something for you, you know. And so they came in the theater and started bringing paint (laughter) and all kinds of stuff they brought to us, you know. And they, occasionally they would march in while we were doing programming. And there'd be maybe fifty of them. They would march in and stand around the wall, standing there to let us know we're in their territory, and then they'd march on out. They always helped me. Now that we got that out of the way, what happened was Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] came in there.
Speaker 2: Well, kind of programming? I still don't know what--
Speaker 1: Oh, the programming. All right, let's start with that.
Speaker 2: What was on the stage?
Speaker 1: I'll give you a sheet. I got a sheet; I got a--
Speaker 2: You don't have to give me a sheet. Just tell me what was on the stage.
Speaker 1: I am.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: That's what I was letting you know, that I have a sheet too.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: It's still in my mind.
Speaker 2: Well, we'll get to the stage, all right.
Speaker 1: See, we got to flow together to get a good interview, because it's got to come out of my memory.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so don't push me. I've had ten thousand interviews. And--
Speaker 2: I don't want you to destroy the Afro-Arts [Afro-Arts Theater, Chicago, Illinois] with Stokely before we talk about what was in it.
Speaker 1: Well, we can skip back and forth, because we seem to be skipping back and forth anyway.
Speaker 2: Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: I want to, I'm following a pattern of thought. And I'm a spiritual person. When I speak, I like to let my spirit flow, because that pulls out something that I don't even have access to, I mean I don't have no control over it. And I get a lot of facts out of that. You know, I get a, I have problems when I go on an interview with people who want certain information and that's all they want. See, I take things according to the way they develop (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's not all I want. I'm trying to get the chronology, that's all.
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't mean that. But I'm just saying, but that's the way they do that to me.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to get it in chronological order.
Speaker 1: That's what it does to me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as a spirit person. If you see a preacher preaching a sermon, that would be me. Because that's what I do when I open my mouth, okay. I can't help it. I'm seventy-nine, and I'll go back and try to give you exactly what you want. So, if you got somebody out there that wants to have an Afro-Arts Theater, they shouldn't use this, because this is unique. They've got to find their unique thing. First of all, when I go back, here's what we set up. We set up an eating program that was in our concession stand. We only had food that we considered was beneficial to the body. That was the first time anybody heard of that going on in Chicago [Illinois]. We taught, we had a womanhood class of about forty-something members. And they taught, they were taught that they were the controllers of their family energy, and what their roles were. Whether they did this or that, they had to fulfill certain functions in order to have a harmonious family. And we taught that, my wife taught that. I taught the brothers that. And I taught them things about the abuse that they give to women and to young girls.
Story_ID: 402554
Speaker 1: And so, we get back to the programming of the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], and this'll get into that story. On Thursday nights, I had speakers from other countries. And the thing that you have to always deal with when you're dealing with history is timeline, where the public is at that particular time, because that influences how they respond to things. You get people at one time, they won't respond properly to this like they will at another time. For instance, like overweight. Back in the '60s [1960s], overweight didn't mean nothing (laughter). But now it's everything, because it's dealing with dietary problems. Now, in my programming, like I mentioned, we talked to women. And that was very important, because the women didn't have any sense of their role in the family. So people were just making up stuff as they'd go along, you know. And that's a big problem. We had a lot of sisters that were taught there. And I've got to say, that little amp [amplifier] sitting on the, the little white amp there, was bought by one of those sisters. She sent me five hundred dollars, and told me about three or four years ago, "If I hadn't come to your class, I would have died long before that. Because I had all kinds of medical problems and couldn't solve them. And it was your class that taught us how to live." This is what I was about. The problems that I thought were most important in the African American community, I was addressing in a practical way. We had the men and the women in those classes. We also had speakers come. We had Mr. Kushi [Michio Kushi] from Boston [Massachusetts] with a macrobiotic diet. And no one knew about Kushi in Chicago [Illinois] until maybe four or five years later. We had him there in the Afro-Arts Theater giving us a lecture on his concept of nutrition. But at the end of the lecture, he pulls out a cigarette and starts smoking. So, you know, to hell with macrobiotics. (Laughter) That was in 1967, see. All right, the programming was very important. We had plays, we had development of classes; we taught all classes free. Nobody had to pay anything in the Afro-Arts Theater. We also taught languages. We taught Hebrew, we taught Arabic. And my Hebrew teacher was Reverend Divine [ph.], and my Arabic class was Wallace [Warith Deen Mohammed]--
Speaker 2: Mohammed?
Speaker 1: Elijah's [Elijah Muhammad] son.
Speaker 2: Wallace Muhammad.
Speaker 1: Right. He's Warith, imam now, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I had another--the African language was Swahili, and it was taught by a student at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] named Engasa [ph.]. So, these were free classes, all you had to do was show up. But you had to show up. If you didn't show up, you know, for so many times, you were cut out of the class. I couldn't even go to my own class, (laughter) because I would have missed something. (Laughter) I was too busy to study it myself, but I made it available to them. And we pointed out to all of our students that you're studying an ancient language, because it transcends your experience of slavery. So therefore, you can learn values that existed long before you were brought to these shores, all right. We also had people who traveled abroad. No matter where they went, if they went to any of the black nations we would have them speak, give a lecture maybe for three hours at the FOI [Fruit of Islam], free. We didn't charge people for stuff like that. We weren't interested in money. We were interested in culture. But here come the politicians, the political, Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture], "Get yourself a gun, man." Well, everybody already had guns. I can't picture anybody living in Chicago without a gun (laughter). Do you understand what I mean? If there's 3 million people here, there's at least 6 million guns in Chicago. So let's forget all that crap about getting the guns out of people's hands, you know, because it ain't going to never happen. Everybody's got one, and is going to find a way to get another one if they don't have one. So anyway, the balance of our program in the theater was teaching the arts, dance. We didn't get to the painting and stuff like that, but we were on our way.
Story_ID: 402555
Speaker 1: And what happened was Alex Poinsett of Ebony magazine, a senior editor, was very much impressed by the diverse program. We had lectures, we had lectures about--for instance the first PR [public relations] man that put Da- Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] in office. Do you remember Hatcher was the first black mayor of a large city, Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 2: He was the second, yeah, behind--
Speaker 1: Behind who?
Speaker 2: The brother, Stokes, Carl Stokes in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: I didn't know that. I don't think that's so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, it might be. You would know the history. But anyway, at the time that I saw it and the time I participated in it, we didn't have, to my knowledge, any mayor, a black mayor over a city. So this brother's name was--I shouldn't say that. Anyway, his PR man came to us to perform for them. And our group had a lot of prestige, so we made this set out there, and all the artistic people who used to do things together came out, and we raised about fifteen hundred dollars, or something like that. And this brother took that fifteen hundred dollars and bought a full-page ad in The New York Times. And in that ad, he said, "Help. We're being squeezed out, and we have an opportunity to put a black mayor in office." And so, he got so much donations that, I mean they just marched in the office. And this guy came back to me and said, "Phil [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran], as soon as we get this cleaned up, I'm going to make the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], I'm going to put it on the world map." And so [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett started developing, from the First Unitarian Church [First Unitarian Church of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], a hundred and twenty-five thousand dollar grant to go to the theater for programming and whatever, you know, salaries and things like that. And he brought along six accountants from various places to do our books for us, so that everybody in the public would know who's clean. And we didn't even have to deal with the books; we just dealt with the programming. Now, this grant was to consummate at the end of September. And in the middle of September, we busted up. But I'll have to go back to some other factors. Now we can go back and reach in some other parts of the programming.
Speaker 2: Well how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was the conflict between the politicians, who only knew politics, which to me is a European game. I don't play it. And he [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] came in saying, "You should get yourself a gun." Well, he was a child. He didn't understand culture. He talked about it, I mean he talked about it before his time was up, because he went to Africa to live with Miriam Makeba and all that. But he never was an advanced cultural person. You can read any of his writings, and you can't trace them back to nothing but the current time that we live in. Do you understand what I'm saying? That's what so many of our experts do. They won't penetrate, you know, and that's the reason I don't have too much respect for their efforts, because you have to sacrifice. I almost lost my life driving up to Minnesota to get some of my facts. You know, I had to drive in a snow storm, and you couldn't see nothing but the reflectors. And I had a lot of experiences trying to do it. One time I ran out of gas on my way to St. Charles, Missouri. And it was what, six [degrees] above (laughter). That's a bad time to run out of gas on a highway and have to get out and walk--
Story_ID: 402556
Speaker 1: Now, to put all of that aside, the basic thing that we taught in the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] was that we should be in control of all of our cultural entities, and we should not permit other people to trample on our cultural accomplishments as a way of demeaning our efforts, you know, like taking the spirituals and making a commercial out of them. See, that enraged me, because that spiritual saved our people. That song had the strength to carry us beyond where we could go without it. And if you don't understand that, I'll charge you to look at--what is that? 'Amandla!: A Revolution in Four-Part Harmony.' If you haven't seen it, I would advise you to look at it. Because it shows how they defeated every effort that was put against them in South Africa, they defeated it through song. You have to understand that song is the most powerful thing that we deal with. And I knew that from the beginning when I left Sun Ra. I knew that song was all powerful. Now when we get to--I'm trying to think of all the things in my programming. We, all drives, clothing drives. People down South got put in jail, money, we spent money. Whatever. The audience that came in that theater was always ready to contribute. It was a time of contribution. It was a time when everybody was going to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. It was a time when everybody was going to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], you know. We all, we had people, busloads, coming from Milwaukee [Wisconsin], busloads coming from Gary [Indiana]. We had people, and we had their hearts. And so that was how--what do you call the thing up in, Woodstock [New York]; that was the next year. Well, you see, it was quite different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: See, we were '67 [1967]. That's the reason I was stopping you when you said that's when the beach was. We were '68 [1968]. Now, what did, how did that Woodstock [Woodstock Festival; Woodstock Music and Art Fair] get started? Do you know anything about it? They're always talking about it.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I just know that it was on some guy's farm--
Speaker 1: The guy lived out here in the suburbs, I can't remember his name. He was a wealthy guy out here in the suburbs. And they were aware of our beach in '67 [1967], and so they come up with not a beach, but a field, in '68 [1968]. And it went in an entirely different direction altogether. Where we were trying to accomplish something very uplifting, they were accomplishing a freedom from, from restraint.
Story_ID: 402557
Speaker 1: After Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois], I mean who--I mean did somebody else take over the function of, the direction of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or did it just close down?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they took it over. Because--
Speaker 1: Who took it, I mean who--
Speaker 2: Part of the band [Artistic Heritage Ensemble]. We all got it ourselves, by playing free. See, we took the money that we had and put it into development in the theater. And every- I had a staff of twenty-five people. And we sat down and decided that we would do this, and would not, we would not spend money. Well, that hurt some of the musicians. Everybody else was cool, but some of the musicians just couldn't envision playing without making something, you know. And even when we would--we would have our meetings to determine who needed what, these same people would come back crying about what they needed, all the time, you know. Because they just couldn't deal with the idea of volunteering. And I'd like to point out here that that's one of the worse things about the slave in America, is that he won't donate to nothing else but himself. He's always--like even in the dictionary, they pronounce a slave as parsimonious and stingy, you know, simply because the world that he's exposed to is so diminutive that he has an abnormal value on things, you know, like money. And so, that political thing came in there, and Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] had decreed that no revolutionary would speak in Chicago [Illinois]. And therefore, he meant he controlled all the churches and all the venues where people developed or assembled. But they never did control the Afro-Arts Theater. And so, their idea was to destroy it if they couldn't control it. And as he spoke, March the 3rd, I believe it was, they closed the theater down. And they came, well, they came that night to close it because we put all the newsmen out. Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] said the newsmen didn't tell the public that he was going to be there, so they didn't have no right to be there themselves.
Speaker 1: So, who came to close it? The landlords, or was it the police, or who?
Speaker 2: The police. Captain Pepp, Willie Pepp [sic. Charles Pepp] was his name, the 21st District. And he came and spoke to me and said, "You'll have to close, because you're discriminating." I've got all the accounts of it, and in the newspaper, it was written all about it, you know. And I said, "We're not discriminating. We put blacks out too." So he said, "Well, then you have to let the press in." I said, "No, we don't have to let anybody in. If they're performing their duties, they can come in on the basis of being the press. But they did not perform their duties. They didn't notify anyone that Stokely was going to be here. So, why are they here?" That was our position. So he said, "Well, you're going to have to open anyway." And there was a whole battery of people back there ready to fight, you know. And it had come down to that, which it never had to get to that. Because I'm a cultural person; I never would progress anything to that level. But this is the politicians, all these guys sitting up listening to dogma, going through this and that. You know, and the people were outside at that fountain, forty or so newsmen from around the world, "The racist Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]," and so on and so on, you know. And so that's where my rep on that part came from. But you know, that was what, forty years ago, and I'm still helping people. I haven't hurt anybody yet. (Laughter) And I taught, I even taught down there at the Catholic school. They got my spear hanging in the lobby now, where I taught them precision through math.
Story_ID: 402558
Speaker 1: Now, you started teaching at Malcolm X [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] at a certain point. Did, was that right after Afro [Afro-Arts Theater, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the students asked for me. I didn't want to be a part of any European organization, because they think different from me. And if I have to satisfy their needs, I can't satisfy my own. We're two different people in concept.
Speaker 1: Okay. Maybe I should ask you--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --and you can determine whether this is right or not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Should we talk about the Earth, Wind, and Fire piece?
Speaker 2: That's all right, fine.
Speaker 1: Because I think they were in your band [Artistic Heritage Ensemble] during the time that--
Speaker 2: Sure, a couple of them, a couple of them played with me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Verdine White, Maurice White--
Speaker 2: No, not Maurice. Maurice tried, and didn't make it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: Verdine White.
Speaker 2: --he couldn't hold the rhythm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a rhythmic system that demanded perfect rhythm. See, we play cosmic law. That's the reason it was so powerful with people, babies, you know, or anybody. Because we played cosmic law, and if you aren't divine, you can't even go there. It's very difficult to play cosmic rhythm, and that's what we were doing. I hear people trying to copy me now. They come on the six o'clock news and places like that, and you know, they get 60 percent of it. But this cosmic thing is something you can grab on and go all the way with. And the different people that we had with us, Master Henry on the congas.
Speaker 1: Henry Gibson, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I went out and pursued him, because I didn't want a trap drum. A trap drum plays Turkish symbols, and they like them because they heard the guy, maybe like Max [Max Roach] playing on the cymbals. But it never occurred to them what those symbols were pitched to, or for, or why they were made. But these are the things that I studied. I don't want no ding, ding, Turkish symbols ringing in my music, because it wasn't tuned to what I'm tuned to. And so, I didn't want drummers. I finally found one drummer who was in my mind the best, Bob Crowder [Robert Crowder]. Because he would lay out, he could lay out for forty bars, and then come in, bam, and make up for all the bars he didn't play. (Laughter) You know, he had taste, and he understood the concept of the African drum society. So that's what my music was. It was two things. We played a cappella, and we played the African drum society rhythmic concept. And people still can't do that now. I don't hear it--very seldom do I hear it done properly. Even Africans don't do it right. See, I should have been the teacher. I should have given the people the choice of what I had, and I think the world would be in a different place, because I had things that always opened up further advancement. I never run to the end of anything, I was always in eternity. And I'm not trying to brag on myself, because that was my job, I was born for it. All through my life, everything I ever done was preparing me for this. So, I just accepted it. And that's going back to what I said in front. "How can you be anything if you don't understand who you are, and what it means?" Because you don't know what direction to go in. You can't get to New York [New York] going on Highway 61 [U.S. Route 61], you know, it runs north and south. So, I didn't mean for you to forgive your structural patterns, but I wanted to make a point that we had certain things in mind, and that's what I would like to get out in my life. I would like--other people can write about me all they want to, but when I talk about my life, I want to talk about what I had in mind. Because I think that that's what they're not exposed to. I think that people ran from what I deal with, and it's because they know that white people don't like it. And they think that they might be condemned or cut off from the jobs and things, which is what basically happens. Because just like the people sitting on the "L" [elevated train] riding downtown, that's an indictment of fear. And so the thing about the guns and the city, all of these programs, all of these new houses, the whole neighborhood is being wiped out and rebuilt, forcing people to move out. See, at the same time while people are going through their greatest prosperity, you know, this is the stuff that, they stick their head in the sand, everybody, and forget that we're living in one of the greatest conflicts that the human race ever experienced.
Story_ID: 402559
Speaker 1: So, going back to Daley [Richard J. Daley] and Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture], they closed my theater [Afro-Arts Theater, Chicago, Illinois], and when they closed it up we thought of ideas to get it open. I won't go through those, but one was we put lanterns on the thing after they turned our lights out, and the lanterns challenged their insurance (laughter). So, you know, to get the insurance people off of them, they opened it back up. Then I said, "Well, come to the theater. We don't charge anything, just come on." And we got six hundred people the first night, free. And then we took up a collection. We said, "You know we can't run without money. So whatever you give us, it'll help us stay open." We must have got about eight or nine hundred dollars (laughter) from that crowd, in collections. So that was how the theater broke down. And this was the second week of September. Now, this is--the fight had been going on, with all kind of back and forth.
Speaker 2: So it was open--how long was it open altogether?
Speaker 1: Oh, I left when this dispute came up in this second week, because it was attacking me. I've got something for you, if you'd like it.
Speaker 2: No, I'm all right.
Speaker 1: All right. So, this second week they had to stop it, because the third week we were having a program from the First Unitarian Church [First Unitarian Church of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And they were going to raise about five thousand dollars at the initial program. Everybody's coming to our theater, and then that would start our thing off from the grant. Well, that same day that I came in this second week--well, first I was invited to Washington [D.C.]. Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had certain people, and they knew that the music was very strong in me. So, they invited me in August to Washington. Now, first I was interviewed by Look magazine with two writers, a writer and a photographer. They stayed here four days interviewing me, just like you are now. They went out on the lakefront, they went and talked to neighbors, they talked to people in schools. Everywhere I went, they talked to people and asked them questions and things. And they went back, and you can look in it now. In 1968, the very first issue, January issue [sic.], they had it. It was black, the cover was black, and it said, "The New Black Thing" [ph.] or something like that, you know. And so, naturally they had to include me. And they put one line in there, "Black is anything that ain't white, says musician and philosopher, Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]." Well, that was just an interpretation of the crap they put up. But they sent two writers for four days, a writer and a photographer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's all they got?
Speaker 1: And that's what they put in the magazine. All right, now we're going--and that's the way it's been ever since.
Story_ID: 402560
Speaker 1: Now, when this thing was supposed to go down, the guys accused me of all kind of things. I didn't really get a complete charge, but everybody said I was doing something wrong, and that I was wrong. I can just take it from what I read about J. Edgar Hoover, that they tell all kind of lies on people. And I found down through the years that it's easy to believe a lie on a black person, because they're the ones who's the object of all the lies, all right. So then we split up right there, because I demand integrity in my life. And I told them that I had picked each one of them up in giving them the best of what I knew. I had taught them musical techniques, and I had taught them things about living that I would never go back on. To me, it was the truth. So I just said, "You can have all this, if you think it's more important than being truthful, okay." So they took my Malcolm [Malcolm X] picture right there that day just to hurt me, you know. So, they, I got all my stuff out and I left the PA [public address] system there. And I went and moved out to the St. John Grand Lodge [M.W. St. John's Grand Lodge, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). But all the time that I was there in the theater, there was this energy that came from the young people. The Four Corner Rangers [sic. Blackstone Rangers], they didn't know nothing. But they stopped the wine heads from coming on the street. Some of the other Rangers stopped people from smoking. You know, people began to become aware that they could make a difference. And so, I was very appreciative of that. And I moved back up to my little apartment and started doing my thing as Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]. Well, the public didn't know what had happened, but they were told a lot of negative stuff, too. I saw friends of mine who wouldn't even speak to me. And so, it was a thing. But the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] lasted all the way into '69 [1969]. I don't know what month it was, because Sammy Davis, Jr. came to the theater and we gave a performance for him. He said, "I'm going to come back in the fall and give you a house, you know, and that'll give you a boost." So, he couldn't get back in the fall, so he used Finis Henderson, his agent, to give the Pharaohs, because when I left [the Artistic Heritage Ensemble] they called themselves the Pharaohs, and copied my compositions and my songs. Fortunately, I hadn't taught them very much. I just played for them and made, you know, gave them the keys to playing together. But I didn't teach them the whole concept. And so, they couldn't go very far with what I had. They were good musicians and they were all dedicated, and they had played my music, but they didn't know the formulas. And I'm so glad that happened. I wanted so much during that summer to teach them performance, but we were just performing day and night; we didn't have time. And that's what it was. In '69 [1969], in the summer of '69 [1969] after I had split with them for over more than a year--but I talked with them and worked with them. I even held a fundraiser there, because it didn't bother me. I never bother about what is not true. And they can say whatever I did, it didn't bother me. And once I finished with those guys, one of them lost his mind. Well, I won't say that. He appeared to have lost his mind, and I don't see any remnants of recovery. But I thought they took some deep things, okay, some deep hits.
