Story_ID: 99688
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's get started.  My name is Cheryl Butler.  I'll be conducting the interview today.  We're also joined by Matthew Hickey who is the videographer.  Please state your full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Ayisha Nell McMillan, A-y-i-s-h-a, N-e-l-l, M-c-M-i-l-l-an.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 21st, 1978.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 19th, right?  June 19th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview?
Speaker 2: In my home, in my apartment in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I am currently a marketing professional (laughter).  I guess, I guess--I've never, I haven't had to say it as a profession.
Speaker 1: And you're known as--
Speaker 2: I'm known as a ballerina (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: Where were you born?
Speaker 2: In Golden Valley, Minnesota, outside of Minneapolis.
Story_ID: 99689
Speaker 1: So, now, I'm going to ask you some "People Magazine"-style questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate something, probably chocolate brownies.
Speaker 1: What about your favorite time of year or season?
Speaker 2: Autumn or spring--probably autumn, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation location?
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I do.  I think every few years, it changes.  But, I'm, I'm not sure even what the, what it would be now.  It would be something like--well, this is life (laughter) or sometime or, or that, that this is, this is really life.  This isn't a dress rehearsal, something along--it, it usually has something to do--it's usually positive, very positive though.  A while ago, I think, when I started college, it was life is good.  So, I don't really have one that's stuck with me through all the years though.
Story_ID: 99690
Speaker 1: I'd like to get a little bit of your family history.  What is your mother's name?  What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Connie Van Brunt, and that was the name that she was born with, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And where was she born and when?
Speaker 2: She was born in Los Angeles, California.  And oh, I wish I had the sheet in front of me--in 1940.  Oh, she's fifty-seven, so what would that be--1945?
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947] [sic, 1949].
Speaker 2: --'47 [1947], okay.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about her childhood--where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She grew up in the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles [California].  And she and my uncle would tell stories.  They told stories about how my, my uncle heard her younger brother.  He used to deliver eggs.  And they talked about some of the other kids in the neighborhood.  And it seemed like a very, a really wonderful place to grow up, and they felt safe.  They felt they were happy.  They, my grandfather worked for Goodyear Tire and Rubber [Company].  And my grandmother, this is maternal, was an educator and--
Speaker 1: Do you know their names--your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My maternal grandmother is Dr. Vida Van Brunt, and her maiden name was Milton.  And my maternal grandfather is Godwin Augustus Van Brunt, and he was a native San Diego-an.  And she was born in Oklahoma when it was still an Indian territory where she is Choctaw freedmen.  Her family are Choctaw freedmen.
Speaker 1: And she's a doctor, she was a doctor?
Speaker 2: She was a, she had her Ph.D. in, in education--she got from University of Massachusetts at Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Do you know what year?
Speaker 2: I don't know off of it, I don't know.  I can research that.
Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: She--I had it written down.  Maybe I should pull out the reference sheet.  Off of the top of my head, I don't remember many of the dates.
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your grandparents--their profession.
Speaker 2: My grandfather worked for Goodyear Tire and Rubber.  He worked, stocking the, stocking the tires.  And he used to tell, he used to tell my mother, at least what my mom says to me.  He used to say, Connie, don't, don't get a profession that is, that requires you to be physical in your profession.  And then, all those years later, when my mom saw in me, as a ballet dancer, and having to ice my feet every night, and having to go to the doctor all the time, and getting so many injuries, she said, oh, this is what pop-pop--is what, which is what I call him--this is what he was talking about--that he was--but he, he did very well in that work.  And, every day, he would come home from work, and he would change into his, into his slacks and his, his shirt and, and a little blazer.  And he always wore a little cap when--at least when I was growing up, it was always a Kangol cap.  So, I'm not sure if, if, back then, that's what he would have worn.  And he would, he was a respected gentleman in the neighborhood.  He was always a, he was also a leader in the church.  And so, he was very--he would, he would walk around the neighborhood and visit with people.  And people would look forward to him coming by.  And I, I, I, of course, wasn't around back then.  But I can really, I can really see my grandfather being that person.  Even when he was older, and toward the end, more toward the end of his life, there were just so many people that gathered around him and, and my, my grandmother--so many people out in California who cared so deeply for them--
Speaker 1: They--
Speaker 2: --just a huge community of people.
Speaker 1: In Watts?
Speaker 2: In, well, no, actually, they moved.  They left, they left Los Angeles.  And I think they probably left Los Angeles after both of my, after my mother and my uncle went away to college, and they moved to San Diego [California].  At first, they moved to a different house in, in Los Angeles than the one that they grew up in.  I think they grew up on Thoreau Street or, and then they moved to a different house.  And then, they, they relocated to San Diego.  And at the time, I think my mother was either in Chicago [Illinois] or in Minneapolis [Minnesota] with me.  And, and my uncle was in Los Angeles for a while and he went to school in New York and--
Speaker 1: And your maternal grandmother--her profession?  I know she was a Ph.D.
Speaker 2: Right.  And she taught, she taught English and science in college.
Speaker 1: At what school?
Speaker 2: At, at USC, at University of Southern California, yeah, in San Diego [California].
Story_ID: 99691
Speaker 1: And what has your mother [Connie Van Brunt] told you about her early childhood memories growing up in Watts [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: Mom said--mom, mom likes to talk about how Uncle Pete, how her little brother.  She would run around after him.  They were swimmers.  She used to swim a lot.  She loved to play piano, she played piano a lot.  She tells me also about her, her godmother who is, who is Edith Wilson.  Edith Wilson was a famous jazz [sic, blues] singer and was one of the very first Aunt Jemimas.  And she used to, she used to have a show at Disney World, you know, it would be at Disney World.  And my mom used to love and go, loved to go see her at Disney World.  And she would do a, a presentation, like a, a--it was a, this was as the Aunt Jemima character.  And I, I loved this story about the image that my mother had of her growing up.  And as she was playing--because my mother knew her before she was playing the Aunt Jemima character.  She knew that she was this elegant, elegant woman, this jazz singer.  And my mom used to get--she loved to get to take the train to, to wherever Auntie Edith was, was singing.  And they would pack, they would pack a lunch in, in a basket to ride on the train.  And my mom said it was the just the most grown-up thing in the world that she could imagine doing.  And, and really, the, the way that, the way that Aunt Jemima grew to, to get a bad rap, and the, the way that hurt the image was so, was so rejected.  And there was so much hatred toward it--hatred and, and hurt.  I don't want to just say hatred.  But Edith Wilson was an elegant woman.  I mean, she, she would finish her Aunt Jemima skits and, you know, throw on a, a fur shawl (laughter), her, her fur coat.  And, honey, you know, she--it was the, it was for my mother.  This was always a very dignified thing.  This is a professional entertain--something an elegant professional entertainer was doing.  And so, I, I find that history so fascinating and, particularly, since she's a performer in my family's history who was in, who was a, who was pioneering with her performance--areas where, where people who look like us, were not allowed to go unless we put on a, you know, a mammie's cap.  But the, but the type of dignity that she brought to that role and what it really was to her is so significant to me.
Speaker 1: So, your mother grew up in a middle-class family?
Speaker 2: Yes, middle-class family.
Speaker 1: And did they attend a specific church?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the church that they attended.
Story_ID: 99692
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your father.  What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father is Robert Frank McMillan, Jr., Robert F. McMillan, Jr.
Speaker 1: And when was he born and where?
Speaker 2: He was born in New Jersey.  And he turns, this year, sixty-one--yes, and he, he was born in New Jersey, although he, he grew up in Ohio.
Speaker 1: And do you know the names of his parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His mother is Kurt McMillan.  I'm not sure of her maiden name, but his, his mother is Kurt, and his father is Robert F., Sr.
Speaker 1: And has he told you any stories about growing up, either in New Jersey or Ohio?
Speaker 2: He has.  He, he told me about how they used to vacation back in--and I just, I just heard these stories more recently--how he used to vacation out in--I say, vacation, but it was really visiting an aunt (laughter), who had a cottage in New Jersey.  And they would spend some weeks out in the summer with her.  And he talks about--he, he talks a lot about playing pranks on his, on his little sister (laughter), Marsha (ph.).  And she talks a lot about that, too (laughter).  Apparently, he got her good a lot of times (laughter).  So, he raised a lot of heck, but he--it--I, I can, I can tell, especially from the pictures that he, he was a good young man, he was a good boy, and always studied very hard.  Both of--he likes to talk about how both of his parents were very no-nonsense.  My mother [Connie Van Brunt] often talked about how--I mean, my mother was a debutante with The Links.  She had her debutante cotillion precisely thirty years before my sister had her debutante cotillion, both with The Links.  My mother's was in Los Angeles [California].  My sister's was in Chicago [Illinois], yeah, and that was very special.  And it's very, very Van Brunt.  And my, my dad and his sister, they, they had a very--they were instilled with a lot of, a lot of discipline--I think I would say, but loving discipline for sure and a lot of humor, a lot of humor, and a lot of wit, even the stories that they would tell from childhood.
Speaker 1: Did he grow up in a middle-class family?  Were his parents educated?
Speaker 2: He did.  He grew up in a middle-class family.  My, my paternal grandfather was college educated and, but I don't, I don't believe that grandma Kurt was.  But she worked as a professional, as an executive assistant, even back then.  And, and my grandfather, yes, was a mechanical engineer.  And, actually, he was one of the, he was the first mechanical engineer in, in the, in the plant where he worked to be--he was the first African American engineer to be promoted to the position of manager ever, in the history of the, the entire company.
Speaker 1: In Ohio?
Speaker 2: This is in Ohio, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: In what town?
Speaker 2: In Cleveland, uh-hum.
Story_ID: 99693
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they talk at all about their--do you know your great-grandparents, their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  On my, on my maternal side, my grandmother's parents were Peter Milton and Nellie (ph.) Beams (ph.).  And on the other side, on my father's side, I would have to, I would have to check and look because I think, I think I would confuse it with her, with his grand--my dad's grandparents' names.
Speaker 1: Do you know the first generation of educated relatives?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Dr. Vida Van Brunt] got her Ph.D., so that was--and on my, on my father's, that's maternal grandmother.  And she may have--I believe she was the first on, on her side, on my mother's side.  But then on, on my father's side, perhaps it was even his, his father.  It, there's a very interesting story that my grand-, and I actually, when I was working on compiling stories for my, for my HistoryMakers paper, I got to talk with my grandfather.  And he tells us this really interesting story about his father, and how very little is known about the way that he grew up.  And there's this story--he's the--your father doesn't believe me when I tell this story.  But, but there's no one to dispute me (laughter) so, and this is the way my father told it to me.  But he ran away from home--he, being my grandfather's father, ran away from home at a young age.  And it's because there were so many people.  There were so many children there.  I think that, that the, that there wasn't very much money, so he left home at a, at a young age.  And was, and stopped to rest wherever he--to wherever he was wandering.  And a man named Mr. Kirk approached him and he said, what are you doing out there?  He said, oh, you know, I'm, I'm not doing anything.  He--and asked him some more about what he was doing, and, and realized that he had run away from home.  He said, well, would you like to come and live with me?  And, pop-pop said, said, okay, yeah, sure, he said, and became an adopted part of, of that family.  And he actually went to tech-, he went to technical school, if not, college.  This was my, this is my grandfather's father--did go, was, went through-
Speaker 1: Paternal?
Speaker 2: Paternal, yes, went to--did--Mr. Kirk put him through their school actually.
Speaker 1: In what state?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what state that was in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a real--I think part of the reason why some people in my family have trouble believing it is because, ohh, facts here and there (laughter) to look up to nail down.  Or we've all heard so many, different versions of the story, but that's what the story that I got from my grandfather firsthand.
Story_ID: 99694
Speaker 1: And your parents, how did they meet and where, when?
Speaker 2: They met in Chicago [Illinois].  And they met--they were actually introduced by a cousin of Mr. [John H.] Johnson [HM], Mr. Johnson of Johnson Publishing Company--Mr. Johnson, because my mother [Connie Van Brunt] was working for him at the time.  She was creator and editor of Ebony Jr! magazine, and she was working for Johnson Publishing Company.  And my father [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] was probably, at the time, working for Turner Construction Company in, in Chicago also.  And Mrs. Burns, Mrs. Burns introduced them.  Now, I wish I could remember Mrs. Burns' first name, but when you're a little girl (laughter), Mrs. Burns doesn't have a first name (laughter).  It's Mrs., Mrs. Burns, and that's how they met, that's how they met.  I'm not sure how Mrs. Burns knew my, my dad in order to introduce them.  That's where they met, and, and I believe they got married in Chicago, too.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: I believe in 1976.
Speaker 1: And did both of your parents go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, they both did.  My mother did her undergraduate work at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville [New York].  And she went on to graduate school at Harvard and in their School of Education [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she completed both degrees.  And, actually she graduated at Harvard.  She completed her, her master of arts in education, summa cum laude.  And my father went to, my father went to two schools.  He went to, he went to Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], and then, and Temple [University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: With a degree in--
Speaker 2: Civil engineering, uh-hum.
Story_ID: 99695
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your early childhood.  You were born where, again?
Speaker 2: In Golden Valley, Minnesota in 1978, and in the dead of winter (laughter).  My parents say that the day I was born that exhaust, or at the least the day they brought me home, that exhaust would hang in the air for five minutes after you pull--after the car would pull away 'cause it just froze.  The molecules were just--particles were just frozen in the air.  It was a very cold time, February 21st, in Minnesota.
Speaker 1: And are you the oldest child?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest--I'm the first.  And my sister, Marcia, who we call Marcy (ph.), was born in 1979 in December, also in Minnesota in Golden Valley.
Speaker 1: How did your family get to Minnesota?
Speaker 2: My, my dad [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] took a job there.  So, my parents moved from Chicago [Illinois] up to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And so, my mother [Connie Van Brunt], at that time, when she was giving birth to us, and raising us while we were little, she did, she did freelance work mostly--working as a freelance writer and editor in, in Minnesota, uh-hum.
Story_ID: 99696
Speaker 1: And tell me your earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: I think I remember Minnesota, I know I remember Minnesota.  There is a, a really wonderful family who would watch me while my mom [Connie Van Brunt] would--and dad [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] were at work.  And they are a Polish-American family and their last name is Gunser (ph.).  And they--it--there wasn't just one.  And their, the Gunsers had--I think, four daughters, and Laurie (ph.) was my primary babysitter.  But, not just Laurie babysat--I mean, everybody.  I was, I was the star (laughter).  They would just, they would--my mother would drop me off at their home to be watched and, and I just remember having a, I remember playing with everyone.  I remember sweeping the floor and, and learning how to, learning how to do big girl things with them.  When I was very little (laughter), they were a very loving family.  And even the, even the, the dad, even Marty (ph.) Gunser--there was Marty and Irene were the mom and the dad.  And then, Laurie and Colleen were, were the two main daughters who would watch me.
Story_ID: 99697
Speaker 1: So tell me about that neighborhood in [Golden Valley] Minnesota.  Was this in a racially integrated neighborhood?  Was it middle class?
Speaker 2: It was middle class.  I, from what I hear about the house and I, I would have left there when I was pretty young--I think when I was three, about.  So, I don't remember too much about the neighborhood.  I remember we had a big backyard with a big hill.  And we had a dog, we had very furry dog who was with our family until I was in third grade.
Speaker 1: But you remember seeing people of different races?
Speaker 2: In Minnesota, no (laughter).  In Minnesota, I think we were the only black people for miles and miles (laughter).  I think that my mom [Connie Van Brunt] and dad [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] like to tell stories.  The, the, the Gunsers used to take me out to--if we would go to lunch or something out in a restaurant, and the only way that they knew that I was out and about with the Gunsers is because sometimes, when my mom and dad would go out with me and, and have, and have me with them, some people would stop them and say, isn't that Irene Gunser's baby (laughter)?  She said, no, she's my, she's my baby.  She's brown (laughter) like us, can't you?  And said, hmm, I think you got Irene Gunser's baby.  I mean, really, we're like--what are you doing with Irene Gunser's child?  So, I don't think there were very many black babies around.  So, I think that when they--I think the people remembered me (laughter), at least in that part of Minnesota where we were.
Speaker 1: Do you remember at such a young age, three years old, do you remember being conscious of racial issues at all?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  That would take some time, yeah.  No, I wasn't, I wasn't aware of that at all, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when your sister [Marcia McMillan] was born?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I remember, I remember holding her, and I remember crawling into her crib.  I remember feeling like I was doing a very good job taking care of her.  And I felt like that was my job was to, to take care of my little sister.  And I was very, very proud of that.  And I remember in the--'cause she and I would share a room.  And she had, she was in a crib.  And I had a big girl bed, and I would climb out of my big girl bed, and if she woke up in the middle of the night and would start bouncing in her crib, I would climb in her bed.  And I would take off her diaper (laughter) because that's what people do--you just take off the baby's diaper.  I'd take off her diaper, and I would run downstairs to the fridge.  And I would pull out a little bottle of apple juice, cold from the fridge, and I would bring it to her--and she would just, without any diaper or anything in her crib.  My mom said that she would walk in and think, how did she get this apple juice?  Where is her diaper?  And it was, it was me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you lived in Minnesota until what year?
Speaker 2: I think only until about '81 [1981].
Story_ID: 99698
Speaker 1: Wanted to hear a little bit about your family's connection to sororities and fraternities--your grandparents and your parents.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was a, a long-time AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] and very proud AKA.
Speaker 1: Maternal?
Speaker 2: Maternal, yes, Vida, Dr. Vida Van Brunt was a, an AKA.  And I remember, I remember one visit.  One time, she was visiting us in Chicago [Illinois], or maybe she was actually--she had moved in with my mom [Connie Van Brunt] in Chicago.  And, and I accompanied her to the AKA Boule at the, at the Chicago Hilton and Towers (laughter).  And it was, it was very, it was really fun.  And we went shopping beforehand, and she had to make sure that she had white for the certain evenings, and everything else was pink and green and (laughter), very, yes, it was a very important part.  Actually, I was part of Jack and Jill [of America] growing up.  And, and my mother--at that time, my mother was an AKA.  And then at some point later, my mother became--joined The Links.  And so, I think, but my mother--there must have been some, there must have been some in and out, now that you mention it, because I'm pretty sure that my mother's debutante cotillion was with, with, was with The Links, precisely thirty years before my, my sister [Marcia McMillan]'s debutante cotillion with The Links.  And my mother's was in Los Angeles [California].  And we, we have pictures of her in her white gloves and her, her white gown.  And my mother--actually, my sister did a junior debutante cotillion, and they're in the actual debutante cotillion.  And it was, it was a really fun time for my family.  We loved that stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about fraternities?
Speaker 2: None that I know of, none that I've been aware of with, with any of them.
Story_ID: 99699
Speaker 1: I'm going to bring you back to your childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You said in 1981, you left Minnesota.  What happened next?
Speaker 2: We moved to Oak Park, Illinois.  And one of the funniest, to me, at the time, when I found it, it was very funny, but, but at the same time, it, it really meant a lot to me.  I found from--I, I think it may have been from 1981 to '84 [1984], an article that the Oak Leaves, which is our, our--one of our local newspapers in, in Oak Park, did on my family.  And I hadn't--I, I don't remember this happening, but they sent a photographer to our, to our home.  There's the picture of the four of us on, on the couch at our home.  And the, the title of this piece is "They Do Not Fear Tomorrow".  And I thought, "They Do Not Fear Tomorrow"--it's because we were the only black people in the neighborhood.  And this was not in our neighborhood of Oak Park.  There, it--on the side of town where we were living, there were not very many people who looked like us so much, so that we were in the newspaper (laughter).  So, it was, it was a wonderful house that my parents bought.  It was a historical home.  It was built by one of, one of Frank Lloyd Wright's students.  And actually, not too far from where, from the house where we grew up, was the Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studios.  And actually, in fifth grade, I became a junior docent at the Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studios.  And I led tours there for--from fifth grade through eighth grade.  I was a tour guide (laughter).  So, it's--Oak Park is a really neat place.  And it, it, it grew to be much more integrated as I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about some of those growing memories in Oak Park when you were--I mean, imagine you went through nursery school, kindergarten.  What are some of your memories with your friends?  Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my best buddy has--was always Marcy, my sister [Marcia McMillan].  So, wherever I went, you know, or wherever she went, we were usually hanging out.  But aside from that, I, I really didn't get to hang out with the neighborhood kids very much because I went to--one of the things that I started very, early on, in Oak Park was at the Academy of Movement and Music.
Story_ID: 99700
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.  What year was this and tell me about the Academy [of Movement and Music, Oak Park, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: This, you know, this would have--needed to be right in '81 [1981] unless we moved to Oak Park a little bit earlier in 1980, so it was about 1980 or 1981.  And, and I started creative movement classes.  I started ballet class.  And, and for the first many years of that, it was just one of the things that I did, and then that my sister and I did.  I took Suzuki piano lessons.  I studied cello.  I sang in choir at school.  This is another very important part about Oak Park, and actually the adjacent suburb, River Forest, is where I went to school at Grace Lutheran School, Grace Lutheran Church and School.  And I grew up--my, both my sister [Marcia McMillan] and I grew up little Lutheran girls, and which was also very interesting because talk about not having very many African Americans around.  We were, though, we were both the only black kids in our classes for a really long time.  But I'll never forget how no one ever said anything.  None of my classmates or teachers ever said anything about it until I was in fourth grade.  And it was such a warm--maybe it--I think it, yeah, maybe it was in fourth grade and, and we were learning about the Civil Rights Movement.  And it was at a time when, when our teachers could share a little bit more with us about, about what the struggles of the Civil Rights Movement really were.  And I remember, I remember one little boy named Lewis (ph.) said to me.  And he, he came up to me, and he looked, he looked so sad, and he said, Ayisha?  Do they still make you sit at the back of the bus?  (Laughter).  And I started laughing.  I said, no, I don't have to--no, I don't have to sit at the back of the bus.  He was--I could tell he was so--he just thought this is so wrong--and in the back of the bus.  And I, I could tell he, he was picturing me, just, in the back--this is so wrong and the, the--what was coming out of him.  This was so genuine and, and so concerned.  And that, that, that's the type of environment where--that I was really blessed to go to school.  And I think there were, of course, there were the times when my sister and I just sort of assumed that we had German heritage (laughter), even though we don't.  We would, on Dr. King Day, we'd say, oh, yeah, it's Martin Lutheran King Day (laughter).  I mean, 'cause we were going about, we were learning about Martin Luther, and we were learning about Dr. Martin Luther King.  And I guess when you're a little kid, it all bleeds together.
Speaker 1: Did you have that experience when friends would say, oh, I'm half-Irish, half-German, half-Polish, or whatever it is?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you have--did people ask you that question as well?
Speaker 2: I think so, but we were just, we were just black, and we were--we had African heritage and Choctaw.  We have it, so, oh, yeah, well, we're Choctaw freedmen.  And I don't know if we were saying African American back then.  I don't know if that's a term that had come up yet.  I don't think so.  This would have been in the, you know, mid-, mid- to late '80s [1980s], so I don't think we were calling ourselves African American.  But we knew, we were--oh, we're black and we're Choctaw Indian, too.  And that, that was okay, cool (laughter).  There was never any sort of issue about it.
Story_ID: 99701
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Academy [of Movement and Music, Oak Park, Illinois].  How old were you, and what was that experience like?  Did you love ballet from the start?
Speaker 2: I loved ballet from the start.  If I'm to be honest about it, I loved it from the start.  There was a time when I was maybe eight, or seven.  Well, there is a time before that, too, when I, when I rebelled against the ballet.  I wanted to go to gymnastics.  I went to Leaps and Bounds in Oak Park.  And I, I did gymnastics until I realized--yeah, this is not for me (laughter).  I just remember feeling like what--they're jumping off of high beams and things and that's just--I would rather just jump.  So, I, I went back to ballet and I had--I loved it.  I, however, when I was eight, and maybe a lot of kids go through this when you're establishing your independence.  But I would throw a tantrum before it was time to go to ballet class every single, every single time, and this was at least twice a week.  I would, I would get into a little huffy, diva fit which, of course, was not popular with my mother [Connie Van Brunt].  It was not going to be okay.  And I would say, mom, I don't know why you're making me go to ballet.  I'm not going to be a ballerina when I grow up.  I'm going to be an architect.  So, I, I don't want to go to ballet.  I don't know why you're making me go.  My mother would say, Ayisha, you're going to be an architect who has grace and poise.  Get in the car (laughter).  I would get in the car (laughter) and I would go to ballet.  And here's the crazy part--I would go there, and I would love it.  And I, or at least, I remember registering the thought, and being in class, and standing at the bar, and having a thought actually register to me--I like this more than anybody else in here (laughter).  I mean, just really feeling like, oh, I'm really serious about this.  I, I really, really like this.  And that's how much I would really love it.  But for some reason, you know, that was Tuesday.  But, you know, on Thursday, it was a whole new, ugh, why do I have to go?  So, and my mother's intention was never for me to be a ballerina.  My mother just wanted me to be a, a well-rounded middle-class black child who would grow up to be a well-rounded, happy, good woman.  That's all she ever wanted.  And that I became a ballerina was, was really my choice, and, and I loved it.  I got to, I got to dance a lot of very sophisticated things, a lot of very sophisticated works at an early age.
Story_ID: 99702
Speaker 1: When I was nine, I started with the MOMENTA dance troupe, which is based in, in the, in Oak Park [Chicago, Illinois], and is, and takes a lot of its performers from, from that school.  And I was performing works by Doris Humphrey, who is one of the founding women, one of the founding artists and choreographers of early American modern dance.  I mean, she--and there I was performing, you know, "Under The Leaves" or some, or some of the, some of the other ballets that she did--very sophisticated work.  And this--and she was another Oak Park native, just like--well, Frank Lloyd Wright lived there, but Ernest Hemingway was from, from Oak Park also.  So, this was, this was just how I grew up was with these sophisticated works.  And the, the director of the school, Stephanie Clemens, was a--she was wonderful for me.  I think she and I got along very well in terms of dance because she, she believed in, in really doing--bringing these sophisticated works to, to young people, and training them properly to, to do them, and having people come in from all over the nation to properly train them.  But also, we had to have the best costumes (laughter).  I mean, that mothers, you know, would sew.  But they, but these patterns were taken from the archives of, of the, you know, Humphrey-Weidman Company.  I mean, really, really sophisticated stuff and, of course, I loved to dress up (laughter).  And so, that's probably the real reason why I got in ballet is all the pretty costumes.  But I, I was performing at a young age, and I think that's, I think that's really all of the things really awakened my passions--really, really doing things authentically, really training to do things right and being passionate.
Story_ID: 99703
Speaker 1: Tell me about the training, both at the Academy [of Movement and Music, Oak Park, Illinois] and MOMENTA.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: What was ballet class like?  Were you the only black girl in class?  Did you stand out?
Speaker 2: I think, I, I was, I was at least one of very few black girls in my class.  In the school, there were two others, there were two others, and they were both older than me.  And, actually, Stephanie Clemens choreographed a dance for all three of us.  And this was one of my first major things.  Well, it wasn't, it wasn't major in terms of lots of people saw it, but to me, it was a very, it was a very important part.  And this, this ballet was called "Memories and Dreams."  And I was the, I was the young girl remembering, and that the other girls were remembering.  And I was dreaming of being these older young women.  And that was a very special thing for me, and also having those, those two.  It's very rare, first of all, for a young black girl to be able to be in a ballet school, and to have two examples to look at within, within the school, and especially at that time.  And, and, and one of them, Tanya Wideman, went on to join Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York City, New York].  And she was a soloist with Dance Theatre of Harlem--soloist and principal, of Dance Theatre of Harlem.  And she danced in San Francisco with Alonzo King's LINES Ballet.  And she danced in New York with Dwight Rhoden's Complexions [Contemporary] Ballet.  People who--I mean companies and dancers who, once I got to be a little bit older, I was, you know, in the loop with them, too.  And I would say, oh, you know Tanya Wideman?  Oh, yeah, I know Tanya Wideman.  I was like, oh, yeah, I know Tanya (laughter).  You know, and also with Sarita, Sarita Smith [Childs] was the other dancer, and she danced in Chicago [Illinois].  I, I believe she danced with Joseph Holmes Company for a little while before she, before she decided to change directions and, and go into a career in banking, which is, hey, that's great (laughter).  I think, really, it's, it's what you take from putting yourself into dance and, and really using that passion and that discipline.  And it can carry you through some many other things.  And both of them were wonderful role models for me.
Speaker 1: What--
Story_ID: 99704
Speaker 1: Tell me some stories about rehearsals and the things you had to put your body through to prepare for a performance.
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of, lots of stretching, lots of strengthening, particularly when it, when I got to the age when I was, when I was allowed to go on to pointe, and I was allowed to get my first pair of pointe shoes.
Speaker 1: When was that?
Speaker 2: That was when I was eleven.  And I had to wait one full year after the rest of my ballet class did go on pointe because my teacher felt that my bones--my body wasn't strong enough yet.  I was a real tiny, tiny little, slight little thing.  I was real skinny (laughter), so she was afraid to put me in the pointe shoes 'cause my ankles weren't strong enough yet.  And all of these years later and a career later, I'm grateful for that (laughter), even though at the time, I was really very bummed out.  But even before, even before I got to be in pointe shoes, I remember every Saturday, all day, was in the studio.  And I was rehearsing at MOMENTA or and I would take class at least three times a week, at the very least, for a--I can't remember at what age, but I started going every day.  But it was--I would often have two ballet classes a day, every day.  And then, that's a standard that kept up until I became a professional.  And then, I would be--actually even a year before I became a professional, it was, it was all day, I would train.  So, you know, your feet bleed.  You get blisters, and my mom [Connie Van Brunt] would help me ice my toes after, after ballet class, after pointe class.  There came a time--and this was, this was a very important part in my studies also, is when I started training with Homer Hans Bryant.  And he was a principal dancer with Dance Theatre of Harlem, and he danced with New York City Ballet also.  And he danced under Arthur Mitchell at, at Dance Theatre of Harlem, and he, he was a fantastic teacher.  I started out with him--I think when I was, I think I was nine, I was nine--I was.  I was nine years old when I started with Homer because I remember earlier this year, I was back in Chicago [Illinois].  And whenever I go back to Chicago, which is where he still has his school, I take class with him.  And I realized--somebody said to me, well, are you sure, when did you start seeing Homer?  I said, oh, I started, I started studying with Homer twenty years ago, I started studying with him twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: So, take me through the timeline from the Academy [of Movement and Music, Oak Park, Illinois] through MOMENTA.  When were you at the Academy--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --of Motion and Music, and then MOMENTA, and then, you know, take me through.
Speaker 2: Right.  They were--it, it overlapped--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --quite a bit.  So, I, I think I started with performing with MOMENTA when I was nine.  At about the same time, I started studying with--doing private lessons on Sundays with Homer Bryant.  And he, he would really focus on my strength, and he would stretch me (laughter).  And sometimes, he would--I would, sometimes it would hurt so much that I would have a tear running down my cheek.  And he would wipe the tear off of my cheek.  He said, I need to put all of my ballerina tears into, into a bottle and sell them as crystals.  I'll make a lot of money.  And then, he would kiss me and it's crazy (laughter).  But it was, but it was a very loving type of coaching, but very, very disciplined.  Oh, his dancers were all, his dancers were all serious.  We were all going to--we were all his 'rinas, his ballerinas.
Story_ID: 99705
Speaker 1: Were you conscious of race while you were going through these various training periods and the other girls and roles--who was getting what?  Tell, take me through some of that.
Speaker 2: Well, it, you know, to really be honest, the being aware of race, as it played out with the roles that I noticed I was getting, or not getting, didn't begin until my professional career, really and truly, which made it all, which made it a really big shock (laughter) because there I had made it for--I mean, I was probably about nineteen years old.  It wasn't even in my first season when I, when I really, when it really showed itself for the first time.  I think I, I was very blessed.  Any school that I went to, and I went to--I studied at Boston Ballet School on scholarship.
Speaker 1: So, take me through the timeline so--
Speaker 2: Timeline--so, we have--
Speaker 1: You started with--
Speaker 2: Started with the Academy of Movement and Music [Oak Park, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: In 1981?
Speaker 2: --at age two, yeah, 1981.  And stay, and was pretty much there until, until about seven years later or, yeah, if I was nine years old, so that's maybe 1988.  Yeah, that sounds about right--until 1988 when I started studying with, with Homer Hans Bryant--only on Sundays, though, really, only on Sundays, once a week, but very, very important Sundays, very important training sessions once a week.  And then, and through that time, I was, I was still performing with MOMENTA.  I was still dancing there.  I started in 1988--actually, I went away for the, for my first time.  And in the world of ballet, especially as, as you're a student, the summer intensive programs are very, are very important to a young dancer's development.  And the first one that I went to was Boston Ballet.  I went for three weeks at a time, and I was eleven years old when I went, when I left home for three weeks, and that was a very big deal for me.  And also, because students come in from--fly in from all over the world to do, to study at programs like that.  And so, I did that that for, for 1988 and 1989 and--
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?  So, you were with dancers from all over the world.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there eye-opening?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.  It was great because we all spoke, we all spoke the same language of dance.  We had all been trained--I mean, and there were differences, differences in schools and differences in our training.  But we had all been--I mean, I, I think I mentioned how I would, how I would be in the studio every day of the week.  I missed a ton of birthday parties that way.  I missed--I was never at basketball games.  I was never at, at any other of those other things.  I don't even know what those would be that other kids do, but all of us had that in common.  We, we had all been training like that.  And we could all get together and train like that, really hard, and dance all day in our little buns and, and our leotards and our--and walk around, you know, the campus where we were in our little tights and our sandals (laughter), and not be weird, or not be, not be stuck up, but not, not have the perception of being stuck up.  And we were, it's--there's something very serious about the, the training, but, but there's--it grows from a love of, of doing.  This is what we wanted to do.
Story_ID: 99706
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your favorite memories from either Boston [Ballet School] or your time in Oak Park [Illinois], of key performances or times you really bonded with some of the other dancers from perhaps other countries.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, one of, one performance that sticks out first was actually a, a ballet that I did in--when I was in Oak Park, and I was dancing with MOMENTA--
Speaker 1: You're how old?
Speaker 2: I was--maybe I was ten--I think I was probably about ten years old.  And the younger--I was in the, I was in the very young group of dancers in the MOMENTA Ensemble.  And we got to do a piece together set to the music from, set to some music from "Victor/Victoria".  And it was jazz and La Paz, and this was the, and this was a role where I got to really--I really got to turn it out.  And no one had ever seen me perform like this before.  And I remember--particularly, my dad [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] was like slack.  His jaw was slack (laughter).  I mean, after having the purple (unclear) because I got out there, and I was, oh, baby, well, I mean, really, and I was a quiet little girl (laughter).  I wasn't, I wasn't the person that you see before you right now (laughter).  I was actually very quiet and pretty shy, except for when I got on, on stage.  And, all of a sudden, I was this sophisticated, you know, "Victor/Victoria" jazz and La Paz woman, and just--I really could throw myself into that role, and we would snap, and it was jazz, jazz.  And it wasn't purely ballet, but I think, but it was a big deal for me in my performance development.  And that will always stand out.  I had a such a great time dancing that role.  And it, it was, it was fun for me to surprise my parents, too (laughter), for them to see me on stage and say, that's our little girl, and she's really throwing it down.  Back then, it would have been--would not have been throwing it down, but (laughter), but it was really saucing it up.
Story_ID: 99707
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned that this was kind of a mixture of different dance forms--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --did you take other types of dance?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, lots--we had a wonderful foundation in modern dance and jazz dance also.  I never studied tap, but modern and ballet and jazz.  We're all very--which was also another unusual thing for a serious ballet student at the time, which ended up serving me well because nowadays in, in dance, in professional dance, a dancer must be well-rounded in order to be of value in a company.  You have to be able to put on the, the pointe shoes, and do something very classical or very neo-classical.  And then, you know, maybe for the second act, really be able to do some of the most cutting edge, very modern, very low to the work, to the floor-type work.  And that's, that's a lot of what the, the repertoire has been in, in here, in Charlotte [North Carolina].  But also, in, in Houston [Texas], to a certain degree, it was like that.  So, I got a wonderful mix of--from Homer [Hans] Bryant with his very [George] Balanchine-influenced technique and choreography, with the modern dance that I did, and the jazzy performance pieces that I also got, and then tons and tons of ballet, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were at the Boston Ballet how long?
Speaker 2: Well, I did two summers, so for three weeks in 1990, or maybe from--either 1988 or 1989, and then maybe 1990, maybe it was 1989 and 1990.
Speaker 1: Every summer?
Speaker 2: Yes, for those two summers.  And then I started--then, I actually, and this is another very interesting part.  The director of the Bolshoi Ballet [Asaf Messerer] ended up coming to Oak Park [Illinois], and he stayed with me and I studied with him.
Story_ID: 99708
Speaker 1: You were telling me about your experience at the Boston Ballet [School]--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --over the summers.  Tell me about some of your instructors, mentors there.
Speaker 2: One, our head teacher, or the director of the program, was Elaine Bauer.  And I just remember Elaine Bauer being so--again, elegant, very regal.  She was a ballerina herself with--performed professionally with the Boston Ballet.  And, in her--she was, she was very encouraging to me.  And, and I have a picture of myself with her at the end of--I think at the end of my summer session.  And she used to, she would stand straight as an arrow all the time.  And I remember thinking, oh, I wonder if that hurts (laughter).  No, that was just, that her muscles and her, her posture were just pristine.  And she always--she would say, well, ladies, all right now, are we ready?  And that's the way that she would always speak, even if she came to visit us in the dorms.  She would say, all right, girls, well, how is everything here (laughter)?  And I, I, I just loved her.  And she taught us "The Dying Swan" variation.  And that was the first time we learned, you know, with the, the swan arms when we got to, to work on that, and some other variations from, from ballets.  Variations are sections of, of ballets that real ballerinas dance.  And you get to work on one little part, and you feel like a ballerina (laughter) when you're learning with, especially as a young student who's seen these ballets on stage or on videotapes, and to have, and to have a wonderful ballerina like her passing, passing all of that on.  It was just fantastic.  So, I did that for--I, I went to those programs and those were all day, all day, we danced.  We would get up in the morning and go to the cafeteria and have our breakfast.  And then, we would have our first technique class; and then we would have pointe class; and then we would have variations class; and then, it was character class; and then we would rehearse for our final performance.  And in there, there were also classes like, applying stage makeup, and what else--health and nutrition for dancers and--
Story_ID: 99709
Speaker 1: Tell me about your experiences with girls from other countries.  Do you have any fond memories--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --or striking memories?
Speaker 2: --so, so many.  I've visited a, a friend of mine who had went, who, for a few years, was actually my roommate in Houston [Texas], but she, she's from Brazil, and she went to dance in Europe.  She went first to London [England] and then to Germany.  And I've visited her twice while I, while I was in Germany and got to just, you know, call her up and say, Marianna (ph.), I'm here.  And, and I also had a roommate who was from Japan and ended up dancing at, at Boston Ballet.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like being with other girls from other countries?  Was, again, race, was it an issue?  Was it a conscious thing?
Speaker 2: It was beginning to get a little bit more conscious because--only because they would, they would come, they were, would be in a new culture.  And I think in the United States, especially at the time, around the time that I was growing up, even kids knew what not to ask, you know, or, or what is not considered polite here.  And but, but, but coming from a different country, you know, they didn't know.  And they would say, well, sometimes it, of course, I would be the, the person they would ask for, you know.  I think, we were reading "Tom Sawyer" and, and the one from Brazil said, why, why does, why does Jimmy talk like that in the book?  Why, why does he talk like that?  What does that mean?  Why do black people talk like that?  Or why do other black people that I've seen--why do they talk different?  And, and those were probably the first instances where I found myself being the black spokesperson (laughter).  All of a sudden, the, there's that dynamic, that, that some talk about, speak about, with a--well, well, you're like them, but you don't speak exactly the same way.  So that does make you bad?  Does that make--are they bad?  Does that--are they uneducated?  No, no, they're not uneducated.  This is also around the same time when the term, Ebonics, became more broadly used.  And I think, really, that was for the people, for the dancers that I met who came from other countries.  Probably language was the, was the--at least, it was the most prominent point of entry for discussions about race and very interesting because once, once we got in the studio, there, there really weren't any--there was really nothing to talk about.
Speaker 1: It was all about ability then?
Speaker 2: It was all about ability.
Story_ID: 99710
Speaker 1: And where did you rank when it came to ability at these various schools?
Speaker 2: I was, I always did very well at my schools.  I was, I was always a scholarship student.  I always earned scholarships.  At Houston Ballet, I was on full scholarship the whole time I was there.  And I studied, I, I went there for summers similar to how I did with Boston Ballet School, but I went for summers before I--two summers before I joined their school.
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: Oh, this would be years.  This would be--1993 was my first, no, I'm sorry, 1992 was my first summer in Houston because it was the summer of 1991 that Asaf Messerer, that I studied with Asaf Messerer and--
Speaker 1: So, tell me about that summer first--1991.
Speaker 2: Sure.  In 1991, and this was still when I think about it, I don't know how, how many different, you know, cosmic things (laughter) must have come together for the director of the Bolshoi Ballet.  At that point, he was the former director of the Bolshoi Ballet--to end up on our doorstep in Oak Park, Illinois, the same, the same home that I'd grown up in.  And he, he was in his eighties at that point.  And he wore these thick, thick, you know, bottle cap glasses.  And he was, he was a little bit, you know, hunched over because of his age, and he was such a, he was such a gentleman.  He was such a gentleman to my mother [Connie Van Brunt], and he was so appreciative to my mother.  He ended up staying with us in our home because he was too elderly to be put into a hotel.  And, and really, it, it was best if someone could make sure he had his meals and, you know, just someone to, to be around.  Hey, that'll be outstanding.  It was, it was amazing, it was absolutely amazing.  He, he used to call me Yisha, he used to call Bebe-Yisha (ph.), and say, Bebe-Yisha, she good, she good.  And she said, he would say, you know, when you're fifteen in Moscow [Russia], you can drive (laughter).  He said, and when you're fifteen, you can come drive in Moscow, come drive me, come drive me around Red Square in Moscow.  Oh, then, when you're fifteen, all you, all you have to be is fifteen, and you can drive.  So, and that was, that's the way that things were at home.
Speaker 1: Did he give you instruction?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and, oh, yeah, he gave wonderful ballet classes.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Wonderful like, even at the beginning of the class, which is the--and the beginning of the ballet class starts with very small movements, traditionally, to warm, to warm the body up, to, to enhance placements to, to get the dancer placed and, and you start building your strength, your blood starts circulating, you start getting very warm.  But right from the beginning, you know, port de bras, which is the carriage of the arms, was very important.  And we had all of the, the Russian's shapes.  And, and watching him, even though he was, even though, you know, I could under-, only understand every other word he was saying.  And if he was saying something in French, and most of the conversation was in French, but even though he had a thick accent, it was--I was, you know, caught, you, you have to catch on very quickly, but just having him there and, and being able to watch him, you know, oh, no, a lot of it was non-verbal, too, like, you know, tapping your arm, oh, oh, okay, okay.  So much of it, so much of it was non-verbal, but he just had this incredible presence.  And he was just, he was very, he's very gentle, he was very gentle but, wow, he worked us hard (laughter), you know.  Oh, you hold the position, you hold your leg in back of you--hold it, hold it, hold it, hold it, hold it, hold it, you know, build that strength there.  Our legs are trembling.  You hold it, you hold it, you know, really, really, you're, you're in, in boot camp (laughter).  It's--ballet is like a lot like boot camp, but like every day (laughter).  It's, it's not preparing you to, to just go, and do something once.  It's every day is a new boot camp.  And with him, it, it was, even though he was such a gentle man, a gentleman and a gentle man.
Story_ID: 99711
Speaker 1: How did Asaf [Messerer] introduce you to Mikhail [Messerer]?  Is that what happened?
Speaker 2: That is--I don't remember exactly how that happened, or if it happened the other way around.
Speaker 1: Did you do something with Mikhail?
Speaker 2: I did.  I danced--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: --I did.  I danced, and I, I'm having trouble remembering what year this would have been--
Speaker 1: And how old were you about?
Speaker 2: --and how old I was.
Speaker 1: Twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about twelve, twelve or thirteen.  I was twelve and thirteen because I danced in the Soviet American Ballet's production of "Coppelia", and that was Mikhail, Mikhail Messerer.  Actually, thank you.  That came first before I met--and that is, that's part of how Asaf Messerer ended up on my doorstep is because I auditioned.  Yes, okay, I auditioned for the Soviet American Ballet School's production of "Coppelia".  There was a, a flyer about it up at our, at our ballet school.  And, and I said to my mom [Connie Van Brunt], mom, I want to go to that, I want to go to that audition.  And my mother said, okay, well, I'll take you.  It's, you know, on a Saturday, and kids from all over go there.  This is in Darien, Illinois which is really, really not this hub of the ballet world (laughter).  This is far out in the Illinois suburbs.  And, you know, we were in a--the studio is in a strip mall across from a burger joint for real, a, a burger, burger joint named Pamy's, yeah, it was Pamy's.  And we, I went and I auditioned, and I made it.  Not only did I make it into the production, but I made it into a good part.  I was one of Swanilda's friends.  And actually, they added--the Swanilda traditionally has six friends, six friends or eight friends, depending on the size of the ballet company.  And this was not a, this was not a professional production.  The, the principal dancers were professional, but the rest of us were students.  But they--I was the youngest, was I the--I was, I think I was the youngest of the bunch.  And they, they thought, well, you know, she's very young for friends, (unclear), friend of Swanilda, but we want to have her do it.  So even though they already had eight girls this time, Swanilda was going to have nine friends (laughter).  Swanilda was going to have a lot of friends (laughter).  And that was one of the, that was a great, great time for me 'cause it was so much work.  Oh, we would work, we would dance for crazy hours.  I remember one time it was Mother's Day and we rehearsed all day long.  It was a Sunday, it was Mother's Day.  But Mikhail said, uhh, momma, you said you watch, okay.  Girls, c'mon (laughter), let's go, let's go, let's go.  And we, we worked so, so hard, many hours a day, but it was every day.  So, we would train with Mikhail, but then we also, or you had the option to train.  And I, and I did train with him, and also learned the choreography and, and rehearsed in getting ready to perform this ballet.
Story_ID: 99712
Speaker 1: So, you raise a very good question.  How were you able to balance the rest of your life with your family, with school, all that stuff?  So, take me through the various academic institutions you attended at the time--elementary school, junior high school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how did you balance?
Speaker 2: Well, it was pretty much all that I did.  It was dance and then homework.  I was a very, very serious student.  And I went to Grace Lutheran School, and from kindergarten through eighth grade, and that was in River Forest, Illinois.  And then, once I finished eighth grade, I took the acceptance exam for Fenwick Prep-, College Preparatory School in Oak Park, Illinois.  And I was actually in the first class of young women that Fenwick High School ever admitted.  After sixty years of being an all-boys' school, they decided to open their doors to girls and to just two.  And it started with just the freshman class, integrated girls, and I was in that first, first freshman class.  So, I was accepted into the school and I went just for one year.  That was the Catholic school.  And I went just for one year before I ended up going to Houston [Texas], leaving home, and going to Houston.
Speaker 1: So take me through Grace Lutheran--first through eighth grade.  Were you known as the ballerina and also the smart girl?
Speaker 2: I, I know that I was known as the ballerina because I, because I would always talk about--oh, well, I auditioned for "Nutcracker".  Oh, I'm going to be dancing this or I'm going to be dancing that or--
Speaker 1: Like what else, the "Nutcracker"--name some of the ballets.
Speaker 2: "Nutcracker".  Other than that, it was--there was a lot of, there were always the summer recitals that I would dance.  And that was "Peter Pan" one year and I was Tiger Lily (laughter), and that was really great.  And let's see, what else?  Otherwise, they were not traditional ballets, but recitals com-, comprised of a lot of different dances.
Speaker 1: You were known as--
Speaker 2: So that was, I was always on my way to the studio though, I was always on my way to or from the studio.  And that's (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were aware that this was prestigious in some way?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was--well, I don't know that I, I don't--I'm not sure if I was aware that it was prestigious.  I just, I knew that it was, it was something that I was very proud of, but it was also something that I was very serious about.  I was very serious (laughter), I was very serious.  I was serious about my academic studies, and I was serious about dancing.  I remember at one point, I, in fourth grade, we, we had to have our little blue--there were little blue books that everybody, that each fourth grader got.  And you had to remember to bring your little blue book to school in order to take the weekly spelling test because the teacher would not accept the spelling test on loose leaf paper.  It had to be in this little book.  And by that point, I had already set my sights on Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], on attending Harvard, and I was in fourth grade.  And one day, horror of all horrors, I forgot my blue book at home.  And the teacher wouldn't let me take the spelling test.  And I'll never forget, even though my perspective on it now is very different, I'll never forget going up to my teacher and saying, Mrs. Mix (ph.), you have to let me take this spelling test.  She said, Ayisha, it's only fair, I'm, I'm very sorry, but that's the rule, and it's only fair.  I said, but, you don't understand--if you don't let me, or I said, if Harvard sees that I got a zero on this test, they'll never take me (laughter).  And I was in fourth grade (laughter).  I went home and told my mother [Connie Van Brunt], and she said, aww, where is this coming from?  (Laughter).  You don't need to worry.  I was very, I was very serious.  I think, I, I got--I was labeled very early on at school from like the other kids.  As soon as we knew what a perfectionist was, they were like, oh, yeah, like her (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you get straight A's or A's and B's?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were your best subjects?
Speaker 2: Writing, so English and literature are probably--and German, I think were my best subjects.
Story_ID: 99713
Speaker 1: And you wanted to be an architect?
Speaker 2: And I wanted to be an architect, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me--why?
Speaker 2: Well, because, well, it was really because of my daddy [Robert F. McMillan].  It was really because of my dad.  My dad would bring home blueprints of the, of the projects that he was working on.  He did--at the time, he was working on a number of different commercial buildings.  He's--I think, probably by that point, he was a real estate developer and as he is today.  And so, he, he had blueprints all of the time.  He would teach me how--he knew how to, he knew how to, to create architectural drawings, so he bought me my own set.  He bought, he bought me a compass, and an S-curve and a protractor, and a ruler, and a T-square.  I had the whole set and I would just draw lines and circles and curves, and I would imagine how I would change my dad's drawings.  He would bring home extra ones for me, so I could just tinker and, and do whatever I wanted to, and I could picture these spaces.  I would picture houses.  I designed us a number of houses, or I designed a porch to go on to our house that we had, so it never got built (laughter) but, and my dad, my dad was always very handy around the house.  He built a room addition on the house.  He built a deck.  And that's, that's what I wanted to do.  I loved going to, to the hardware store with my dad.  I'd walk behind him, try to kind of walk like him, like I knew what was going on in the hardware store (laughter).  Dowel rods, oh, yeah, those are dowel rods, oh, yeah, we need a, we need a dowel rod (laughter).
Story_ID: 99714
Speaker 1: So, were you seen as a sort of special family?  You were one of only black families in Oak Park [Illinois], but were you seen as you're the over-achieving family?
Speaker 2: I, I just thought that, that's the way that everybody was.  I don't, I don't think so.  I mean, I don't know.  I really don't know if that's the way we were perceived.  I think, before my parents divorced, perhaps it was, it was.  I wrote up a poem about, about our family once when, when I was in college.  And I, I, lovingly joked about us that we were a, we were a Varnette Honeywood painting, but in pastel colors, so that if you're familiar with the vibrant colors that, that are Varnette Honeywood.  But we were, we would go to like Lutheran Church services (laughter) in, in River Forest [Illinois] on Sunday.  So, we were, we were all dressed in pastels, but we were our own, our own Varnette Honeywood.  And that's, and it, and it, that's the way it talked to me.  It, it felt like a, a, it felt like, yeah, I got my dad [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.] here, I got my mom [Connie Van Brunt] here.  I, I learned things from both of them.  I, I've got structure and love and everything that I need.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned your parents divorced.  How old were you--twelve, when your parents got divorced?
Speaker 2: Yes, about twelve.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: That was very hard for everyone in my family.  That was very hard and I, I think that when, and when you're, when you're a child, you're a child.  And I, I think that divorce often causes the children in a family to need to grow up a little bit faster.  And, and, so it creates a little bit of a strange dynamic sometimes where you, you think you're a lot more grown-up than you are (laughter).  So, I assumed that I should be able to handle all sorts of responsibilities and negotiating all, all sorts of things that, that it took me a while to realize--oh, children are children because, developmentally, they're, they're children (laughter).  They're not little adults in small packages.  So, but it was hard, it was painful for, it was painful for me, for my sister, for my mom, for my dad, it was painful.
Speaker 1: Did your--who moved out?
Speaker 2: My dad did, uh-hum.  He moved to Aurora, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Did that change your sense of self, your drive, your focus?
Speaker 2: No.  I think that what happened is that because--I think that my drive and my focus helped me survive.  I really do and, and my mother really used everything that she had to, to encourage me to, to live in what my passion was, which was dance.  And, and with, and for my sister [Marcia McMillan] also, really encouraged any--she--it was very hard for my mother.  I didn't realize this at, at the time, but it was very hard for my mother to see me leave home when I was fifteen.  Then my sister did, too.  She went to the Illinois Mathematics and Science Academy [Aurora, Illinois] when she was fifteen.  But, but a divorce leaves the family financially in a more difficult position.  Things are very difficult for the family, so I think that--and my mother has told me that she could recognize that going away like this would, would allow me to, to really, to, to focus on, on things that they weren't so painful--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --and to really put myself into something I loved.
Story_ID: 99715
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned that fifteen, you moved away.  That was to Houston [Ballet Academy, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: That was to Houston.
Speaker 1: Had you done some maturing?  I mean, your body starts changing around that time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --interest in boys perhaps.  Tell me about that transitional period, and then off to Houston.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, let's see.  At that point, I had--by, by the time I left, I had gone to Fenwick High School [Oak Park, Illinois] for a year.  I was very--I was just joking about this the other day--how I, as far as boys went, there were no, there were, there was no talk of boys (laughter) for me for a very long time.  I went on my first date when I was seventeen years old.  And I lived in--I was already living in Houston 'cause I left home at fifteen.  I was already living in Houston.  And I was mortified because my mother [Connie Van Brunt] called my ballet teacher and because I was living in this school's dormitory.  It was an apartment that served as a dorm for girls from all over the world.  And my mother called--when I told my mother, well, you know, a boy asked me out on a date, a boy from high school, and I said yes, and we're going to go see a movie.  My mother said, Ayisha, your first date.  She called my ballet teacher and said, Ayisha is going on her first date tomorrow (unclear), oh, my goodness, oh, my goodness (laughter).  I think she was so excited, and from a thousand miles away, what's a mother to do, you know, so I had to have compassion for her.  At the same time, as a seventeen-year-old, I was just mortified--oh, my goodness (laughter).  Then you went and told my ballet teacher, oh, no.  But everything ended up okay.  I didn't have my first boyfriend until I was eighteen, and I had my own apartment and a full time job.  So, that was--I think that's another part that just--it really was not part of my life, that socialization that very young people do.  I didn't really do in a traditional way.  I never went to a school dance.  I've never been to any prom of any sort, but to be very honest with you, I, I didn't feel like I was missing out on anything.  I felt like, but this is what I want to be doing anyway.  So, and, and that's the way I remember feeling back then.
Story_ID: 99716
Speaker 1: What about body image?  You, so you were a black, a Native American girl, who was surrounded by primarily white girls from all over the world.  Were you, were you thin then?  Was your body changing?  Did you have body image issues at all?
Speaker 2: I, I did.  I, I--well, the body, the body image issues didn't really start--again, until I became a, until I made the transition from being a ballet student to being in a ballet company--a, a professional ballet dancer when I was eighteen.  Because before that, I, I think I was thin, I was always thin.  I think my, my thighs were overdeveloped muscularly, but and that was something that I, that I needed to work on, and that my ballet teachers in Houston [Texas] really were having me work on.  But I never felt like, oh, but it's bad.  I didn't feel like shame about it.  I didn't feel a sense of shame or self-loathing (laughter), or hatred or frustration about it until, until it got to probably be closer to the end of, of my school, my training time.  And then, it's just so insidious the way that it, it eventually did come and it--that, those body images, and it--what, I don't think it was because my body changed.  It's because of where I--my environment changed.
Story_ID: 99717
Speaker 1: I'm going to take it back for a second.  Were you active with the Bryant Ballet Company in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I absolutely was, yes.  That was--I started studying with Homer [Hans] Bryant before he even had his own school.  I was one of the charter members of his school (laughter)--the very first dancers in his, in his--once he got his own school.  So, once he got his own school, I started to study with him more.  And, and then, soon after started, he started this performing group that was Bryant Ballet and that was wonderful.  I actually, I got to perform a pas de deux with him and actually have a photo that I can show you from that.  And that was very special because he, because I really got to work with him on a sophisticated level that was more pre-professional.  But in this, in this pas de deux that we did together, there were lifts.  He was lifting me above his head and, and I had to, you know, hold myself a certain way.  And I had to not, not be worried and not feel self-conscious, but really, just hold my, hold my weight steady, so that I could be lifted.  And it built a great amount of confidence in me to be, to be partnering.  That's, that's another big step for a young dancer and to be able to, to dance with--first of all, Homer Bryant is, even though he, he hadn't been dancing professionally for many years, by that point--I mean, a professional partner and it, but the partnering is, is just that.  It's--I mean, it's not that the, the man can, can handle it all.  But when you have such a high level professional (laughter) behind you, manipulating you, you're going to look great (laughter).  So, I felt fantastic like, I look wonderful.  I'm flying through the air in, in these huge presage lifts where I'm soaring above everybody's heads.  And, and it was just a, it was a really wonderful time for me performing with Bryant Ballet.  We got to go--travel to St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, where, where Homer is from.  And I got to perform there with his company, and that was after I had even left for Houston [Texas].  I was invited to join the company on that tour and we performed, we performed rap ballet.  We did educational performances about discipline, about working hard in a positive attitude.  And Homer, Homer Bryant was the creator of this program called rap ballet and we did "rap ballet, rap ballet, rap ballet in the classical way, uh-hum, uh-hum, rap," but he had this whole rap that took you through the entire ballet class with all the French terminology--mens, what discipline means, what it means to work hard, and what it means to have a positive attitude, what it means to be physically fit and, and we took that to schools.  We did that as an educational program.  And it was, it was really, it was, of course, then, you know, rap--it was all about the rap (laughter).  And so, we had rap and ballet and we were so cool (laughter), we were so cool.  We did African dances, too, within, in dashiki, like sarongs, and beaded headpieces (laughter).  And, and we were all, we were all African queens, you know, even the ones of us who were of Irish heritage (laughter).  They had on the dashikis, too, and that's--it was a very--that group was, and Bryant Ballet was, was very diverse.  And, actually, a number of those women--I'm still friends with now.  One of them is a friend of mine.  She's an investment banker on Wall Street, and she's not dancing anymore.  Actually, I got an email from her and she's in Egypt (laughter) with whatever company.  But, but it's, it's--you form such tight friendships--I think, such tight bonds during those years. And when you're, you're going, I think everyone was going through adolescence.  We were all going through adolescence, but in this very serious pre-professional training.  And it, like I mentioned before, it sort of isolated us from a number of our other--from a lot of peers.
Story_ID: 99718
Speaker 1: Did it isolate you from the world in terms of politics and race relations and--I mean, you mentioned rap music.  Were you aware of what was going on in the world politically and socially as well, or were you very isolated?
Speaker 2: I think that my, my, microcosm, my miniature version of the world, was at-- my mother [Connie Van Bryant] liked to say how, when you're in ballet, it, it--she realized that God's rolodex has no zip codes.  That's what she loved to say.  She said, she, she told me, honey, I just prayed for the Lord to put you in the right place to dance, the best place for you to dance.  And she was really just thinking about how I was struggling about dividing my time among where Homer [Hans] Bryant was in Chicago [Illinois], and where this studio, MOMENTA, was in Oak Park [Illinois], but I ended up in Houston, Texas (laughter).  She said, Lord, but any, but it was a lot.  And, and in Houston, Texas, I had a, a director from Great Britain.  I had--I danced with dancers from Cuba, from Japan, from Russia.  So, these dynamics, the dynamics with race, the dynamics with ethnicity or, or color or nationality, those are lines that--it's a paradox.  In dance, in the arts, I think, perhaps a little bit broader, those lines are, are not really--we don't draw those lines very distinctly.  So, I, I didn't feel like I was that black girl dancer.  Also, because with Homer, there were a number of other of us.  And Homer, and actually, I trained for, for a while with, with Homer, with a woman that Homer was married to, and she was a black ballerina in Dance Theatre of Harlem.  So I had--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Rhonda and, at the time, she was Rhonda Bryant.
Speaker 1: Were there other role models, black women in ballet whom you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was--I had in my Caboodle makeup case--I don't know if you remember the Caboodles from the '80s [1980s], I had a little makeup case.  And inside the makeup case and this is for my stage makeup 'cause I didn't wear makeup, you know.  Otherwise, because, you know, I--but inside my stage makeup case, I had Guerlain Meteorite powders that my mother [Connie Van Brunt] got for me.  And I would only just use them sparingly 'cause I loved them, 'cause they were so fancy to me.  But I also had a little picture--I had two pictures.  One was of Virginia Johnson, who was a principal ballerina with Dance Theatre of Harlem, and another was Stephanie Daphne, also a principal dancer.  And I believe it was a feature that TIME magazine did on Dance Theatre of Harlem, and that's where I clipped these photos from.  And they were on the inside, they were on the mirror.  So, every time I put on my makeup to, to prepare to perform, I would see Virginia Johnson and Stephanie Daphne.  And those were, and they were, they, they were, they were at the pinnacle, you know, of, of where a ballerina's career would be at that time.  There actually--there was a third one.  She wasn't in my Caboodle, but I had pictures of her on my bedroom wall, and that was Nina Ananiashvili, and she was with the Bolshoi Ballet.  Very interestingly, through the course of my, of my career, I would encounter both, both Virginia Johnson and Nina Ananiashvili.  Actually, I would share the stage with Nina Ananiashvili.
Speaker 1: Pretty amazing?
Speaker 2: Really amazing (laughter).
Story_ID: 99719
Speaker 1: What was the performance and what was your part?
Speaker 2: It was the Houston Ballet.  I was in the corps, and she [Nina Ananiashvili] was the principal.  That's fine (laughter).  I mean, we would, we would take class together in the same--I mean, she was dancing among me, you know, with me.  We would go across the floor.  At one time, we went across the floor together, you know, dancing.  And it was, it was just absolutely amazing.  She's just very beautiful and very gracious.  At Houston Ballet, this--I think the first production was maybe, was either "Sleeping Beauty" or the "Snow Maiden."  She did a number of productions with us in Houston Ballet, and it took me, excuse me, it probably took me a good two years to work up the courage to have her sign my book that had, that I had for years with pictures of her (laughter).  And she was always very nice so I don't know I was so nervous.  But, it was, it was absolutely wonderful.  And then, Virginia Johnson actually, just a few years ago, probably about four years ago, once she retired from dance, she became editor of, of a magazine, of an industry magazine called "Pointe" magazine, and she interviewed me for a feature in her magazine.
Speaker 1: How did that feel?
Speaker 2: I started, I, you know, before we started, I said, you know, I must tell you that you have inspired my career (laughter).  I said, I cannot believe that I'm speaking to you on the phone, Ms. Johnson, because I had your picture cut off from a magazine, inside my Caboodle, from the time that I was nine years old.  And, and, just that image of you--and I never saw her perform live, you know, 'cause I was telling my, my director here in, in Charlotte [North Carolina]--I said, you know, Virginia Johnson is a long-time idol of mine.  He said, oh, yes, beautiful dancer.  Did you ever see her perform?  I said, no (laughter).  She was my idol, nonetheless, but she was, but, you know, it's rare to see a black ballerina in a tutu dancing.  It's, it's not something that you run across very often in this, in this country, on this planet.  And, and I think that's, that's part of why I felt, I felt fed by it, but at, at other times, a little bit more pressured that I should probably be putting on myself with when I perform because I want to represent so, so badly.  I want to, I want to, I want especially for young people, not only young black kids, but for young girls, in particular, to see me enjoying myself for--that, that I have something that I loved to do, and that I worked very, very hard to pursue it.  And they see me doing it and loving it.  And, and I feel particularly that with young black children, not necessarily that I want them to, to grow up to be ballerinas, but they can say, oh, we're here, we're there.  We're in opera; we're in ballet; we are, we go to the moon; go to outer space; we're in medicine; we do everything.  I can do it, I can do anything.  And that's, that's really, that's, that's really what I would want to see from that.
Story_ID: 99720
Speaker 1: Take me through Houston [Ballet]--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --to the time you turn eighteen and become a professional--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.  Well, that was, that, that was a very interesting time for me, not just because I became a professional dancer, but also that's the time, that's the time when most people my age were going to college, were leaving home for the first time, and going to college.  So, I graduated from high school, and before I graduated, though, I, I remember it was during "Nutcracker" time that I was getting all of my school applications together--my college applications because I was determined, from an early age actually, because I think I started learning at around age eleven that a lot of ballerinas don't go to college because they, because they need to start in a company so early on.  But, but to me, I thought, no, that's, that's ridiculous.  Of course, I'm going to college (laughter).  I'm going to do both.  So, and that's what I set out to do.  And, and essentially, for eleven years, that's, that's what I've been doing, but I applied to six schools.  And that, and applications, college applications are quite a bit of work, with all the--I had essays, I had interviews.  I applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], of course (laughter).  I applied to Harvard, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], and I think I, I applied to some more, but, thank goodness, I've forgotten because--then that means I'm not too hung up on it.  But I got into all of them except for Yale.  I do remember that.  Anyway, I got into all of them except for Yale, but I had, I had strategically planned all of the schools that I applied to, to correspond with ballet companies that I could audition for.  And then, so, hopefully, I would--wherever I was going to dance, I would be, also be going to school.  And I ended up with my two first choices, which were Rice University [Houston, Texas] and Houston Ballet--dancing for Houston Ballet, and attending Rice University.  And Rice University was very welcoming.  They, they allowed me to do what I needed to do in order to go to school.  I would, I was--it was impossible for me to have a full load.  And they usually require all of their freshmen to take a certain number of hours.  And they usually require all of their freshmen to stay on campus.  But, you know, once I sat with them and said, listen, I cannot afford to put on the freshmen fifteen and also, I'll be at the studio all day.  I can't deal with a dorm where students will be up all night, making noise.  I have to go to bed.  I have to get up.  I have to be in that studio and it's business, and that's the way I pay, pay my bills.  That's the way I get health insurance.  That's the way I pay my rent.  That's the way I'm paying for tuition here (laughter).  So, I was very, I was very aware that this was time to get a job.  I felt, so I felt, I felt a lot of pressure there, and also the dynamic from being a, from going from being a student to being a professional dancer is quite different because when you're a student--at least in my experience, when you're a student, others advocate for you.  You're in a ballet class where you are--the, the objective is to receive instruction.  When you become a professional dancer, you are your own advocate, you must be your own advocate.  The objective is no longer instruction and focus on development.  It's focused on putting a ballet together--quickly (laughter), (unclear) on stage.
Story_ID: 99721
Speaker 1: So, give me an example of a couple of ballets you had to get together.
Speaker 2: "Swan Lake" was the first one.  That was trial by fire (laughter).  "Swan Lake" is tough.  "Swan Lake," "Swan Lake" was the first ballet that I did with the profession, as a professional, and with the professional company.  And it was, and it is, it's grueling physically.  And it was a lot of choreography for me to learn at one time and a very fast pace because that's the way professionals do it, and it was very exacting physically.  Dancing with a large corps de ballet and, and really being very precise and having meticulous technique--all of those things are very important.  And they, they did, they did cause me to--all of that did cause me to grow, but it wasn't, and it wasn't an ushering type of a growth.  It was a growing pain, painful type of growth (laughter).  It's very, it's very hard and your feet hurt, your feet ache, because after dancing for a long time, the swans and the corps de ballet are required to stand on one foot while the, while the principals dance.  And then in between variations, all you're allowed to do is switch legs.  And it must all be at the same time--switch legs silently, all eighteen of you together, and it's some, it was very athletic.  It was very, very hard and, I think, and this was part of where some of the body image difficulties came in.  I became very self-conscious about wearing a tutu 'cause I--because my legs didn't look like the other girls' legs--the way that theirs were shaped, the way--
Speaker 1: Tell me about your legs compared to their legs.
Speaker 2: My legs have always been curvier, and I have a bottom that sticks out (laughter), and that's not the case for most ballerinas.  You know, fortunately, at Houston Ballet, I had one of the world's--one of the few black ballerinas in the world, and this was Lauren Anderson.  And she was wonderful to me.  She was a wonderful mentor and she was, while I was in the corps, you know, she was dancing Odette/Odile.  She was the, the principal dancer.  And so, I didn't feel like--it's very complicated.  I think that every, every--although there are black dancers who opened doors for others, I think that this is, I think that also perhaps in Hollywood--this is, this is a lot of the case.  I, I, I see many parallels that, although many doors have been opened, we're, we're not there yet.  It doesn't mean that you're, oh, oh, yeah, well, sure--they're plenty of roles for you.  The paradigm fits you just fine (laughter) because it really doesn't (laughter).  We still have an idea.  Many people really still have an idea of what a ballerina should look like.
Story_ID: 99722
Speaker 1: What were some of those eye-opening experiences when you didn't get a role you probably deserved?
Speaker 2: You know, it was a lot, it was a lot tougher for me to, to tell--I think, particularly, as someone who, being someone who didn't grow up around racism.  My--I remember the first time that my mother, my mother [Connie Van Brunt] said--it was, I was calling home, and I was really upset about, about the way that was going.  And she said, well, you know, honey, that sounds like racism.  I said, don't be ridiculous, you know, that's not it--couldn't be 'cause I had never, I had really, not really ever encountered that before. The only time that where it was absolutely blatant (laughter) was when one choreographer, who had used me before in a very nice role, came back to work with us, and wasn't putting me in the ballet.  And, and I didn't say anything.  And, well, okay, until finally, this choreographer came up to me and said, well, you know, you know that I love your dancing.  But I don't think I'm going to be able to use you for this one because there's some romantic dancing in this, and we don't have any other males who are, you know, for me to pair you with.  And, wow, and I didn't know what to say, I didn't know what to say.  But I, I, I went into the lady, into the ladies' locker room.  I cried about it for a little while, went back out, finished the day.  And then that night, I called Lauren Anderson.  And I said, and I told her what happened, and I said, I don't know what to do.  I didn't know--is this the way it's going to be?  Is this how--is this something I'm going to have to deal with?  She said, honey, (laughter), I've dealt with that before.  Here's what you do (laughter), she said, here's what you do, honey.  You go back to that choreographer, and you tell that choreographer--that's not the way that Ben Stevenson runs his company, and that if the choreographer doesn't like the way you're dancing, okay, fine.  Don't put, don't put you in the ballet, and I agree with that wholeheartedly.  If you don't like the way I'm dancing the role, then, by all means, cast somebody else.  But, if you're afraid of putting me with, with a non-black dancer--not only that it was a white dancer, but it was a non-black dancer (laughter) in a romantic role.  I mean, and Ben Stevenson had gotten hate mail from partnering Lauren Anderson with a--as, as, Princess Aurora, in "Sleeping Beauty" with a white prince.  He got hate mail and said, go on, dance.  So, and so, I, I've experienced it, unfortunately, in, in that, in that instance.  And the way that, that, that story ended up, was I, I did exactly what Lauren told me to do.  And she said, and then after you tell the choreographer that, that's, excuse me, that that's not the way that Ben Stevenson runs his company, then go tell Ben Stevenson that you said that (laughter).  But wait until after you (laughter), and then it would (unclear).  And I said, I did.  And, and then, and when I told Ben, I said, well, Ben, you know, this came up and, I just told the choreographer that you, you cast ballets for dancers, and not for colors, and he said, and he said, yes, that's right.  And then, that was it (laughter).  He said yeah, he said yeah, that's right, yeah (laughter), and that was, that was the end of the discussion.  So, I, that was an instance where I was very blessed.  Really, I think in other, in other ways, it's, it's never revealed itself in black and white.  It, it doesn't reveal itself to, to be that way.  People know what to say.  Please know what not to say.  I think that when it happens most is more, is more, it's more, it's under the radar, but it's, it's also not something that even the person who is discriminating can tell is happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's just something that they're looking for.
Story_ID: 99723
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where--you mentioned you graduated high school, and you started applying to college, where did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: Mirabeau B. Lamar High School in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Spell the first name, the first?
Speaker 2: M-i-r-a-b-e-a-u--really, it's called Lamar High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I heard, I hear that Debbie Allen and Phylicia Rashd went there, too (laughter), and Beyonce (laughter).  She's younger than me though.
Speaker 1: Well, Debbie Allen was--was she a role model of sorts?  I mean, it was a different type of dance but--
Speaker 2: Different type of dance but, you know, I met her at Kennedy Center when I was, I was, I was at Kennedy Center performing for, with Houston Ballet.  And she, she was talking to Lauren Anderson, and I saw them standing at the, the door talking.  And I was in rehearsal, I was actually rehearsing.  And I, and I said to my--I just said, forget it, I'm leaving rehearsal, I'm going to go meet Debbie Allen because I have to, I have to shake this woman's hand.  And I think that she's, you know, another elegant woman, another elegant woman, with energy and that dance is her vehicle is wonderful.  I think that, for me, since, since I was such a ballerina that it was--the dance part of her, of, of what she does, was always wonderful for me.  And the professional performance was always very exciting to me, and I always admired that.  But I think that even more than that was just her, was her charisma, and her energy.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: So, I didn't have her picture on my wall, but, but she's, she's Debbie Allen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She's fantastic, and I was so excited, I was so excited to meet her.
Story_ID: 99724
Speaker 1: Where did you go after the Houston Ballet?  How did you end up in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: How did I end up in North Carolina?  I know.  The North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet] has a wonderful reputation in the industry.  And by industry, I mean, in, among ballet companies, particularly for artists who want to dance, not only classical work, but who really want to dance more contemporary work, and work with some of the, some of, some of the choreographers who are, who are really pushing the envelope in, in, in the industry.  And that was what I wanted after six years at Houston Ballet.  I wanted, I wanted less of--I, I didn't want to wear another pair of pink tights in my life--I'll tell you that.  And that was another, that, that was something that had very much to do with my body image and with my legs, which I'm been very sensitive about for, you know, a long time, certainly my entire professional career because they're more bubbly and not, not as svelte as, as what is still stuck in my head is what a ballerina should look like.  It's really something that--it's, it's still, to this day, with, with perceptions of myself when I see myself in a mirror.  And I think that--I know that I'm, I don't know how far out in this career it'll take me to really move beyond that.  It's very, it's very deeply ingrained.
Speaker 1: And this was a cutting edge theatre company in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: This is, yes, with, in ballet and our director, Jean-Pierre Bonnefoux, who was a New York City Ballet and Paris Opera Ballet star.  And our associate director is Patricia McBride, one of the world's most famous ballerinas, one of the most, most loved ballerinas in the history of the world anywhere.  I mean, if she walks down the street in New York City today, people stop her and say, oh, Ms. McBride (laughter), and, and she's just a wonderful artist.  She was the principal dancer under [George] Balanchine at New York City Ballet.  Both of them were.  And she was the principal there for thirty years at New York City Ballet.  So, first of all, the company has a fantastic provenance, you know, has a wonderful history of people with, with a wonderful legacy--with a wonderful legacy might be a better word.  And then, on top of that, Jean-Pierre's vision is to bring in artists like Alonzo King who's, who has a company in, in San Francisco [Califronia].  Of course, very much Balanchine work, we do a lot of Balanchine work with all of these, you know, very authentic people, traditions that get handed down.  We do work by Dwight Rhoden--people out of New York, people out of Spain, Nacho Duato's work, with a really--it's very important to our director that we get to do the type of work that the dancers love to do.  And, and that was very important to me.  And it's a smaller company than Houston Ballet, less than half the size, which was a good thing, because then everybody has to work really, really hard (laughter) because there's, there's less spreading out.
Story_ID: 99725
Speaker 1: Did you make history here [North Carolina Dance Theatre, now Charlotte Ballet] in some way?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was, I was the first African American Clara, I was the first black Clara which is the lead role in Salvatore Aiello's, "[The] Nutcracker".  It, so in the history of this company, I was their first black Clara, which is a central role for a--it's a, it's the sort of a jewel centerpiece for any company's repertoire.  So it's, it was a very special role for me.
Story_ID: 99726
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long did you attend Rice University [Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I, I attended Rice for six years and I, I studied part-time to accommodate with my, with my full-time schedule.  My--
Speaker 1: What was your major and how were your grades?
Speaker 2: Well, my major there was art history actually because at the time I, I was feeling that I would want to work in a museum after my career in dance.  My grades there were not the type of grades that I was accustomed to (laughter), because I, I didn't have the type of time.  I didn't have any time to dedicate to really cranking out my, my papers.  Where I really did well was in the interactions in the classroom.  And I loved--it, it was rare that I just had a lecture, a lecture class.  And I had fascinating classes like the, the search for the absolute, which was a, a religious studies class.  One of my first classes was a Russian history class and, and that tied into a lot of, of what I was doing in the studio with the tradition of ballet and, and dancing "Swan Lake" and--
Speaker 1: Do you know who the university president was at the time?
Speaker 2: The president of Rice University at the time--I can find out because I have my year-, one of my yearbooks right over there on the--
Speaker 1: No problem.
Speaker 2: But--
Story_ID: 99727
Speaker 1: When you left Houston [Texas] and Rice University, you came to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you enroll in school while you were dancing?
Speaker 2: I did.  Here in, here in Charlotte, there's a--with the, with the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, and with North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet], there's a wonderful program that the dancers can take part in if they want, where they earn, they earn the credit.  A dancer can earn credit at the university by dancing in the company, but only credits.  You don't just get general all-purpose credits, but it's fulfilling the requirements of some of the courses in the dance department.  So, for instance, if there's a, if there's a class at the university, and the students have to take daily class, learn choreography and perform--well we're doing that fourteen-fold at the company.  And so, I was able, I've been able to fulfill a number of credits that way in--through the dance department.  And also, I've taken other courses, either by summer session, or I did biology and lab and--
Speaker 1: What's your major?
Speaker 2: My major now, well, my major now is dance, but it's on its way to communications.  So, just like a traditional student, I've had a number of changes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Cool.
Story_ID: 99728
Speaker 1: And tell me about your experience with the North Carolina Ballet Theatre.
Speaker 2: Yes.  North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet] has been--it was a wonderful transition for me to make, going--I'm, I'm very grateful for my time at Houston Ballet.  I think that I was exposed to things in Houston Ballet to ballets--by things, I mean, ballets, choreographers, places in the world.  I, I toured to London [England] and to Hong Kong and Toronto [Canada], and like I mentioned, Kennedy Center and Los Angeles [California] at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion.  I got to go to some really great places and danced to some wonderful grand ballets while I was with Houston Ballet.  And coming to North Carolina Dance Theatre was shifting gears.  There was a lot more contemporary work that I got to really engage myself in.
Speaker 1: Tell me about "The Nutcracker".
Speaker 2: "The Nutcracker," "The Nutcracker" was wonderful.  It was a, it was a role that, through my entire--it, it's rare that you meet a woman, professional dancer, who's never, through the course of her training or through the course of her professional career, who has never danced a lead role in "Nutcracker".  And, and often, you're either just not thought of for the role or whatever the circumstances might be, or whether it's deliberate--I think, and for a lot of my colleagues, certainly for a lot of my African American colleagues.  So, it was certainly, has certainly been the case that it was deliberate.  But, for me, finally, I think I was, I think I was twenty-four maybe, when I, when I danced Clara for the first time.  And, and I really walked in and, and this was--I was proud of myself because I've, I had never done this before where I really just said to the director, this is a role that I think I will be excellent in, and I want to do it (laughter).  And, and was met with, oh!  And, and this was a year in advance that I really, that I did this, and that I made my wishes known about dancing this role that--
Speaker 1: It's a--
Speaker 2: --I just knew that I would love dancing.  And then, I felt, and, and that I had gained enough confidence to say, and I would do a really good job dancing it (laughter).  So, I think you need to cast me.
Speaker 1: So, it was a history-making moment?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a history-making moment in a, in a larger--in the sense that I became the first African American dancer in, in this company and in the city to dance this, that role.  But also for me, it was very important because I was really taking ownership of it, and I was taking a special type of ownership of my career also.
Speaker 1: How was it received here in the South--African American woman in this really lauded role?
Speaker 2: It--I was received very, very well.  We had a, we had a wonderful turnout for the performances.  I got excellent, I got very welcoming press coverage because of it.  And I had a lot of people approaching me and saying, oh, we saw you as Clara It was just wonderful and, and we were very happy to, to see you out there.  So I, I felt that I was received very well and very warmly, extremely well, and, and among my colleagues.  I mean, the artistic director embraced me in it.  The, the associate director embraced me in that role, and, and coached me through it very well--Jerry Comery [ph.], and, and really encouraged me to be myself in the role--Jerry Comery did.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: What were some of the difficult ballet moves you had to learn for that role?
Speaker 1: Oh, it, it's such an athletic role--the, the way that, that role is choreographed.  It's really athletic so it, it wasn't so much about--taken, taken by themselves, taken alone--all of the, all of the technical feats that I had to do were not so bad if you take them alone, but string them all together (laughter).
Speaker 2: What was--
Speaker 1: Oh, so there were, there was a series, for instance, a series of, of Fouette turns.  I can't remember how many it was.  It may have been, maybe just sixteen, not even thirteen, but at the end of the coda, at the end of the Grand Pas de Deux.  So, and in this version of "Nutcracker", the Grand Pas de Deux is not just danced by the Sugar Plum Fairy and the Prince, but Clara dances a solo.  She dances the extended version, length version of the solo.  Then she comes back in the coda and she's still dancing, and she's been dancing for the entire ballet by the way.  She does a variation of the--in the first, in the first act, she does a couple of variations in the first act, complete with pirouettes and jumping.  And she's in the snow, in the snow scene.  She does the Snow Pas de Deux which is a beautiful Pas de Deux in the, in the Kingdom of Snow and which typ-, which typically, which sometimes is danced by a, another dancer.  So, really, this Clara role was, was like the Snow Queen and the Sugar Plum Fairy and Clara all wrapped up into one role.  I was exhausted.  I was taking all sorts of, you know, energy shakes from GNC to supplement my diet 'cause I couldn't possibly eat enough to, to keep, to get all of the energy that I was needing to sustain me.
Story_ID: 99729
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So that was a big highlight in your career?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was, it was great.
Speaker 2: Other highlights--was that the biggest, or were there other highlights here in North Carolina and Charlotte?
Speaker 1: To here in, in Charlotte, I would have to--I think, hands down, dancing the role of Tinker Bell and having it created on me in, in "Peter Pan" in Jean-Pierre [Bonnefoux]'s "Peter Pan" was--it was like the cherry on top of an ice cream sundae (laughter).  It was fantastic because I--the--all of the performance, all of the performance energy that I had been, that I, that I found in myself, you know, when I was really little doing the jazz le pazz, I could put all of that into this role.  I could put, I could create this character to be the way that I wanted her to be.  And she was very--this Tinker Bell that, that I did--got to be really cheeky.  She was jealous, she's very jealous of Wendy, and she was no shrinking violet (laughter).  She played tricks on Wendy.  She was trying to get her put out, but in a very--but she had attitude, too (laughter).  I could put as much attitude into it.  I could really shape it to be what I wanted to be, and then I could just take it and run.  I could really--and it was wonderful dancing to great wonderful--I had a lot of very intricate petit allegro or very small steps to do, you know, small quick steps to do here and there.  And then at other times, I would just get to leap and jump, and then wham with my, with my hands on my hips and, and thrown a little attitude wherever I, wherever I wanted to throw it--attitude, you know, oozing out of my ear.  It was just so much fun.
Story_ID: 99730
Speaker 1: Was it revolutionary for a woman of color to take on that role as well?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it was--some, at some point, it's almost like ever, every role that a woman of color gets to have on the stage is, is revolutionary.  I, I mean, when it's ballet, when you're speaking of ballet because it's just--it doesn't happen very often.  So, in terms of that, probably it what--there, I don't know.  I wasn't aware of it as much that, like with, with "[The] Nutcracker", there are, there are these really--since it's such a, a popular ballet that it's done so often.  It's done every year by almost every ballet company on the face of the earth.  There are, there are ideas of, of what Clara should look like, of what all of these people should look like.  And--
Speaker 1: What is the ideal?
Speaker 2: Well, a very pale-skinned and pretty blond hair, blue eyes, or maybe brunette hair, with long hair, you know, trailing down in the back.  I--that was another one of the things that you know.  My, my hair isn't, isn't going to do the long ringlets, you know, down to the bottom of my back.  So I, I did my hair the way that I thought that a, a black girl at the, a little black girl at the turn of the century would have her hair.
Speaker 1: How was that?
Speaker 2: And I had the, the top up in a little, in a little bun.  And then, I had short ringlets close to my head across the back.  And I felt like--well, this is, this is, this is a black girl who's Clara (laughter).  It's the way I felt about it.  And, and a dancer, larger than that, you know, more importantly, a, a dancer who's dancing Clara but, but, of course, she--it--of course, it's within the realm of possibility that she could have chocolate skin and her hair would probably look like this.
Speaker 1: And what about your family members within the performance, within the play of "The Nutcracker"?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were they white or black or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were white (laughter) which is, which, for the way that--and different people had different perspectives on the way that, that this should be done in, in ballets or in opera, but, particularly in dance.  I, I think that you're looking at dancers and really, really, that's what the way that she want to be, that's the way that a dancer wants to be seen.  So, and I, I draw a parallel to a lot of roles in Hollywood--how just because it's not written, just because a role isn't written for a woman of color or a man of color, then they're like, oh, we can't--you--it would throw it, it would be a different character.  It, it's not plaus-, it's all of a sudden, not plausible if, if this dancer is, is not, is of a person of color.  And why would that be the case, why would that be the case?  And so, this is--so Clara is a, is a little girl, and she and her family is, her family doesn't look, doesn't have the same shade of skin that she has.  But she, but really, in a bigger picture, she's a dancer, and the rest of them are a dancer, too, because sometimes that can be used as an excuse, too.  I've heard that used as an excuse in the past where with--oh, well, I would cast you in that role, but we don't have any black dancers to play your dad or we don't have any (laughter).  I'm not (laughter)--who's it, what's the problem here?  So, that's another form of--and I, and I don't ever want to make the people who make these types of decisions seem evil.  I mean, even today, like I draw, I keep drawing this parallel to Hollywood.  I, I see it more of a blinders issue.  I see it as an issue of these people.  Some people are--they're looking for something in particular, and they're so attached to that one vision.  And because of the way that, that our society is, and/or even because of the way that certain parts of the dance world are, many parts of the dance world are, we want--we're holding tight to a certain aesthetic where it's holding tight to a different, to a certain way that when my story is told, it has to look exactly like this.
Speaker 1: Have you--the black aesthetic, which has been popular in the literary arts, particularly in, you know, post-black arts movement, you know, really after the '70s [1970s], really be '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s] to that, start becoming popular in universities, did you get a sense that the black aesthetic was something recognized in the world of ballet where there was something unique about a black form of ballet?
Speaker 2: Well, with ballet, it, it wasn't something that I, that is, was very recognized very broadly outside of Dance Theatre of Harlem with their gorgeous "Creole Giselle" production in the "Creole Giselle" or a, or where I grew up which was, which was a natural, you know, following of, of Dance Theatre of Harlem.  Outside from there which is, outside from there, it's very hard because all of a sudden--I, I would find that my shape that would take me years and years to, to love and appreciate for how it echoes this black aesthetic that was be-, was becoming, you know, at like you discussed--becoming to be celebrated in other parts of our culture, but certainly not in ballet and I, I think still not in ballet.
Story_ID: 99731
Speaker 1: Why did you decide or why didn't you decide to go to New York City and Harlem?
Speaker 2: Right.  Because I felt like, I felt like, that's not the company for me.  I felt like, I felt like, I should be able to choose the company I want to go to because of the, because of the reasons that other dancers choose their companies, because I feel that this rep-, repertoire suits me well.  Or I feel like this city suits me well.  And I felt, and that was something that came, that's something that came to be a, a kind of sensitive point.  It's a very, very good question because it became to be a very sensitive point for, for black dancers, female black dance--ballet dancers in the United States because, because many people would ask us either--well, why aren't you--so you're going to go Alvin Ailey Company, right?  And we would have to explain, well, Alvin Ailey Company is a wonderful, world class top-notch company, but that's not a ballet company, which is what I do, or you're going to go to Dance Theatre of Harlem, right?  And then, it's--well, why, why is that hap-, why does that need to be the natural progress-, progression to me?  Why does it need to be that one size fits all for black ballerinas or for everybody else that's not the case?
Story_ID: 99732
Speaker 1: How long did you spend with the North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet]?
Speaker 2: Six years--oops, five, six, wow.
Speaker 1: From what year to what year?
Speaker 2: From 2002 to present, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And any other high points in that time?  Did you do anything else?  You were, I know, at UNC [University of North Carolina at] Charlotte at the time.
Speaker 2: Right, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Any other big moments?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A big moment that didn't happen here but, but grew out of what I was doing here was being featured as a Grand Marshal in the Bud Billiken Parade in Chicago [Illinois].  That was a huge deal for me.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: And that was in 2005.  That was the 2005 Bud Billiken Parade, and that came to be about from a long-time supporter and I'm so grateful and amazed that I can call this man a supporter.  And this is at the Chicago Defender, Mr. Earl Calloway [HM], who's the, the arts and entertainment editor.  And he's a Chicago legend, a living Chicago legend, and he, he started following me when I was dancing with Bryant Ballet, you know, when I was probably about fourteen--thirteen, fourteen years old.  And, and he, he, and I made sure to stay in touch with him.  And he, he was always interested to hear what I was doing and he reported on what I was doing in Houston [Texas], on my performance career in Houston.  He made wonderful observations about my career and what I was doing here in Charlotte.  And he appointed me to this Grand Marshal, that the parade with you.  A million people were lining the streets in my hometown in Chicago.  And that's, that's very special to some, to, to me, and I think to anybody to be welcomed back home, back home that way, and to be in a parade.  And I'll tell you, being in a parade is everything it's cracked up to be (laughter) and more.  It's really cool.  I highly recommend it for everybody (laughter) 'cause it was really super.  And to get to see, to get to see so many people along the route of the parade and wave them, and wave at them, and to hear, particularly the little girls say, she's a ballerina, she's a ballerina.  And a lot of adults, too, saying, all right, all right 'cause, because without even knowing, I think, they knew.  Without even, without even having to hear my story, they knew--you're doing something that there.  Maybe there is some--there were probably some walls.  There were probably some hurdles there.
Story_ID: 99733
Speaker 1: Tell me about your retirement.
Speaker 2: Well, first, I'll say that leading up to this retirement or transition maybe 'cause goodness knows, I'll need to be working for a long (laughter), a lot longer, and I want to.  But, I, I had a hip surgery, I needed a hip surgery about a year ago to correct an injury that I got while dancing.  And not only that, but not only that injury, but there have been a lot of other injuries that I've had over the course of my career, even dating back from when I saw--I think I saw my first orthopedist when I was in fifth grade.  And I think it was a, a knee injury that brought me to that orthopedist who I would see, you know, thirteen years later with a, with a different injury in my ankle.  But I, I felt, I felt, I, I began to, to feel increasingly and it, and it started as a trickle until it turned into a, you know, an ocean--this feeling that I have other interests outside of dance and outside of dancing and, and dance that I really would love to pursue.  And I'm, I'm excited about those things and I want to take care of my body.  I'm twenty-nine years old and I've had hip surgery (laughter) and it's not, and it's doing so well, it's doing so well, better than I thought I would recover.  But at the same time, it's still there.  I mean, the, the issue is still there and I do, I want to lead an active life.  Hopefully, I'll be blessed with many more years of life.  And, and I'd like to avoid, I'd like to make those healthy years.  And a dialogue that I had to, that I started between myself and my body many years ago to, to--and this is something that I had to do to cope with, with a poor body image that I had of myself.  I had, I had to start, I started this dialogue with my body.  And, and my body has been with me, you know, when I stopped and realized--this body that I've, that I'm blessed to have, has stuck with me through all the times that I have felt hatred toward it; all the times I've felt that it was holding me back in, in my career in doing what I loved to do; all the times that I felt like I wasn't shaped the right way, or I was too thick here or, or too curvy there.  I had--or didn't curve enough in, in certain places.  The body was still there.  And it kept coming back after I kept beating it up, day after day after day.  And I felt like my body yelled at me one day, one day.  This is back when I was having a lot of negative feelings about it and I said, you know, I can leave you (laughter), I can, you know, all of this ability that you have--don't take it for granted 'cause I sure can--that, that sure can come to an end (laughter).  It sure can, and, sister, it will.  So, and, but it was a real awakening for me, even though I had, had injuries before.  And you know, you, you get into the habit of being so disciplined, just push, push, push, push, push.  Pain, it, pain doesn't, isn't receptive in, in your brain the, the way that it is for some other people.  I think athletes and, particularly dancers, are this way, that you, you learn to just, just turn it off, and work through it.  Pain is an indicator but, it's an indi-, an indicator of what?  Until you have to--I mean, I, with my hip injury, I did not stop dancing until my leg went numb.  The pain was so bad that it, it stopped being pain, and it went to numbness.  And that's, and then I figured, well, it's dangerous, it's actually dangerous for me to dance.
Story_ID: 99734
Speaker 1: Did you have a sort of final performance, even though it's not really a final, but what was your big moment?
Speaker 2: Well, it was not such a big moment (laughter).  But I had, I had my last performance and performed in a wonderful ballet that was created on, that I was in the original cast of, created by Alonzo King, who is a, a wonderful choreographer, and one of those who's pushing the envelope and pushing the art form to be what it is today.  And I performed the role of it, I performed before in that ballet.  And, and it was, it was a wonderful thing because my family was there.  And they, they--I could feel it coming on in the weeks beforehand.  And I wouldn't talk about it very much because I knew that it was so big.  And I didn't want to get--it, it was difficult for me to deal with, leading up to it.  It was certainly a decision that I wanted to make, but I, you know, I wasn't, I hadn't cried about it.  I hadn't let a tear flow about it or anything.  It was just, okay, this has been such a, you know, I want to make this transition.  I have things to do.  Okay, the last performance will be on this date, buy your ticket, so you'll be out here, you know, your, your airplane tickets.  But as the numbers grew, the number of, of people from my family who said, oh, yeah, I'll be there, oh, yeah, I'll travel.  I'm getting my plane ticket.  I'll be there, I'll be there.
Speaker 1: Who was there?
Speaker 2: My, of course, my, my mother [Connie Van Brunt] and my father [Robert F. McMillan, Jr.].  My sister [Marcia McMillan] was there; my step-dad [Michael Samachson] was there; my, my--every auntie that I have was there; my, my father's sister and, and her husband; my, my uncle Lee was there; my, everyone on my, my mother's side; let's see, a few of my cousins; my aunt and uncle on my mother's side; a, a friend of my cousin's; people--
Speaker 1: So, how did it go?
Speaker 2: It went, you know what--I don't really even know because at, in that performance, I was so--the emotion on the inside was so intense that I thought I was going to lose my lunch on the stage (laughter), to be honest with you.  And I, I just knew--leading up to it, I didn't know how I was supposed to be feeling.  I thought, this is a really big deal for me.  I wonder when it's going to hit me--what's actually happening.  And it wasn't until I was actually in costume and, and actually doing it, but I, you know, I couldn't breathe (laughter).  It, it was difficult.  It was tough.  I just wanted to get through it, so I don't know how it went.  Hopefully, it went well, but it was such a special night.  And I took my bow.  And the, and my colleagues threw me in front of them to take a special bow.  And, and I was presented with flowers by Jean-Pierre [Bonnefoux].  And, and the tears just started falling.  And all I could think was saying to my family how much I loved them.  I said, I love you--you've supported me.  You've bought my pointe shoes.  You've listened to me cry.  And I love you and you're all here.  And it was, it was astounding.  It was, it was huge.  I don't have words for how, how touched I was just that they showed up.
Story_ID: 99735
Speaker 1: When was your final performance?
Speaker 2: It was Saturday, May 19th at 7 p.m., 2007.
Speaker 1: And what was your final role?
Speaker 2: It was, it was dancing Alonzo King's ballet, "Salt."  And so, there's just a, there aren't, there aren't very many specific roles.  It's a, it's a, but it's a, it's a beautiful ballet.  It's a wonderful one to get to bring your professional performance career to a close on.
Speaker 1: Did you have that sense of the weight of your career at that point?  Did you have flashes of moments with the Soviet-American Dance Company, all that stuff?
Speaker 2: I certainly felt it all, yeah.  I felt how, I felt how I've had, I've been very fortunate.  I, I--to me, it's been a distinguished career.  I've, I've not been named a principal dancer of a company.  I've not, you know, I've, I've not advanced through the ranks of any company, but I've danced some very distinguished roles.  And, to me, I feel I've done some very important things, important to me, which, you know, is--I think is what counts.  And very interestingly, just a few weeks before my retirement performance, a, an article came out in the New York Times about how few black ballerinas we have in the world, in the United States.  It's such an interesting time for this to come out because it, it served as, as one, as a bookend to my career.  And in 1997, there was another large article in the New York Times by Jennifer Dunning about the, the struggle for, for black women--in particular, in ballet.  And there was an informal poll that the "New York Times" took at that time of the top, of the ten largest ballet companies in the United States, and excluded the Dance Theatre of Harlem, for the purpose of this poll.  And of those ten companies, there were about 573 dancers, and 23 of them were black.  And Ayisha McMillan was one of those 23, and the number of those who were black women--even fewer.  And I, that was huge for me to realize that in 1997, that, that I, with-, without Ayisha Nell McMillan, that number would be 22.  And 23, out of like 570 something, or 590 something is, is really significant and not--I mean, in, it, that was when I got, that I really got it then back in 1997.  And I was very grateful for another article to come out again in, in 2007, a decade later.
Story_ID: 99736
Speaker 1: What gave you the inspiration to do this?  I know that the numbers are few.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So, from this point in your career, looking back, what were the great moments for you personally, and who were the great ballerinas of inspiration?
Speaker 2: Great ballerinas of inspiration have been Lauren Anderson, have been Nina Ananiashvili, Janet Collins, about whom I, I've only read, and I've seen photos.  But that was a big deal for me to see her portrait in "I Dream A World", and to have--we had that book when I was growing up, and to read about, to read about when I was a little girl--how Janet Collins was the first black ballerina to perform on the stage of the Metropolitan Opera House--how, how very, very notable, you know, names in the ballet world said to her when she was coming out, you know, I would love to have you in my ballet.  But I would have to put makeup all over you and make you white, and you wouldn't like now, would you?  That was huge.  I don't, I don't think that those things--I don't know how much those things spurred me on.  I think that what spurred me on was my love for what I was doing, and so that the work that went into it--there, there was no, there was no choice for me.  I remember my mom [Connie Van Brunt], my mom said that she actually got scared to hear me say this at, at an early age.  When I said, well, but if I don't dance, mom, what will I do?  She said, you were, you were eleven when you told me that (laughter).  And, and I don't think that, I don't think that I thought that there was nothing else that I could do because, remember at that point, I still, you know, believed I was going to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And, and I needed to take--get a 100 on my spelling test.  There--so it wasn't that there wasn't anything else that I could do.  But it was--no, this is what I have to do, this is what I have--there was, so some people say, oh, well, that must have been a difficult decision for you to make to, to turn down the, the universities that you did or, or to make the decision to dance full-time instead of pursuing your, your scholastic career which you've been doing very well in.  And my response to that was always, decision?  (Laughter).  No, it, it was just something that was so organic.  It was so innate in me, and I'm blessed that I got to follow it.
Story_ID: 99737
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The Bolshoi [Ballet]--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --what was that?
Speaker 2: Ohh, what was that to me?  It was tradition, it was the tradition that, wow, embraced me (laughter).  So, I think that gave me a lot of--I think it, it took me a little while to really realize it.  And I think I, I didn't--I wasn't able to articulate it in my mind until I had quite a bit of hindsight on it, but that Asaf Messerer stayed in my home and trained me, and saw promise in me as a dancer from an early age, and that he was the director of the Bolshoi Ballet Company.  The Bolshoi Ballet Company, which is--in, in ballet that, that's, there's, there's no--I mean, that's the, that's the touchstone, that's a standard.  I mean, there's the Bolshoi, there's the Kirov [Ballet, now the Mariinsky Ballet].  There, there, then, you know, (unclear) there's the Ballet Russes and, but I mean this is, this is real and this is (laughter)--there's no, like questioning those credentials and that, that faith, type of faith was placed in me so early on, gave me a lot of strength in the face of, of those who would say that I should not try to be a ballet dancer, that I--if I want to dance, you know, you got that performance thing on going on.  Go to Broadway.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, I know your--
Speaker 2: I was told that--
Speaker 1: Hmm--
Speaker 2: --I was told that.
Speaker 1: To go to Broadway?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The ballet isn't my cup of tea.  And I really--if I wanted to get any, if I wanted any sort, sort of success as a dancer--that it, it would be in Broadway, and that it wouldn't be in ballet.
Story_ID: 99738
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother [Connie Van Brunt].  I know she remarried and there was an interesting twist there.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean it--very interesting because these years when I was at the, at the Academy of Movement and Music in Oak Park [Illinois], there was a woman there who would, who is quite involved there named Dorothy Samachson.  Dorothy Samachson was not only involved there.  I mean, we were fortunate to have her involved there as, you know, I think she was on the board of advisors perhaps.  And she would come to see MOMENTA perform and, but she, she was a musician herself, a pianist, who would played for, for ballet classes, and was familiar with dance that way, but also, she's a dance and art historian and writer.  And, and so, she sort of took me under her wing, and my sister [Marcia McMillan], too.  She became my first mentor, and she took me to the ballet.  We would go, or my mother would, would drive us all, and, and would drive Mrs. Samachson and myself.  And we, we went to see American Ballet Theatre perform "Swan Lake" when they came to Chicago [Illinois].  We came a lot, we saw a lot of things at the Lyric Opera House.  And, and she would, she would--I would always get to sit next to her.  And she would lean us over and tell me, she would lean over, and whisper things to me about the ballet.  She would point out, you know, this is, or see this--is that the prince there and oh, see this role is very important.  And so, she--I had this, I had this running commentary of, of wonderful dance history.  But then, also she would say things like, ugh, that's just horrible--I can't believe they made that decision (laughter).  You know, I can't believe that American Ballet Theatre is using, you know, shooting ducks as swans, you know, and (laughter) she would say like, you know, outrageous things, too.  It was absolutely fantastic.
Speaker 1: So, years later, then--
Speaker 2: Years later, it turned, years later, and it wasn't until the years later, that my mother was now at this point, long-time divorced.  And, and her son had been long-time divorced--her son, Michael, met at a, and, and actually she, Mrs. Samachson, introduced them, and had them to a Thanksgiving dinner together.  And but it wasn't until after Mrs. Samachson passed away that my mother and Michael Samachson ended up getting to know one another better.  And the rest is his sister, you know--the son of this woman, who was so special to me growing up, and is, is now my step-dad.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And she passed away in 2003?
Speaker 2: No, she passed away earlier than that.  She passed away probably in 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 99739
Speaker 1: What are you doing now?
Speaker 2: Now, I am in charge of patron relations for North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet].  And this is a part of a wonderful transition that I have from my performance career into a career in marketing.  And I enjoy marketing, especially because I enjoy communicating with others.  And, and I see marketing as a wonderful opportunity to be able to share my enthusiasm, my enthusiasm about something with others.  I particularly am interested in mobilizing others.  And at church, I've been, I've been very involved in the Luth-, I'm still a Lutheran (laughter).  And so, I, I've reached back to my Lutheran roots from, from girlhood.  And, and I've had such wond-, wonderful opportunities through church to work in advocacy.  And I think really, even before I, I thought that I would want to go into marketing, I started with advocacy.  And I found out how, by learning how much can be done by getting the word out, by sharing, by sharing your message, by, by hollering to people--hey, this is what's happening.  You can do this--join us, join us, and that's--people doing that changed the world.
Speaker 1: And you're working for--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm working for North Carolina Dance Theatre, yes.  I'm on their marketing team.
Story_ID: 99740
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That is such a good question.  I would love for my legacy to be, to be, to that, I approached, that I approached my life with humor (laughter), and with a bit of tenacity, and that I, I pursued what I loved, and that, hopefully, hopefully, along the way, I've inspired some other people to do the same because that's, that's the way I believed what, what needs to be happen, what needs to happen, that's going to happen.  And that it's borne, and that it needs to be borne out of love, that it needs to be borne out of love--love for, for others, love for God, and great, and being grateful for what you have.  And if I could leave and, and if my legacy could be anything remote to that, I'd be really, really happy (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 99741
Speaker 1: And, finally, is there a vision you have for black women in the world of ballet in the future?
Speaker 2: There is.  I think that, I think that perhaps part of my transition, and part of my retirement from dance, is at least, at this point, is having me separating myself from, from that vision.  But I really--I see black women in tutus and for it not to be a novelty.  I see black women and their shape.  I see their, the curve of their backs, and the shape of their legs to be widely known as beautiful and classical--not necessarily exotic, not exoticized, but beautiful, just, just beautiful, not uggh, beautiful, but it to be what it is, and, and for it not to, not to, not to detract from anyone else's on the stage, not to detract from anyone with the European, with the European aesthetic.  But I would--my dream is to see more of us there in ballet because I think more of us would love it if, if we knew that it was something that, that would be welcoming to us.  And I just want to see us everywhere.
Story_ID: 99742
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 2: All right.  This is me teaching dance class at the Cycle Wiz Factory of Learning.  It's a non-profit organization in Cabrini Green in Chicago [Illinois].  Some of those students there--I have had since they were three years old.  And we, we did dance class, a general dance class and creative movement in ballet.  That was in the year, probably about 2004.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is me and my dad, Robert F. McMillan, Jr. after a performance that I did at Sadler's Wells Theatre in London [England].  And my dad and my aunt traveled out to London to see me perform with Houston Ballet.  That would have been in the year 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay, great.
Speaker 2: That is me with my mom, Connie Van Brunt.  We are at a reception following my graduation performance from the Houston Ballet Academy.  I was awarded the Michael Losman [ph.] Award for artistic excellence.  That is in the year 1996 in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This photo is of me with Jean-Pierre Bonnefoux and Patricia McBride who are currently artistic director and associate artistic director of North Carolina Dance Theatre [now Charlotte Ballet].  They're both also former stars of New York City Ballet under George Balanchine.  This is me in costume for George Balanchine's ballet, "Rubies," a ballet which both of them danced, performed under George Balanchine.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I'm sorry.  I, I need to make you do that again.  I didn't know that wasn't rolling.
Speaker 2: Sure, no problem.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me with Ben Stevenson.  Ben, the artistic director of Houston Ballet, and I--we are on stage before I'm performing the ballet, "Etudes."  And this would have been in the year, perhaps 1999 or 2000 (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, right, ready.
Speaker 2: This photo is one of me with Barack, Senator, Senator Barack Obama [HM], and Carol Moseley-Braun [HM], former Senator Carol Moseley Braun and former presidential candidate.  And we are posing before we participate in the 2005 Annual Bud Billiken Parade.  This was the 76th Annual Bud Billiken Parade in Chicago, Illinois.  And this is where I was being honored with a, with an appointment to be Grand Marshal of the parade.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And the--no, '93 [1993] (unclear) in Texas.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And ready.
Speaker 2: This is me standing with Lauren Anderson. Lauren Anderson was principal dancer of Houston Ballet at the time.  And this is me at my--following my graduation performance from the Houston Ballet Academy.  And I was about to join the Houston Ballet Company as the third African American woman to join that company.  Lauren Anderson was the second.  And that was in 1996.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum, and ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my family, my, on my maternal side.  And we are in San Diego, California celebrating my sister [Marcia McMillan]'s 17th birthday.  And my grandparents--well, not their anniversary, but actually, this was a celebration given in honor of them.  And this was in 1996.  Girls had fell off, too.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a photograph of, of me at about age two or three.  So, this is 1980 or 1981 in Oak Park, Illinois, performing in the Academy of Movement and Music's Annual Recital.  And I am a flower--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --for your information.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, but what part did you play?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: This is me and my sister, Marcia, in 1989, after we've both performed in, in a recital in Oak Park, Illinois.  We performed "Peter Pan" and I have danced the role of "Tinker Bell"--no, "Tiger Lily" (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: "Tiger Lily", '83 [1983] or '84 [1984], okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: This photo is from 1983 or 1984.  It's me with my sister, Marcy [ph.], Marcia, in our home, in the home that we grew up in, in Oak Park, Illinois.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my maternal grandmother's parents.  This is Peter Milton and Nellie Beams Milton.  They are photographed here in Oklahoma Indi-- Indian Territory, probably Garvin Indian Territory, before the turn of the--before 1907, so perhaps around the turn of, right around the turn of the century.
Speaker 1: 'Cause what happened in 1907?
Speaker 2: Oh, because in 1907, Oklahoma became a state.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is me performing in Charlotte, North Carolina.  I am performing the role of Butterfly in George Balanchine's ballet, "A Midsummer Night's Dream".  I'm performing with North Carolina Dance Theatre.  The photo credit goes to Christopher Record for the "Charlotte Observer".
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-hum, and ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me and my long-time teacher, Homer Hans Bryant.  This is a photo taken from the Pas de Deux that he choreographed, Interlude Pas de Deux.  This was from the year 1992.
