Story_ID: 643752
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I--we're gonna start out by slating the interview. I'd like to have you first start out by stating and spelling your name?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Vincent Chancey, Vincent, V-I-N-C-E-N-T, Chancey, C-H-A-N-C-E-Y.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: I'd like to have you give your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 4, 1950.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 22nd, 2013.
Speaker 1: Our location?
Speaker 2: This is my apartment in Tribeca, New York in Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician.
Story_ID: 643753
Speaker 1: And we ask five People magazine-ish questions, so short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food (laughter), I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: You, don't, you don't need to worry, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Italy.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Phrase, I'm at a loss there as well.
Speaker 1: You don't have to worry, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 643754
Speaker 1: So I'd like to start out by asking you about your family background.  Now, I know you were raised in foster care, but can we talk about what you know of your, your background and we can take, however you want to do it, you want to do mother, father, however you want to handle it?
Speaker 2: Well you know, coming from a foster home my, I was separated from my mother at three and my father--
Speaker 1: Do you know your birth mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I, I knew her you know, even though I was separated from her--we, we stayed, my brothers and sisters and I stayed in contact with her.
Speaker 1: Would you give her name?
Speaker 2: Frances Watson [Frances Page Watson], yeah we stayed in touch with her and the family, the, the siblings had all lost touch with my father until I was about fourteen or fifteen I think and we found him living in Oklahoma, which is where he was from.  He was from a small town south of Tulsa [Oklahoma] and then he--when he left my mother he went back to Tulsa.
Speaker 1: So, can you give his name too?
Speaker 2: Cleo Chancey, well Cleo was shortened.  His name was Cleopatrick Chancey and he used Antonio.  All of his friends called him Antonio.    I think he was a bit you know, embarrassed about being call Cleopatrick, (laughter) which I think is an incredible name.  I, I keep saying I'm going to name one of my bands Cleopatrick, but, yeah, his name was Cleopatrick, but he went by Tony or Antonio often.
Speaker 1: So is Cleo [Chancey's sister, HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] named after him?
Speaker 2: Yes, he is, she is.
Speaker 1: Your, okay, your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of my, one of my brothers' middle name is also Cleo.
Speaker 1: So, where, so how much do you know about your, each of your parents, your mother, can you talk a little bit about her, your father?
Speaker 2: Well, my father I didn't really know much at all you know.  I told you I first met him when I was about fifteen and he--I was in Chicago [Illinois].  He came to Chicago and he was visiting some other relatives of his in Chicago, so I was just told that he was there, so my two brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] and I went to this house and there were like ten or twelve people there and one of them was my father, so we just said, you know, "Hello," in very awkward ways, you know, being around him since we didn't know him and we were only there about an hour, hour and a half and that was my only time seeing him until I was thirty years old and I, I went to Oklahoma to see him when I was thirty and he died shortly after.
Speaker 1: So you had more contact with him than your other siblings?
Speaker 2: No, my other siblings, my sister actually, not Cleo, but my other sister [Gladys Chancey Lytle] found him in Oklahoma and actually got a job, she was working for the telephone company or something and she had a, a job placement in Tulsa so she went there and stayed with him for the last eight or ten years of his life, became close to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother had six kids in seven years and two miscarriages by my father, and when my father left her I think she was a bit overwhelmed and she had a nervous breakdown, which is why we were all put into foster care, so I did see her from time to time I would visit her, we would visit her in the hospitals, you know and then when she was home we would visit her at home and she remarried and had two more children [Adrienne Watson and Margaret Smith Watson], so I would see her with the other two children as well.
Speaker 1: So how old were you--where are you in the birth order?
Speaker 2: I was the youngest of the six siblings (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were, okay.
Story_ID: 643755
Speaker 1: What memory do you have because you would have been pretty young, right?
Speaker 2: What memory do I have of what?
Speaker 1: Of, of when you got put in a foster home?  You would have been really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, I--it's funny because my memory starts the night that I was taken out of my mother's [Frances Page Watson] house and taken to the foster home, that's when my memory starts.  I can remember the car, the person who drove us, everything, but that's--
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I was three years old then.  Well, it was a, a rainy night in Chicago [Illinois], I guess this was 1953 and the six of us were all picked up by this man and driven to, you know, these peoples' house who said that they were going to be our foster parents and it turned out that the woman [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] was actually a cousin of mine because her mother and my mother's mother [Margaret DePrad Page] were sisters, so she was a distant cousin; so she took all six of us in and she stayed in a basement apartment in Chicago, on the West Side of Chicago at that time and she had two children.  She didn't have any place for us to stay so we, all six of us, slept on the floor and within the year she had moved out of the house and moved to another place down the street because I think she was able to make money for six foster kids, that was her livelihood really and her husband [Claudell Agins] worked for the naval ordnance plant in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So when you say you remember, I would like you to describe what it was, what you remember of that night?
Speaker 2: Well, just you know, the confusion of being misplaced like this, I didn't really understand why I was being taken you know, from where I was, but then like I said, that's the beginning of my memory, so even though there was some confusion there, I, I can't recollect you know, what happened before then, but I remember going into this basement apartment and seeing my, who was to become my foster father sitting in the chair and, and my two brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] and I, we looked at each other and we said, "He doesn't have a neck," you know because he was a very short man and (laughter) so, so you know, that's the first thing that I remember, going into, into this house where this man didn't have a neck and you know, we sat down and they told us this would be our home and that was it from there on.
Story_ID: 643756
Speaker 1: So are you saying, (cough) excuse me--was it six plus two?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, they had two kids of their own when we came in and later--five years later--three years later they had another daughter [Sharon Agins Miller].
Speaker 1: So that's nine kids?
Speaker 2: Nine kids, exactly.
Speaker 1: So how was--what, what was the situation you were put in there and can you sort of describe growing up then?
Speaker 2: Well it was a little awkward because they really took care of their own three kids, they were their kids and we were always you know, forced to believe that we were outsiders in the house and her husband [Claudell Agins] never learned my two brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] and I, our names like, who was which, so he you know, when he would call us he would always call, call us by the wrong name.  He never knew who we were and you know, he would show us his own son [Stephen D. Agins] because they had a son and a daughter [Judy Agins Ojo] at the time we came and then another daughter who was born later, so his son and daughter were always shown you know, preferential treatment to us, so you know, we always felt kind of out of place you know, knowing that we, we felt like we didn't belong there.
Speaker 1: So you were moved as a unit though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were.
Speaker 1: --so was, did that help that you were moved as a unit?
Speaker 2: It did you know, to a degree.  We, but I think everybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The oldest was--
Speaker 2: Was Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson].
Speaker 1: So she, she was (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was the oldest and I was the youngest-
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --of the six and then after her were two twin sisters [Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] and then my, my two brothers and then I was the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay so, wait, okay, but you--only one set of twins?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one set of twins, yeah.
Speaker 1: One set of twins.
Speaker 2: One set.
Speaker 1: So, can you just describe--so you're the youngest, so you're the youngest of all the whole group?
Speaker 2: Right. At that point, right--
Speaker 1: At that point until the--what, when the ninth one comes in--they're younger than you?
Speaker 2: Right, three years younger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, they were?
Speaker 2: --six years younger.
Speaker 1: Six years younger okay.
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six years. What was the growing up like then, I mean, because I think even if you're--so where are you sort of finding your place, that's what I'm saying because I mean you're three, what, and you know, so it's two years before you go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, all my other siblings were in school because my next brother older than me, he was two years older, so he had started school right around that time, so I would just go places with my foster mother [Eleanor Agins], wherever she went I would be there or be at home you know, with her and it wasn't very comfortable.  She was an abusive woman you know, so that part of it wasn't so nice, so just had to live (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then, I mean, that's what I think Cleo's talked about from--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --just removed one bad situation to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now maybe not even a bad sit- but one situation to another.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 643757
Speaker 1: When you start going to school where do you go to school?
Speaker 2: We were living on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] then.  I think I went to a school called Emerson [ph.], was the school that I first went to.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And do you remember social workers coming around much?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah, I, I guess maybe every, I don't know how often, three or four months or six months, but at, at least six, no, yeah, at least six months or maybe more, every--two or three times a year.  Yeah, one would come and when, when the social worker would come we would have to you know, dress in our finest and, and my foster mother [Eleanor Agins] all, even though she was always yelling and screaming and being abusive when, when the social worker came she was always her most nice, amicable self and all of the people in, in you know, who were the social workers all thought that she was the, the most, you know, wonderful woman to have first of all, taken on six children and she had such a sweet disposition and as soon as the door would close behind them the yelling would start and the whippings and everything--so it was, it was a very abusive situation.
Speaker 1: So this is why I have a question about, because who of your--so there's Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson], give me the names of the six?
Speaker 2: The six, Cleo and then there is Bert [Gladys Chancey Lytle] and Joyce [Joyce Chancey Davis], who were the next, the twins, and then my brother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bert and then Joyce?
Speaker 2: Well, they were twins--
Speaker 1: Bert--okay.
Speaker 2: --and then Ronald [Ronald Chancey] was two years younger than the twins and Michael [Michael Chancey] was one year younger than Ronald and then I was two years younger than Michael.
Speaker 1: But how do the--you, I mean you have done well and Cleo has, I don't know about the other siblings, but how, how, how is--that's what I'm saying, how are you keeping it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How am I keeping it?
Speaker 1: --keeping it together?  That's all I'm saying because?
Speaker 2: As children--
Speaker 1: Right, as children?
Speaker 2: --at that time--
Speaker 1: That's what I'm trying to understand?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I don't know, I mean we, we always seemed to be driven and you know, with me you know, I knew that I was in that situation that I couldn't stand.  I hated being there, so my life became driven by, one day I'm going to leave this mad woman and I'm going to go off and you know, so I just have to like, hold tight and keep it together until that day.  Well, I can't say that it started when I was three years old, but maybe about the age of eleven or twelve I knew that, you know, that I just had to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But even when you were three--because I would think that maybe she would have bonded with you a little bit more, you know, as--
Speaker 2: Being the youngest--
Speaker 1: --being the youngest and, and that you were, you know, I mean you were-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably she did in a way, but you know also I was subject to, to more whippings too because I was the youngest, you know, and then later when her child [Sharon Agins Miller] was born she thought that I was severely jealous of her, of her child, which I wasn't at all.  I was just so glad that there was somebody else to occupy her attention so I could do what I, you know, whatever I did at that time, you know, go to school or--but she didn't really allow us to have friends outside of the home so much.  She was very restrictive in a lot of different areas.
Story_ID: 643758
Speaker 1: Is anyone knowing--so what was the household like, that's what I'm trying to understand?  I know there's a lot of yelling and things like that, but what is the household like that you're growing up in?
Speaker 2: Well you know at that point you know, like everybody went to school except me so they came home later in the day and they all had chores, you know, I mean that was the thing she [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] gave everybody chores.  By the time I was five or six years old I had household chores that I had to do.  She taught all my sisters how to cook at a very young age you know, so she didn't do any cooking.  She didn't do any cleaning.  Everybody had their designed chore that they had to do and her house was immaculate you know, because you know, we would be washing the floors and the woodwork and doing this while she just entertained her friends or whatever; so the house was, you know, like pristine and also, each girl, since there were four girls you know, with the foster sister [Judy Agins Ojo and Sharon Agins Miller] and four boys you know, with the foster brother [Stephen D. Agins], so each girl was assigned a boy because the girls were all younger than the--all older than the boys, it just happened that way.  So each girl was assigned a boy to take care of and make sure that he was dressed and cleaned and you know, you know, all his clothes were ironed and everything, so Joyce [Joyce Chancey Davis] was my, what they called, what we called my girl, so it was her job to take care of me and then you know, Ronald [Ronald Chancey] had, you know Bert [Gladys Chancey Lytle] and I think Cleo was called Francine, Francine [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] had Michael [Michael Chancey].  Her name is Cleotha [ph.] Francine, so the whole family called her Francine and to this day I call her Francine and the world calls her Cleo.
Story_ID: 643759
Speaker 1: So what was the father [Chancey's foster father, Claudell Agins] like then?
Speaker 2: Nonexistent, he never said anything, he jus- just you know, like sat in his chair watching television all of the time, all day long and when he came home from work, and he never talked, he wasn't very social; every now and then he would bond with his own son [Stephen D. Agins], he would take him golfing because he was a golfer, he liked to golf, so he would take his son golfing or occasionally fishing, but we never did anything with him.
Speaker 1: Not, not, nothing--
Speaker 2: He wouldn't offer us a thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--okay, so let, let me ask--so you get, you get, you get to the point that you're going to school, to elementary school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay and by this time Francine [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] would--is she, she's in high school?
Speaker 2: Well if I were five she would be twelve.
Speaker 1: Twelve--
Speaker 2: She's seven years older.
Speaker 1: She's seven years older, okay.  Do you--and so she, so by that time--but you're saying even though you were going to school, when you came home there were the chores, there was the strict behavior, there was yelling, there was a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whipping and you know, as she was a very abusive woman [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins], you know, I mean I, I would get daily--she wouldn't call them whippings, they were called beatings and she would take an electrical cord and tie it in knots and, and beat us with this cord until sometimes we would bleed and then she would--when we would bleed she would take salt and pepper and pour it into the wounds.  She was a, a psychological, you know, case, you know, I, I realized that at a very young, young age this lady was crazy and I just you know, happened to have her for mother figure.
Speaker 1: For your mother (unclear), and so was she that way the whole time?
Speaker 2: She was--
Speaker 1: The whole time--
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: Well, but, but by the time I was fifteen she realized she couldn't whip me anymore because I would just like grab the thing and, and she told her husband, you know, "Beat him," you know, "he's been acting bad," you know, "beat him."  I used to--well, I guess I shouldn't go too far ahead--
Speaker 1: No, go on.
Speaker 2: But, I, I use to be a part of a band and we would rehearse late, you know, all the guys in the band were a lot older because I was a kind of a prodigy player at that time, so the other guys were like twenty, twenty-two and I was you know, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, so I would come home from rehearsals sometimes eleven, twelve [o'clock] at night and she would always think that I was out running the street.  I was, I was at band rehearsal; she'd, "Why--you're lying to me," so she would beat me, you know, so there would be points when I would just you know, grab the cord so she couldn't do it, so she asked her husband to beat me and then you know, he would try to beat me and I would look at him like, "Are you finished?" Then I would walk away, you know, I mean, I wouldn't beat him back, I wouldn't fight him back or anything.
Speaker 1: But what did your, your sisters [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson, Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] and brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey]--they were not able to take that because that's a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, she was more abusive with the boys than the girls (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was, than the girls--
Speaker 2: --because she said she grew up I think, with three brothers and she said her mother always, you know, preferred the sons and gave her a hard time, so she swore that when, when it came around to her she was going to give the boys a hard time.  So the girls, they did get whippings and everything, but nothing like we got.
Speaker 1: So how, on a week, I mean how many times are you beat on like a monthly basis, would it be--?
Speaker 2: Practically every day out of the month, it may be twenty-eight days I would be beat.
Story_ID: 643760
Speaker 1: So is anyone seeing this, like I mean are you going to church?  Does the family go to church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I would have, you know, bruises and, you know, scars from the beatings.  I remember at one point she lifted me up by my ears and my ears were separating from my head, so I had to have bandages to you know, to heal the backs of my ears because they were coming off and you know, they just figured, oh you know, those boys are just into rough playing or whatever, so, I mean she was always in, in perfect behavior and everybody thought she was the perfect mother and all this and we couldn't say anything and even later on when my mother [Frances Page Watson] got out of the hospital she, and remarried, her and her husband would try to get the kids back, but you know, we were so terrified of her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of your mother--
Speaker 2: Of the foster mother--
Speaker 1: That you would (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: --that we would go to court and stand in front of the judge and the judge would say, "Which one do you want to be with, her or her?"  And I was so scared to say that I didn't want to be with my foster mother [Eleanor Agins], that she would kill me, so I would say, "Well I want to be with her." The lesser of two evils.
Speaker 1: And what about, what about the, their natural kids, what were they thinking of, you knowing taking?
Speaker 2: I think they just felt, you know, spared because they didn't have to go through it, I mean the son [Stephen D. Agins], you know, he was, he was kind of a bad boy, you know, but he was their son, so you know, "Boys are bad," but if we were bad in any kind of--we were nothing like the bad that he was we really got beat, but you know, they would reprimand him, but nothing like us.
Story_ID: 643761
Speaker 1: What about holidays, how did--were there, oh--
Speaker 2: Holidays?
Speaker 1: Any celebration--don't--celebration of holidays (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, we would, you know, everybody would have to buy gifts for holidays, so I would have to buy both parents [Chancey's foster parents, Eleanor Agins and Claudell Agins] and all my eight siblings gifts for every holiday, you know, so yeah sometimes you know, it would just mean like a pair of socks or thirty-nine cent pair of earrings or something, but everybody had to share you know.
Speaker 1: That was, that was the rules of the household (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, everybody had to you know, get a gift--
Story_ID: 643762
Speaker 1: What has happened to her, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, when I left her house, when I went to college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I came back for the Thanksgiving break and I knocked on her door and she came to the door and she said, "Yes, could I help you?"  I said, "Well--," and then I saw that I wasn't welcome so I said, "Well, I just wanted to get my things," you know, because I left some things there and she said, "I threw those things away." So you know, like my yearbook, all my photographs, all my personal objects that I had acquired from my whole life to eighteen years of--she took it upon herself to just throw them in the trash.  At that point I turned around, I said, "Okay." I never saw her again and then when I got married [to Leila Mae Makdissy Chancey] at forty years old, my other sister, Bert [Gladys Chancey Lytle], who I had invited everybody, she said, "You didn't invite Aunt Eleanor [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins]?" Which is who she was.  I said, "No, I didn't invite her."  I, I hadn't seen her in over twenty years so Bert took it upon herself to invite her to my wedding, so that's the first time I, I saw her from that time that I was eighteen years old was at my wedding when I was forty years old and that's also the last time I saw her.  She passed away maybe seven or eight years ago now.
Speaker 1: So there was basically no one that could help you, the kids, I mean really?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, we, we kind of had each other, but everybody was just sort of like fighting so much for their own you know, existence--
Speaker 1: For their own existence--
Speaker 2: --there wasn't like a real like, we're together, this is us, you know, there was never any moment or statement of that, but we kind of looked at each other as you know, we had each other.
Story_ID: 643763
Speaker 1: So how are you then? Can you describe yourself as a young boy then?
Speaker 2: Well, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean what are you thinking?  You, you appear a pretty introspective person.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so were you sort of living in your head?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was at that time, I was you know, I was very you know, quiet.  I've always been more of a quiet natured person, very contemplative, I mean I had my silly sides in school with the, with the, with the boys because that was my only social outlet at that time because we weren't allowed to have friends outside of the house, so you know, I had my silly moments and everything so I, I enjoyed myself when I was at school or in Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], whatever I did outside of the home.
Story_ID: 643764
Speaker 1: So you were able--you did Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]?
Speaker 2: I did Boy Scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay and you, were you a Cub Scout or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, I was a Cub Scout.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So those things you were able, that kind of thing you were able to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did those things and actually that was my first exposure to playing because there was the, the bugle you know, in the Cub Scouts every, end of every meeting one of the other guys played you know, 'Taps' or something on this bugle and I always said, "Boy, that's a cool--I wish I could do that," and, and my sister, Joyce [Joyce Chancey Davis], you know, I was obviously saying it to her, so one day she saw a bugle in a pawn shop, so she came home and she said you know, "Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Chancey], here, I bought this bugle for you," so I took that bugle and I would go home and I would just play it and you know in the basement all the time.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was about I think ten, I was around ten and also at that time I started taking piano lessons because I--my foster mother [Eleanor Agins], I gave Stephen [Stephen D. Agins], her son, piano lessons for seven or eight years, something and he couldn't even find three notes after playing it eight years on the piano, but I was fascinated with music even at, by that, around that age around nine or ten the music thing started to come you know, anything that involved music I was fascinated by it you know, we had a piano in the house and I would sit at the piano and like make up compositions and harmonies and stuff on the piano, so and then there were also some other musical outlets because my foster mother played piano in the church and my sister Cleo--Francine, played bass later in high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] and my brother played the tuba in high school.
Speaker 1: So there was music in the house?
Speaker 2: There was, well, not, it wasn't so much in the house, they didn't come home with their, with their playing, she played at home sometimes, but my brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] and sisters [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson, Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis], no they never, they never played at home.  They never practiced you know, they weren't serious like I got to be about music, you know.
Speaker 1: So you are--what was it about music that you liked?  So it's not really in the house, but you, yourself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --take an interest?
Speaker 2: It just you know, it just called me you know, once I heard it you know, and I said, oh, you know, just, it was a world that opened up to me once, once I began to listen to music and then when I could actually start to play it that's when I, I knew what my plight in life would be.
Speaker 1: So when you got piano lessons where were you?  Who was teaching the piano to you?
Speaker 2: Well there was a lady who, who taught downtown at the music conservatory [Chicago Musical College; The Music Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts] in Chicago [Illinois], so I think she taught my, my sister, Joyce, who was a pretty accomplished classical piano player; she did practice though; I shouldn't say that, she practiced at home.  She was a classical pianist and the same teacher taught my foster brother, Stephen, for six or eight years that he studied and so I started studying with her.
Story_ID: 643765
Speaker 1: You know and those things affect, but if people can hear the story and maybe they learn something out of it that helps 'cause there's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. There's, there's one other thing in my childhood that I, I don't know if I should, if I should discuss, but, well I'll tell you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you can tell me--
Speaker 1: Yeah, of course--
Speaker 2: Are you rolling now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right, when I was nine months old, when I was still living with my mother [Frances Page Watson] at that point, my sister Bert [Gladys Chancey Lytle], who was, if I was nine, she must have been seven, was cooking dinner and she was cooking beans and I crawled under her and she lifted the pot and it fell onto me, so I got severe scalding burns, you know, on like three quarters of my body at that point, so for the next nine months of my life I lived in the--about, about a year I think, I lived in the hospital, so I was hospitalized from nine months to almost two years old.
Speaker 1: So it was instances like that that caused you to be taken away from your mother, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --or not?
Speaker 2: Yeah, while I was in the hospital--
Speaker 1: It was too much.
Speaker 2: --then, right--
Speaker 1: It was too much and they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --starting to see what's really going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I mean I--and a lot of those developmental years--I mean they thought that I would be like, maybe retarded or slow or something because I didn't, I missed so much of those early years--
Speaker 1: Of the developmental time--
Speaker 2: --time, I mean my first word wasn't mother, but it was doctor.  The first word you know, my first word was doctor so I forgot to mention that part of things (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, so I'm just--you know, 'cause I hear this and I think sometimes the human spirit has ability, amazing ability to sort of endure.
Story_ID: 643766
Speaker 1: We were back to taking lessons--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so you took lessons--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took piano lessons.
Speaker 1: Piano lessons at the Chicago conservatory [Chicago Musical College; The Music Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And that's down on Michigan [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: It, it was on Van Buren [Street], Van Buren between State [Street] and Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I think, I don't think it's there anymore.
Speaker 1: You know, I think the Chicago conservatory; I think it's on South Michigan.
Speaker 2: Okay. It was on Van Buren.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think it's moved to Chicago--because a lot of African Americans talk about taking music--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so she [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] had resources to do that, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so how many of you took music, (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just my sister [Joyce Chancey Davis] and I, we took lessons.  Well, I took lessons for about a year and then after--
Speaker 1: And then you're nine then or ten?
Speaker 2: I was around ten I think and then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're in, you're in at this point, are you in fourth grade?
Speaker 2: I guess so right, yeah, fourth grade and then by the time--two years later when I went to middle school, I became interested in band you know, and I started playing an, an instrument called the mellophone, which is like a precursor to the French horn, so I started playing the mellophone when I was twelve, I think.
Speaker 1: Now, I had read that--so you didn't play--I thought it was, I had read that it was the coronet and the trumpet and then the flugelhorn, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was and then, and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, well the precursor before the trumpet, the coronet was the--
Speaker 2: Was the mellophone--
Speaker 1: --the mellophone--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what is, what is, what is that?
Speaker 2: It's, it's like a French horn you know, it curves around but it has the piston valves like a trumpet instead of the French horn values, which are the rotary valves; so I did that and then I also played--at the same time I was playing the coronet and the trumpet and then I joined the drum and bugle corps and I was playing the soprano bugle, so I was mixing up a lot of different brass instruments at that time.
Speaker 1: And what did you--how did you know you were suited for a brass instrument because it takes--it's the lips, it's the face, all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, I mean when, when I--
Speaker 1: It's all those things?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah at one--when I started playing in junior high school the teacher looked at my, you know, at my, you know, mouth configuration and said, "You shouldn't play brass you know, it's not right for you, you have buck teeth." And at the time, you know, so but you know, I wanted to do it and I had played the bugle before so I knew that I could do it, so once, once he heard me he said, "Wow, you know, you have some talent. Okay, go ahead, we can go on with it." But supposedly my physical situation wasn't correct for playing and even later that, the French horn has a very small mouth piece and they said that, they say that, "You can't play it if you have thick lips," so all my teachers you know said, "Oh, well you can't play the French horn, your lips are much too big." You know, and I started playing the French horn and proved everybody wrong with that as well.
Story_ID: 643767
Speaker 1: So what, what attracted you--I want to go back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, please--
Speaker 1: --what attracted you because, you know, there's the trumpet, I mean they're all kinds--what attracted you to this instrument and you're saying 'cause when you first said, you said you first, was it 'Taps,' you said you, when you first heard the horn and played it was--
Speaker 2: It was the bugle and the drum in the, in the Cub Scouts.
Speaker 1: --in the Cub Scouts--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so what, passed that, because pass that, what is attracting you to that?  I mean what, what, what speaks to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know, it's, it's, I know, it's, it's hard to say what it was, but just the sound and the, and the whole way that the sound was produced and the blowing, it, you know, its' almost like Einstein [Albert Einstein] says, it's time, you know it's like you know, it's now and it's twenty years later and it's 100 years later all in one instant; it's something like that, maybe because I could just see myself doing this and playing and that's what I wanted to do.  It just came out of the blue, I mean nothing lead to that other than me you know, dabbling around on the piano at home and then later taking piano lessons, but I guess maybe that, you know I was introduced to, to music from that standpoint of playing the piano.
Speaker 1: I thought you heard, you heard the, the bugle first, right, but then you started taking piano lessons (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and then you get introduced?
Speaker 2: But it all was within like a year or a year and a half--
Speaker 1: First trumpet and then (unclear)--
Speaker 2: All of those things they all come in after in very close too.
Speaker 1: So, so--in order to get any music lessons they weren't provided--well, you said you were in the drum and bugle corps.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But is that, that was in school?
Speaker 2: No that was outside of school, this was like a neighbor organization and you know, it was a big group, there were fifty or sixty horn players, well, not that many at that point.  There were maybe thirty horn players and like ten drummers.
Speaker 1: And do you know who ran it?
Speaker 2: There was a, a small corps called the the Golden Eagles [ph.] on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] and we rehearsed in, was it Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois], maybe.
Story_ID: 643768
Speaker 1: So you're living on the West Side, but you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no we moved to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] when I was nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay well we missed that, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I didn't, I didn't get to that part, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, okay, so explain that then because I'm thinking you're still on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. So at, at nine--when, when we first moved to Aunt Eleanor's [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] house she had the basement apartment, I think it was a two room apartment and a year later we moved a block down the street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So wait a minute, you didn't mean a two room apartment?
Speaker 2: A two room apartment, that's why I said we all slept on the floor in the living room, all six of the Chanceys slept on the floor in the living room.
Speaker 1: And that was for two or three years?
Speaker 2: No, that was about a year, maybe even less than a year and then after that we moved to, to a house a block down the street where there was I think a three bedroom house, so the four boys had one room, the four girls had--we all stayed in one room and the four girls stayed in one room and the--well, the three girls at that point because--no, there were four, yeah, yeah, that was before the other one was born, but my three sisters [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson, Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] and their daughter [Judy Agins Ojo] stayed in one room and then the parents stayed in the other room.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what about studying and things like that, how, where, where, I mean that's a lot of people in a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it certainly was and we slept on, on twin beds so I always shared a twin bed with my brother, Michael [Michael Chancey] and then Ronald [Ronald Chancey] shared a twin bed with our foster brother, Stephen [Stephen D. Agins], so we had bunk beds and two on each level in the twin bed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in, okay, so then what happens, you move there for a couple, not even a year?
Speaker 2: So, so we moved, well, '53 [1953] I moved to the basement apartment with my foster mother and then '59 [1959] we moved to the, the South Side--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so we were in that house for six years, that apartment for six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, or five years because you're in the one apartment and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and then you move, okay.  So what precipitates that move and where do you, you say you moved to Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Englewood, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure it was because of the money she made from having six foster children, I mean in the foster care system the parents get paid so much per child and it was times six for her, so we moved to Englewood and she bought a house there and within three or four years she bought the next two houses next to, next to her house, so she had three houses in a row there and her husband [Chancey's foster father, Claudell Agins] still had the same jobs, you know, she was making money on us, that's what it was and then we became you know, a source for her to make money.
Speaker 1: To make money, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so when you--so are there other family members, I mean, 'cause she was--you said she was a distant, you know, she was a, a distant relative?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So are there any other family members that you know of around or that are, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well no, I mean all the family members that I remember growing up were her family--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and they all had trouble remembering who, if I was Michael, Ronald or Vince [HistoryMaker Vincent Chancey]--just one of those boys, you know, you're one of the boys and my sisters were one of the girls, but my sisters, since they were older and, and my foster mother was very much into like the correct bourgeois kind of thing, so she'd offer them sewing lessons and drama lessons where they had to, you know, had to speak correctly in the house so you know, we couldn't come in speaking, you know, except in one kind of way, couldn't come in, you know, having street expressions, or street slang, we had to speak correctly, so they had speech classes, they had sewing classes, dramatic lessons, yes, so we were all very well behaved kids I think.  The boys weren't really offered anything like that.
Speaker 1: Weren't?
Speaker 2: No, other than my piano lesson, which only lasted about a year before I (background noise) got interested in horns and stopped playing the piano.
Story_ID: 643769
Speaker 1: You're taking, so, (background noise) at the time that you were going to Chicago conservatory [Chicago Musical College; The Music Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts, Chicago, Illinois] you, no, you haven't moved to Morgan [Morgan Park, Chicago, Illinois]--I mean you haven't moved to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is when I was in Englewood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what, what is Englewood like at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, when we moved in we were the first black family on our block on 66th [Street] and Lowe [Avenue] and, and I enrolled in the, the hi- in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 1959?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959], I enrolled in the school there, I guess I was in the fourth grade or something like that and the school was, there were maybe like six black kids and the other kids were all white in that area, so this was, we moved there in May, so it's the end of the school year, so I finished that school year, when I went back in September it was the complete reverse.  It was about six white kids in the school and they were gone within a month or two and all black and the same thing on our block, you know, we were the first black family on the block, within six months the whole block was black.
Speaker 1: Wow! So this is all white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how fast it happened.
Speaker 1: --this is white flight, flight--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --in a major way--
Speaker 2: I mean I, I really saw that first hand you know.
Speaker 1: And so, but you have your own house so what is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --this gives more space for everyone, right?
Speaker 2: Well, the girls, four girls stayed in one bedroom, I can't remember how many bedrooms there were in the house.  I think the parents [Chancey's foster parents, Eleanor Agins and Claudell Agins] stayed in the bedroom and the older of the, of the, my foster parent's daughter [Judy Agins Ojo] had her room and the four boys stayed in the basement with no heat in Chicago [Illinois], you know, so we had, there were two beds and then later there became four beds, but we all stayed in the basement with no heat and, and I can remember those winter nights in Chicago putting on my coat to go to bed.
Speaker 1: And it's not that she couldn't afford heat, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he didn't want to have heat in the basement because you know, the basement was separate, it wasn't part of the house, you know, like basements aren't heated, but well this one wasn't.  It was just like the furnace and the washing machine and then there was a big area.  So we just took in the front part of the house where--in the basement, so the boys stayed down there.
Speaker 1: So, so I--what would happen when you would get ill or sick, like going to the doctors, no doctor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mentioned we would go to the doctor because this was all under the foster care system, that's all taken care of, you know, not only do you get sick and you go to the doctors, but you get checkups and at that point I remember that we were the guinea pigs for any new medical procedure or any new, you know, whatever came along all these vaccinations and everything that would be introduced, we were the guinea pigs, the guinea pigs for it, the foster kids, so I have like, you know, like weird vaccinations scars on my arm, people say, "What is that?" you know, I'd say, well, I went to the doctor one time and he had a little plate with thirty-six needles in it and you stick it and he stuck me with it and, and I still have those thirty-six you know, marks on my arm you know, you know, every new method that was coming around we were the guinea pigs for it.
Story_ID: 643770
Speaker 1: How were you, so you, how are you as a student in school then?
Speaker 2: I was a mediocre student I didn't really apply myself very well you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay and were there any teachers that you took to in that, in the elementary school?  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --elementary school you're at, you start at one and then go to another, wait, no, you, you're at the same elementary--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --school and then junior high (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started at, on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] and then I, when we went to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] I was still in elementary school--
Speaker 1: Okay and you're, you're where--?
Speaker 2: --because I think I was in fourth grade at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, you knew you were--do you remember this school?
Speaker 2: I think that was Emerson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay and then where do you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: I went to high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] I think it was on Marquette [Road] because it was a middle school that was just built called Lowell [ph.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --L-O-W-E L-L, I think.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right, okay.  I think Lowell is still there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --or maybe it got closed (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and then, and then what about--
Speaker 2: And that's when I started to playing in the band in that, that middle school.
Speaker 1: At, at Lowell, okay, and that's when you're saying then that you are in the drum and bugle corps?
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as well--
Speaker 1: Okay, there and that was right out of the community center.
Speaker 2: Right, yes so my life in school was all surrounded by trying to get to the band room to practice and you know, so I was a mediocre student because it, for me it was only about music and then when school was out I would go to the drum and bugle corps rehearsals, so you know I was, my life was about music from that point on.
Story_ID: 643771
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about drum--'cause there, there were competitions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --right? So how many groups, like how long would you practice, you know, on an average week--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know who would you compete against, you know?
Speaker 2: Right. Well, well the earlier ones, I mean, this is a big national phenomenon, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it a big national phenomenon then?
Speaker 2: Not, not, not, not--
Speaker 1: Not as much as it is now?
Speaker 2: --not until I was, not until--it was then yes, it was then, but I thought you meant at that point in my life.  It wasn't at, at that point in my life.  At fifteen I joined a really big corps in Chicago [Illinois], which was a predominately white corps I think, out of like ninety kids there were, I think six or seven blacks in it.  That was a big national contender.  We scored like, three in the country or something, but the earlier corps were these black corps on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] that were, you know, really bad, they didn't have very good equipment and the uniforms were, you know, makeshift and, but I loved it because that was all I knew you know, and it was--I was able to play and I was able to get out of the house, you know, that was a big part about it, you know, being able to get away from Aunt Eleanor [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] and then the music part of everything, so I just, that became much more exciting for me at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are, so you stay in the drum and bugle corps for the rest of junior high school?
Speaker 2: Until--throughout high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Throughout high school, so where do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until, until I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: --go to high school?
Story_ID: 643772
Speaker 1: I went to what, what was then Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], but now--they tore that school down and, and started another Parker on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], I think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School].
Speaker 2: Well, no there's a separate Parker.
Speaker 1: There is.
Speaker 2: I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because I knew that the school that I went to, the building was torn down, maybe they remade another one.
Speaker 2: But I've heard of Parker High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Parker High School.
Speaker 1: All six of us went to--all of my brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] and sisters that I--went to that school, that high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what is the demographics of that school at the time?
Speaker 1: It was, when Francine [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] and my sisters [Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] started there I think it was an integrated school, but it, it quickly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) More black, more white, or even?
Speaker 1: When they came I, I, I couldn't say because I wasn't in, in the, at the school at that point, by the time I got, I went there in '64 [1964] it was a completely black school.
Speaker 2: Oh it's a, oh so you saying when your sisters and brothers went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 2: --it was--
Speaker 1: --right, 'cause just like when I you know, went to that school when I was nine and it was you know like--
Speaker 2: So really when you're hitting this school, it's turning all black?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: No matter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, even if it was integrated--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --its, because several, it was a maze.
Speaker 1: I, I mean there were no integrated, there was no integration then.  Once the blacks came that meant everybody else got the hell out, you know, and that's what that was about.
Speaker 2: So what about your teachers are they both black and white?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were throughout high school, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and who, did, was there a music teacher that influenced you during that time period?
Speaker 1: Actually not--
Speaker 2: But are you, so are you--no, no teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: --not even a music teacher, no one, head of the drum and bugle corps?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean in the drum and bugle corps, you know there were, there were other guys there, but the teachers in--it wasn't about the teachers so much as it was--just about you know, preparing all of this music and getting it together for competition, you know.
Story_ID: 643773
Speaker 1: In the group that you said you competed for and got into that was, you said about ninety--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right? Ninety members in the drum and bugle, bugle corps (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Later, this is after I was fifteen, from fifteen to eighteen I was a part of that corps, but the earlier corpss there must have been forty or fifty kids in that which was still a lot you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are you learning in the, in the earlier corps?
Speaker 2: We had you know, like music based on the big band tradition you know like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause that was big still--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --I mean sort of.
Speaker 2: --you know, but we were playing on bugles--everybody thinks the bugle is just you know, this little [U.S.] military instrument, but at that point they were starting to, to get valves, it had two valves, you could actually play songs and compositions, you had soprano, French horn, bugle, baritone bugle and later the contrabass bugle, you know, so it was, it was like a whole brass band really.  If I was in England it would have been a brass band tradition but then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So wait--
Speaker 2: --it was the drum and bugle corps.
Speaker 1: --you're saying the drum and bugle corps had started to incorporate a brass band section, is that what you're saying, 'cause--
Speaker 2: I'm saying the bugles; you had different kinds of bugles--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --sopranos, French horn, baritone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I'm saying in your, in your drum and bugle corps did they have all those?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: They did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, because I, for some reason and you know I, I may be showing my ignorance, but I think of brass band, I think of two, I think of two things when I think of Louisiana, you know, didn't they have, they were big on brass bands (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely, yes--
Speaker 1: --you know, so--
Speaker 2: --and still are.
Speaker 1: --and still are, I'm sorry, okay, and still are; and then the marching bands--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, which you know, in the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --so you are, who, who are you competing with though?  Is someone better than you, or are you (unclear), who are your friends and are you starting to form friendships around that?
Speaker 2: Well, in the, I mean, I was always the younger one coming in, you know.  So a lot of the other players you know were stronger players than me because they were fourteen and fifteen, sometimes seventeen, eighteen years old, so they had been playing for years already and I'd just been playing for, you know, for one or two years, so I was trying to emulate you know, the things that I heard from them and but within like a year I was better than all of those kids you know, who were you know, eighteen, sometimes nineteen, twenty years old; you know, so by the time I was thirteen I was playing better than all the other kids around me (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that was clear to everyone, including adults (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 643774
Speaker 1: So songs you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Except for my foster mother [Eleanor Agins], she didn't care anything about, about what I did.  She had no, no interest in, in, in my, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Would, would people try to show her or did she (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my brother who was in the band and played tuba when I came to high school, when I came in at fourteen to high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Wait a minute you came in at fourteen to high school?
Speaker 2: To high school, yes--
Speaker 1: So you, you skipped grades?
Speaker 2: No, no, I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, ninth grade, ninth grade is high school, not tenth?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Ninth grade?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, okay, okay.  So my brother was in the band playing the tuba and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Still would be, you're still that--you would be fifteen you know because fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, when you graduated at eighteen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay, it would be fifteen then, maybe, okay.
Speaker 2: Whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it, it doesn't matter (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I started high school (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right, when you started in high school--
Speaker 2: --and I joined the band I played mellophone in, in junior high school, so I couldn't wait to play the French horn because you know, that was in my, you know, my, just a fake French horn you know, this mellophone, it wasn't a real French horn, so when I got to the high school they had French horns.  I said, "Oh, I can play the French horn!"  So I started, you know, I was in, you know, a lot of the French horn from the band room, they--and I would just take it home and practice it for hours and hours every night, you know, completely teaching myself how to play it.  So, the band instructor told my brother, he said, "You should tell your mother that you know, Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Chancey] should have private lessons because he's you know, he has, he has a very promising technique and his style and everything.  He should really be taking private lessons."  I didn't find this out until I was fifty years old you know, because Ronald [Ronald Chancey] didn't tell Aunt Eleanor [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] because you know, she didn't want to hear it you know, so I never had private lessons you know, when I was growing up except for the piano lessons very early.
Speaker 1: So, so you play, so in high school you're in, you, you compete and get into this ninety person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, no that was outside of high school, the drum and bugle corps.  In high school I played in the marching--
Speaker 1: So you played in the marching band?
Speaker 2: --in, in the concert band, not the marching band, but the concert band in high school--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and then outside of high school I played in the drum and bugle corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in, within high school since you had those, you had the marching band and you had the concert band, was it more prestigious to be with the, the concert band or not?  Who, what, what was the distinction?
Speaker 2: I mean I loved the drum and bugle corps because I traveled.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, we would go to different parts of the Midwest; we'd go to Ohio and Wisconsin for these competitions so this was like, you know, it's a dream come true to me, you know being on the road and, and once again, I was the younger guy and the other guys were older you know, so I, you know, I loved that, that was you know, that, it, it, it didn't compare to what I was doing playing in, in the concert band in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I was asking the different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --between the concert band and the marching band in high school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because the drum and bugle corps is outside that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What is the difference, like what is more, what is more, the marching band is really for games, right?
Speaker 2: Right, which I didn't do.  I just played in the concert band.
Speaker 1: Right, you didn't do that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you played--so what is the concert band?  How often are you rehearsing and where are you performing during the (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were just playing in school.
Speaker 1: In, in school, okay--
Speaker 2: You know you have to have I think just one band class a day to mix in with your other classes and then you played for assemblies and graduations, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: But there--what I was trying to understand was the difference in the type of person who was attracted to either one, that's what I was trying understand, or did some people do both?
Speaker 2: I was the only one that I knew who did both.  You know I had a schizophrenic life because in school I was known as you know, this great young talented French horn player and then I would put that horn away at home and go and my life was about the drum and bugle corps at that point.
Story_ID: 643775
Speaker 1: Your aunt, aunt-
Speaker 2: Eleanor [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins].
Speaker 1: --Ellen [sic.], she, she didn't have any issues with that?
Speaker 2: Well you know, I had to play in the--since my room was in the basement I played in the basement so.
Speaker 1: And she, she would never get upset with all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh every, you know, the only thing I would hear was you know, "I'm tired of hearing that horn, shut that dam horn up." You know, never any words of encouragement, just, you know, just, "Shut up."  I mean I can understand after two or three hours of playing every day when I came home because I went right to my horn and played it you know, like for hours, but yeah, she didn't really encourage it in any kind of way.  I have a later story about that.  I don't know if I should introduct- induct it right here.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it chronologically--?
Speaker 2: Well it happened after I moved to New York [New York], years after I came to New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 643776
Speaker 1: Are you practicing scales and things like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --on a, constantly you're doing that, okay? And--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. And songs, you know.
Speaker 1: And songs--so what are some of the songs you associate with that period of time?
Speaker 2: The first song I learned to play on the bugle was "Moon River."  I think it must have been around the same time that the film ['Breakfast at Tiffany's'] was--'cause that must have been '63 [1963], '64 [1964], right around that time; so I, I taught, I taught myself how to play it you know, by ear and one time I went to a friend's house to pick him up for bugle corps and he had like--the way the houses are configured in Chicago [Illinois] you have like back porches with like landings or, you know, it's like a back porch, so I was down at the bottom and, and I played "Moon River" and everybody in the house came out and they were looking like, "Who is this little kid playing this beautiful song?"  That's the first performance I have, remember me playing, just a solo guy standing there and all of these you know, mothers were in tears, and saying how can he play like that, you know, so that was one of the songs I played.  We would do "(Won't You Come Home) Bill Bailey" kind of big band arrangements and then later in the drum and bugle corps I would play like, 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents] songs, "Maria," "Chicago" was one of the songs we played (makes sound), 'Man from La Mancha' [sic. 'Man of La Mancha,' Dale Wasserman and Mitch Leigh], and different show tunes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But these, these are the things that are popular at that time, that's right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, exactly.
Speaker 1: The musicals, the big band (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --those are the things that, that are popular.
Story_ID: 643777
Speaker 1: Okay, so are the groups that, that, that we're talking about right now, have, are you, have you gotten involved with the Giles Yellow Jackets [Giles Yellow Jackets Drum and Bugle Corps] or the St. Andrews Hornets (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay right.
Speaker 1: --or the Des Plaines Vanguard?
Speaker 2: The Des Plaines, yeah, I, I, I was going through all three of those groups.  The, the first group that I, that I started with was the Yellow Jackets, that's when I was--my first introduction to drum and bugle corps.  I played with them for a year or so and then I went to the Giles Yellow Jackets which was also a black corps on 59th Street around, what is, around Wabash [Avenue], around there--we rehearsed in the VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] post, which was the Giles Post [George L. Giles Post #87, Chicago, Illinois] and that was the, the best black corps in Chicago [Illinois], so a lot of these guys were older.  I came in I, I think I was thirteen or fourteen when I came in.
Speaker 1: So everybody else is like fifteen, sixteen, seventeen?
Speaker 2: Most of us guys were, even though the age limit was twenty-one there were guys, the average age was around nineteen, but there were guys up to like twenty-six years old and that.
Speaker 1: And you came in at thirteen?
Speaker 2: Right, right; so I mean I did that and that really, you know, was a whole different level of competition.  It was a better group and we rehearsed like three or four days a week in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], you know, doing our formation, but in the winter we would do the, the music, where we'd rehearse the horns, the songs and the drums and everything.
Speaker 1: And so you did that all throughout, I mean these weren't all the same; did you end up with the Des Plaines Vanguard?
Speaker 2: The Des Plaines Vanguard--
Speaker 1: And that's the one where you start traveling?
Speaker 2: That's the one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the first time I came to New York [New York] 'cause when I played with the Des Plaines Vanguard.  We played for competition here and I, we were, were doing a parade down Fifth Avenue and I was looking around saying, "Wow, this is New York, I want to move here when I grow up!"
Speaker 1: So were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a deciding factor when I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: So were you in your junior year or do you remember what year you were in high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was probably a, a sophomore in high school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you were a sophomore, okay.
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so were you with the Des Plaines for all three, the remaining sophomore--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --junior and senior years?
Speaker 2: Throughout high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would be the season, would you--that's really during the school year, you, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, no that was all year--
Speaker 1: It was all year, even--
Speaker 2: It was all year.
Speaker 1: --'cause summer you might do what, practice?
Speaker 2: Summer it was all the competitions and the parades and everything and then winter we just practiced and developed the routines for the year--it was all consuming you know.  This was the group that was ninety people and out of I think, six or seven blacks in it, so that, that was a completely different change for me to just, to get a different perspective, to, to get out of the all black situation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, so who were--
Speaker 2: --socially--
Speaker 1: --were most of the students from that were--is it from Des Plaines, Illinois?
Speaker 2: Most of, yeah, most of them were Chicago, it's just that the, I think it was another VFW post was in Des Plaines, but all the kids were from Chicago, different parts, the North Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: So then at least, that gives you, we're talking still you know, really at this point early '60s [1960s] and so that gives you?
Speaker 2: This is like mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Mid-'60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 643778
Speaker 1: And this, there's a lot of turmoil going on in Chicago [Illinois] at that point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --so, okay so you--are there, do you experience any racial turmoil or name calling?
Speaker 2: You know, always when I did that 'cause we had to go to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] and at that point you know, blacks weren't on the North Side, especially you know, like teenage kids; so I would often you know, have trouble going to and from practice and then I got involved in like, the, the, the you know, the black struggle and the political situation myself and started growing an Afro by the time I was sixteen in '66 [1966] and in the drum and bugle corps everybody was saying, well, "You can't do that here, I mean we don't do that do that."  I was saying, "This is what I want to do, leave me alone about it." But it didn't really fit into my hat very well you know, but I did it and you know, but I was really involved, but my sister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, when you say you were real involved, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: I was involved with the, the literature, I was reading, I was--
Speaker 1: So what are you reading?
Speaker 2: --you know, black authors, you know, Baldwin [James Baldwin] and Ralph Ellison and you know I, I was--around that time that the Malcolm X autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley] came out you know, just the black authors for the most part and just becoming really conscious of my blackness in America and in the world in that part of my development.
Speaker 1: And Chicago was really a hot bed for all of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause the Black Arts Movement is there you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All kinds of things are sort of happening and a lot of young people were involved too.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was kind of like, had a dichotomy because I was in this white drum and bugle corps [Des Plaines Vanguard] and I was getting all these black attitudes so I kept on asking myself, well maybe I need to leave band but I loved doing it because I loved playing the music and so I was always fighting with myself about it.
Speaker 1: So any racial encounters there too though?  You said that the drum and bugle corps (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there were a couple of guys in the group, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you feel you were treated fairly in terms of position (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I mean, well there, there were certain things you know, like there were girls involved in the group too so it was like, even though it wasn't said, the implication was the black guys don't talk to the girls you know, so you just didn't you know.  I mean, we, we understood it and, and I wasn't there for that anyway, I was there for the music, you know. So, but even with some of the guys there would be issues, you know, that would come happen, and you know, I would know that they were racial (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 643779
Speaker 1: Now did you--how many awards and things did you win with the Des Plaines [Des Plaines Vanguard] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, that corps was I think, by the time I was seventeen was like number two or three in the country, so and these big national competitions we'd go to Connecticut, Massachusetts, we would be like one of the top corps everywhere, so it was big, it was a big thing for me.
Speaker 1: Now you, when you're in those corps you're learning a lot about precision (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and, and teammanship and what else? What other things are you learning--
Speaker 2: In, I didn't think of, I think of it--
Speaker 1: --formation, marching?
Speaker 2: --at the time, but it, it's very military, you know, with me it was just--you know, that's what you do, you form these things with--it's like do you know, the, the marching bands in the football games and you see them, they go out and have these formations and they make configurations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So beautiful from above--
Speaker 2: Yeah and I mean that's what we did, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it, we would be competing against each other--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --while doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 643780
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time that you said, this is not what I want to do and you know and you almost (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I mean (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Now why, what, what was the impetus?
Speaker 2: I mean when I was graduating high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] I knew that you know, I had to move on with my life and you know, like I said I had no more home where I was staying so I had to make all these decisions and one of the, the, of the decisions was I needed to play a real instrument and not the bugle because this bugle (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because how were you going to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there's no, I mean I would look at our teachers and instructors you know, like these forty and fifty year old men, it's like, you know, like who are these guys other than here teaching this, like what is their significance in the world, you know? And there was none.
Speaker 1: You, and you were thinking about that?
Speaker 2: I, yeah, I, I was thinking about that; say, saying well, I need to stop playing this instrument and put all my attention into a real instrument.
Speaker 1: So what would you--I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was the French horn, because I was playing the French horn in high school; so that's when, so I didn't really get serious about playing the French horn until after I left, but then when I left high school I never had an instrument because I used the, the school's instruments; so went, you know, sometime without being able to play at all.
Speaker 1: So wait--even for the bugle corps you got, the instruments were for (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Those were the, those belonged to the corps they didn't, they, they weren't mine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so--I see, okay.
Story_ID: 643781
Speaker 1: So let me also understand, are you a, you're definitely know you're going to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and had your--wh- not all your sisters [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson, Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] and brothers [Ronald Chancey and Michael Chancey] have followed that, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know, believe it or not the six, all six of, of my--me and my five siblings, all of us went to college and all of us graduated and the three kids that belonged to that foster parents [Eleanor Agins and Claudell Agins]--
Speaker 1: None of them?
Speaker 2: --none of them.  The son [Stephen D. Agins] OD'd [overdosed] when he was like thirty-two years old or something on heroin, the other sister [Judy Agins Ojo] was like completely you know like, you know, ghettoized and didn't, never wanted to get--I don't even--she may have finished high school but never did anything beyond that, never really did anything of any significance and the younger one [Sharon Agins Miller], that's younger than me actually went to school and did okay, she got a degree, but the ones that were my generation both of them were pretty much failures.
Speaker 1: So when you decide what you're going to do, I mean, who's helping you though?
Speaker 2: Well, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some folk that you just don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, right.
Speaker 1: You need some, something from someone.
Speaker 2: Well, well you know when I was a junior in high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] I started saying you know I want to go to college.  I started looking at schools and applying to schools and I had really good test scores, SAT and, and high math scores, so I had--by the time I graduated from high school I had like six scholarships, three of them being in math, in schools all over the country and, but I choose SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] because they had a good French horn teacher there so I was able to get a full scholarship to go there as well.
Story_ID: 643782
Speaker 1: So this is your, so going off you tell the story you came back, and--but where did you come back from school that time, and you wanted to sort of pick things up; maybe you had graduated, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's after, I, I was in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] at that point.
Speaker 1: So but, but your four years there, so where are your other siblings?
Speaker 2: Well everybody else, you know, I was the last one to leave, right?
Speaker 1: Right, so where are they?
Speaker 2: So you know they all you know, go to junior college or get jobs; one sister [Joyce Chancey Davis] moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and was working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], the other one [Gladys Chancey Lytle] worked for the telephone company, you know, they hadn't really gone to school and then they went to school later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Later?
Speaker 2: --you know.  I think Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] did too; she went to school la- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She went later.
Speaker 2: --well, well no, she went to junior college [Chicago State Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: She went to junior college but there was-okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but then there was long gap.
Speaker 1: Right, there was a long gap.
Speaker 2: I don't think she graduated from junior college (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 643783
Speaker 1: So you're, so you, you go there, who, I mean, how are you supporting yourself even if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: --yeah if you get a full ride, did you get expenses also?
Speaker 2: I had some expenses and then I got a college loan as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you working?
Speaker 2: I worked, I did some you know, work on the campus in the cafeteria and some things.
Speaker 1: But this--well no that's not your first time out, you've been traveling around and things like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so, but you're in the middle of, you know, you're in the middle of corn country down there.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: But did you like the experience there?
Speaker 2: Oh you know, the school had its own little satellite entity there, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was the music department?
Speaker 2: The, the music department was pretty sad actually.  The, the French horn teacher was good because he was a guy who had been in New York [New York] and played at, for the ballet orchestra I think, no jazz.  The, the music school [Southern Illinois University School of Music, Carbondale, Illinois] was strictly a classical school.  Jazz was a four letter word and it wasn't J-A-Z-Z (laughter) you know, so I had a completely classical training there.
Speaker 1: But your, I don't--had your interest in jazz really--
Speaker 2: My, my interest in jazz started when I was in the drum and bugle corps because some of the music we played were like jazz kind of compositions, so I started listening to other people, but I never you know, thought that I should start working on improvisation, that, that wasn't a part of it.
Speaker 1: But you know, I want to ask this question, do you think, you know 'cause there are people that, there are probably fewer people maybe who have been classically trained, but do you, when you look in hindsight do you think your classical training helped you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --because, okay, because you know people either they, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's all, they don't read, read--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --music or anything--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean now the, with even within the jazz schools it's so sophisticated, the reading and all that, the, the preparation is as strong as a classical school, you know, like people coming out of New England [New England Conservatory, Boston, Massachusetts] and Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and these you know, jazz conservatories now, they get you know, top training just, just as a classical player would, but when I was coming up those schools did exist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: So, so that's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So, so, so I had to get everything, you know, learn you know, how to play, well you know, by the time I went to college I was completely self taught, so that's a whole other story.  I had--when I auditioned for the school and I don't know if it's time for that, but I have to tell that story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Please.
Story_ID: 643784
Speaker 1: All right, so I get to college, so the guy said, you know--
Speaker 2: Now, you get to college, you've declared that you're a music major (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah I said I wanted to be a music major, so they said well, "First of all, you have to audition."  So and they said, "So what's your instrument?"  I said, "French horn."  They said, "Okay, play it."  I said, "Well, I don't have an instrument." So they you know, go out and bring me an instrument.  I hadn't played in four or five months maybe, because you know, school break and everything I, I didn't have an instrument; so the guy gave me an instrument, I looked at it and it was completely different from every one that I had ever played, so he puts some music in front of me and I played the music and after it was over the guy was standing there with his mouth open. I said, "Well, was that okay?" He said, "Yeah you played it perfectly, but I don't know how you played it because every fingering was wrong."  You know, since I had taught myself how to play, I, you know, there's all of these false fingering that you could use and I didn't know what was right and what was wrong, so I just would play a note and just experiment with this finger, oh yeah this works, maybe, you know, so they were all completely wrong.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute. You're talking about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the teacher, so the teacher told me right, said that, "You have to start all over again.  You can be a music major because you can obviously play, but we have to teach you how to play it all over again correctly." So that was my introduction to the music school [Southern Illinois University School of Music, Carbondale, Illinois].
Speaker 2: But was it because it was a French horn or was it because you hadn't been taught correctly up to that point, that's what I'm trying to--?
Speaker 1: Well I had you know, spent all my time with the bugle and the French horn, I just, kind of like in the school band [at Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] so you know, taught myself how to play it only to later find out that my first band instructor was a French horn player, but it was, you know, he was one of the white teachers that was leaving and didn't really care about all of these black kids, so he never gave me an, any instruction other than tell my brother [Ronald Chancey] that my mother [Chancey's foster mother, Eleanor Agins] should get me horn lessons because I showed some you know, talent on the instrument, but he never you know, told me what fingerings or anything I should use.
Speaker 2: I see, so now was this, at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], where Julius Watkins was?  Was he there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well no, Julius Watkins was--
Speaker 2: Or you went to seek him out and studied later with him?
Speaker 1: Here in New York [New York], when I came to New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, so--
Story_ID: 643785
Speaker 1: You're there, so you said the music instruction was not so good when you look at it on hindsight (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I mean it was, it was--
Speaker 1: It was okay?
Speaker 2: --it was okay, but you know, it was completely classical and you know, there was some racism there because you know, like you said, the school [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] was in the middle of a cornfield.  I was able to play in the concert band, but when I went to play for the orchestra the conductor of the orchestra said, "He can't play in the orchestra."  So my private teacher said, Mr. Strauss [ph.] said that, "You can't be in the orchestra," you know, and I knew I was one of the better players in the school, so the whole four years I was there I wasn't allowed to play in the orchestra just because he didn't want a black kid coming in you know, playing. And I would go to some orchestra concerts and I would listen to the French horn player like miss and crack and play bad notes and everything and I would look across the room and my private horn teacher would look at me and just you know (shakes head) be ashamed because he knew that I could shine in the role, but I wasn't allowed to do it.
Speaker 1: And, and you, so how many blacks were in your department there?
Speaker 2: I think maybe, I was, the school must had, the music school [Southern Illinois University School of Music, Carbondale, Illinois] probably had like four or five hundred kids that, were maybe three of us and I think the other ones were singers, no instrumentalists.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so was part of your instruction, you have a private, you have music instrument that's private?
Speaker 2: Had private, private horn and--
Speaker 1: You have ensemble?
Speaker 2: Ensemble and then I had to do you know, classes in theory and harmony and music history, of course all classical.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what even, what do you think you gained out of that, that experience?  You know insights?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I, I you know, learned how to you know, read better and compose you know, 'cause I had to learn how to write.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so composition.
Speaker 2: You know, compositional things, ear training, yes, so it got me going.
Speaker 1: But, but back then--I think they're doing it now, they weren't teaching anything about the business of music?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Right, no, I mean it-
Speaker 2: That started much later.
Speaker 1: That comes, that's--'cause I see now that that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --a big thing right now.
Speaker 2: Right, even after I was in New York [New York] for ten or fifteen years that had only come around at that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I was sort of surprised when I was at the Tisch School [New York University Tisch School of the Arts, New York, New York] the other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, weekend.
Speaker 2: Which is very important you know, it's something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, it's very important.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I was sort of sup- I mean there's a big focus on that.
Story_ID: 643786
Speaker 1: So what are you doing during the summers though?  Are you--
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois]? Well I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you're spending summers in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well the last two summers of high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], well no, I wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.
Speaker 1: --I thought the last two summers you were in the drum and bugle corps [Des Plaines Vanguard]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was doing the drum and bugle, but the last summer of the drum and bugle corps that's when I quit in June, right at the end of the school year when I graduated and I got job working for NBC you know in the mailroom, so in, in, in Chicago, they were located in the, in the (unclear), mercantile exchange [Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Chicago, Illinois], not the mercantile, Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right Merchandise Mart.
Speaker 2: They were there, now they have their own building on, on the river [Chicago River] I think.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But they were like at, I think at the top two floors of Merchandise Mart; so I worked there and even the first year in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I came through to the summer and stayed with either my, with one of my sisters [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson, Gladys Chancey Lytle and Joyce Chancey Davis] and worked that job, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well that was a good job actually to have.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know how much it paid, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was okay, you know--
Speaker 1: --but it had some status.
Speaker 2: I was in the mailroom, I was in the mailroom, but I remember the summer of '68 [1968] was the National Democratic Convention in Chicago [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] and all the riots and I was working for NBC so they asked me to go out with the crew to you know, like help with their grips and the cables and everything and I'm out there with my Afro thinking, I shouldn't be with you guys, I should be with these guys out here protesting, you know, these are the ones I want to be with, so I, I felt kind of conflicted you know.
Speaker 1: Well you know, but then that's when that started the, [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders' career started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because the riots, they were grabbing anyone 'cause he was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at the Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and things like that; but I want to understand, are you, how much during college or you know, during the summers--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --are you checking out the music scene locally, are you not yet, you're still (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I wasn't.
Speaker 1: --'cause you're still--
Speaker 2: I, I'm still doing the--
Speaker 1: --very much in the classical--
Speaker 2: --doing the classical thing--
Speaker 1: --the classical and the drums, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and I, sometimes I would go to St. Louis [Missouri] to do--'cause Carbondale, Illinois, which is where the school was, is ninety miles from St. Louis, so sometimes we would go to St. Louis and do concerts.  I remember at one point I went to St. Louis and did a Scott Joplin opera ['Treemonisha'] directed by [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.  She was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she had set her place there--
Speaker 2: --she was doing it--
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Speaker 2: --and so I worked with her for a while and, and then and did some things with her dance company [Katherine Dunham Company] too.
Speaker 1: Yeah because that's the time that she had come back from Haiti where she had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --been and she had set up shop at, in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in East St. Louis [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 643787
Speaker 1: So tell me, so you graduate?
Speaker 2: I do, yeah I graduated, yes.
Speaker 1: You graduate and you, you have your sights on--see that's what I'm trying to understand, well you had been here as, as a high school student [at Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].  You had been in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: I came to New York once with the drum and bugle corps [Des Plaines Vanguard] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, but you said--
Speaker 2: --and, and one time with my sister in 1967 when I was seventeen years old, but she was coming because she was very much involved with the movement then and she came for a conference to make (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now which sister was this?
Speaker 2: Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson].
Speaker 1: Cleo, okay--
Speaker 2: She came for a conference to make Malcolm X's birthday a national holiday and said there was this conference in Harlem [New York, New York] and she wanted to come with her husband [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson's first husband, Earl Silbar], but her husband was white and she said, "Well, I can't come with him," and she knew that I was, I was involved in you know like, trying to be black and I had my Afro and so she said to me, "Do you want to come with me?" So I said, "Sure," so I think that was the second time I came to New York.  We stayed in Harlem at some people's apartment; so I had been to New York twice at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you decide this is where you want to come?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so who, how do you get set up here, are you just (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] I had a, a girlfriend who was a dancer and she, she graduated six months before me.  She came out in January, I came out in June and she moved to New York; so when I came to New York I stayed with her for, for six or eight months until I was able to get my own place.
Speaker 1: Did she get with a troop here or anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She--
Speaker 1: --or she was taking lessons (unclear)?
Speaker 2: She, she, yeah, she took classes and just worked jobs and stuff.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Then she later moved to Hawaii.  I, I, still am in touch with her from time to time, but you know she's--
Speaker 1: So when you come here were you staying with her, where are you living?
Speaker 2: I'm living in the East Village [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Can't do any better than that, now.
Speaker 2: Well, well then that was like a really rundown neighborhood.
Speaker 1: I know it was rundown but there's a lot--wait, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it was, it was--
Speaker 1: It was 19--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]--
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was a mecca for the arts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a mecca, it was significant.
Speaker 2: There was a lot of--
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause, right--
Speaker 2: --a lot of the musicians were there.
Speaker 1: That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, so I started like going around to jazz clubs and everything.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I mean you still had things, I mean you have it now, but the Blue Note [Blue Note Jazz Club, New York, New York] right, was (simultaneous)-- Right.
Speaker 2: --was, okay and what are some of the others?
Speaker 1: The Village Vanguard [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: The Village Vanguard, all those places are here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And they are active?
Speaker 1: Right, well there were a lot more then and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but what were some of the other places?
Speaker 1: The Village Gate [New York, New York], which was another place--
Speaker 2: Right, Village Gate, I should know that one.
Speaker 1: --which is long gone for now, but even in the East Village there were a lot of loft spaces, it was this movement in jazz called loft jazz where a lot of the younger players were getting in doing more free form kind of playing and everything, so I got very much involved with that in the beginning as I was playing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were--
Speaker 1: --for several reasons because I was still trying to learn to improvise at that point you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, but this is what I don't understand--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --there's a big gap here--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you have to help me, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know there is, you know.
Speaker 2: --because first of all you--
Speaker 1: I'm a classical musician, right.
Speaker 2: You're a classical musical and you haven't been trained in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know that's, and so maybe you were listening to it, I'm not quite sure--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but you get here and are you working odd jobs and things?
Speaker 1: Well, I had to you know, like, several like jobs.  I worked in records stores for a while.  I worked at a small college in Brooklyn [New York] loading boxes on trucks and everything.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But you know, like every time, all my time away from the job was spent learning, learning to improvise.
Story_ID: 643788
Speaker 1: But how do you connect with the music scene, is it that you're first going to some performances?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just started going out to hear music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to this guy who was the jazz French horn player that I had heard about all my life in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], this guy named Julius Watkins, who worked with Thelonious Monk and Duke Ellington and Mingus [Charles Mingus].
Speaker 1: But when you moved here did you know he was here?
Speaker 2: I, I knew he was here, so when I came to New York [New York] I said I have to find this man, so I just went searching him out and I was able to find him and then I called him up and said that I wanted to have lessons with him and the first thing he said was, "I don't give lessons, you know, I'm sorry." So he was playing a Broadway show at that point.
Speaker 1: Do you know which show?
Speaker 2: It was, it was called 'Raisin' [Charlotte Zaltzberg and Robert Nemiroff]--the 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], but it was, the name was only shortened to 'Raisin' at that point and one day between the, the matinee show and evening show he told me to meet him in the dressing room, so I went to the dressing room and he said, "Okay, play me something." So I put my, my, my horn and played, at that point I had just bought an instrument from my, working my jobs; so I bought my first French horn (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your first French horn.
Speaker 2: My first French horn--
Speaker 1: You first, okay--
Speaker 2: --because I'd only used the school instruments growing up; so I played a little of it and he said, "Boy, you really do have something." So he said, "Yeah, I'll work with you." So I started studying with him at that point.
Speaker 1: I see, so tell us about Frank Watkins [sic.], tell us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Julius Watkins--
Speaker 1: Julius, I'm sorry, I didn't mean Frank, okay, tell us about him--
Speaker 2: Well, he was a--
Speaker 1: --and his background?
Speaker 2: --he was a great player, he said he'd grew up in Detroit [Michigan] and he sort, he was like in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], he was playing around Detroit and he came to New York after he got out of the [U.S.] military I think and was able to go to Manhattan School of Music [New York, New York] with the military.  They offered scholarships for, in you know, like veterans or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]--
Speaker 2: G- thank you, you know, so he, he went to Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York] and studied composition and he was really an accomplished composer as well as a French horn player; so he lead you know, several bands and he played with like all of the major talent, like I said, Mingus, Ellington, you know, Thelonious Monk, he played with everybody and he had his own group and he, he made six albums of his own group as well.
Speaker 1: And so at the time that you are--he lived until when?
Speaker 2: He died in '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977], so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I studied with him the last three years of his life.
Speaker 1: --of his life, okay, because I was going to say he was, okay--
Speaker 2: He died very young at fifty-five years old.
Speaker 1: That's what I was going to say, he was--okay, okay.  So he--okay; but when you--so what are you learning from him because you know, part of this whole thing is deconstructing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 1: --what you've--right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What you've learned, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I--but he had been classically trained so that's good, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had been classically trained as well, too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had been classically taught trained as well.
Speaker 2: --so when I first started going to him he would only give me like classical things to work on.  I said, you know, "I came to you because I wanted to learn how to play jazz," you know, "I've been doing that other thing."  He said, "Yeah, but you need to be a better player, you need to work on these other things." So a lot of it was that I had to force him to teach me, start working toward improvisation, you know, like playing two chords and everything.  I had to like, kind of like, get it out of him, make him do it 'cause he was a very quiet man, he didn't, really didn't say much.  Whenever I would play something he would say, he would say, "Yeah, that's good," you know.  He would never be very committed like, "That stinks and let's do that again," you know, he would always say, "Oh yeah, that was okay," you know, he wasn't a very good teacher, you, you know, so I just kind of learned from example more than from what he said, but at, at, at that point not only was I studying with him, I was going around you know, trying to immerse myself in the musical scene and play with different bands as much as I can play, you know; so a lot of the, the loft scene that I talked about was.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the loft scene--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and who, where because it's, this is around the Village that the--it's mainly the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], right, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --or, all the Village?
Story_ID: 643789
Speaker 1: --Another question.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: In those--it didn't matter what the instrument--
Speaker 2: It did.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I'm, I'm asking, so if you come up with--'cause they, they're not used to a French horn (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and that so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --did, did it matter what they say--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was being confronted all the time with people saying, "You can't play; this is not a jazz instrument," (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is not what.
Speaker 2: --you know, "what are you doing with this?"
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And, and, but you know, I wanted to do it because like I said (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hold on, hold on--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I felt that the horn, when I heard it, it called me and it was calling my name out you know, this is what I needed to do; so regardless of what, whatever I played it had to be on that instrument you know, so even though all odds, everything pointed against me saying that it wasn't possible, all the teachers said, "Oh you can't play jazz on the French horn, it's too hard," blah, blah, blah.  I said, "No," you know, I just have to make a way and I--once I found that Julius Watkins had done it you know, I was trying to listen to his recordings as much as I could, but it was hard to find his recordings because they were out of print, so I was just, you know I was just, you know I was in flux, but I, I knew that, what I wanted to do.  It was just a self determined thing, a hard headed thing when I said I'm going to do this and I just pushed the issue until it, it started to form and I started, I started to work on ideas and get things together a lot.
Speaker 1: But it started to form with whom?
Speaker 2: Well I would get together with other players around the neighborhood [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] too.  We'd have like little jam sessions and stuff and write out songs and work on things. So I was just learning wherever I could pick up knowledge I would.
Story_ID: 643790
Speaker 1: So who were some of these pla- who were some of the people that you were performing with?
Speaker 2: I mean, they were, their, the names you probably wouldn't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) wouldn't know. Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but one of these groups lead me to Sun Ra [Sun Ra Arkestra], when I started working with Sun Ra because a guy told me he says, "Sun Ra had a French horn player in his orchestra and the French horn player quit, so you should call him because he's looking for a French horn player." So I said, "Well give me his number." So I called Sun Ra, he was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at that time. So I said, "Hello Mr. Ra," and, "My name is [HistoryMaker] Vincent Chancey and I play French horn, I heard you're looking for a French horn player."  He said, "I'm not looking for a French horn player, I don't know who told you that."  He said, "I had one in my band, but he quit, when he quit I rearranged all the music without the French horn."
Speaker 1: So he was about through with the French horn (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, so he, he--I said well, "Okay, I'm sorry to bother you," you know.  He said, "Well wait a minute." So he said, "Come down to rehearsal." So I went down to Philadelphia a couple days later and rehearsed with the band and he had me play--because he would play on the piano a lot and he said, "Just improvise with me and play with me." So I did and I was still trying to learn to play within that, that, you know form of music, but I, I did have something and he heard it so he says, "Okay, I want you to play with me." So about two weeks later I was in Paris [France] with, with Sun Ra for a three month tour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow, so--
Speaker 2: --and, and playing with him--
Speaker 1: So that was how you really got started.
Speaker 2: That was when--
Speaker 1: I mean, I mean 'cause--
Speaker 2: His, his name was the one that really got my name recognized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know 'cause I was playing with a big name; and, and his music was, everything from free to old classic big band, to funk, to you know, all kinds, you know, he played everything, his music.
Speaker 1: Well how, how many people in his band?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it varied from like twelve to thirty people, you know.
Speaker 1: But, this is your first international, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: So you were living in, in Paris, or were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yeah, we were you know.
Speaker 1: You were traveling around sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we were based in Paris, but we traveled all around you know, living in hotels though.
Speaker 1: You were living in hotels, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 643791
Speaker 1: And so what are you learning about yourself, about your--the instrument and you're working with the instrument you bought, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, so you know, I'm still trying to find its place in the music you know, even to this day, you know I have all my students, I said, I tell them, "That's what you need to do, you need to find this instrument's place in this music," because I have a lot of classical players come to me because they say they want to do what you did, you know, "How did you do this?" You know.  So, you know, I was just trying to find how the horn could relate to that music and you know, what was--there had to be a place for it in the improvisation, in the ensemble you know and it was up to me to do it because you know, I really didn't get it from Julius [Julius Watkins] because he was very vague about everything, so I just had to find it and create it my own self.
Speaker 1: So when, was, was, Sun Ra, was that, that, was that orchestra [Sun Ra Arkestra], was that group or orchestra, was it, I mean you would have to have people who were prone to improvisation with your instrument, that's why I'm saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --so when he said he had written those pieces out, he really had--I mean 'cause a lot of it is improvisation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but it, you know, the, the solo is when one guy gets up to solo its improvised, but all the ensemble things are all written out.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: A lot of people didn't realize that about (unclear) and I explained all of that all that crazy, free music that guy writes everything out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He did?
Speaker 2: --all of that's written out and I'll tell you, some of the hardest things in the world to read, even as a classical player, his stuff was you know, with jumps and all kind of madness.
Speaker 1: So wait a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of the hardest music that I ever read was playing with Sun Ra.
Speaker 1: So, but what, what was his background then?  Can you explain?
Speaker 2: He was a self taught player--he grew up in Alabama, in Birmingham, I--in the, well he was born in like 1914, yeah, 1914, next year is his hundredth anniversary of his birth.  So he grew up in, in the segregated South of Birmingham, Alabama in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] and he came north and moved to Chicago [Illinois] in, in the early--the late '40s [1940s], '47 [sic. 1945] I think, he moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: You know, I also see him more with the '60s [1960s] and many ways--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, not so much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but he had a whole big band culture that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see--
Speaker 2: --that he did with--
Speaker 1: --so here I'm thinking of him later.
Speaker 2: --with the early big bands--yeah, well later he developed this whole outer space--
Speaker 1: Outer space, right, that's what--
Speaker 2: --and the crazy, you know--
Speaker 1: --that's what I'm saying--
Speaker 2: --that.
Speaker 1: --but was he called Sun Ra back then, or what, maybe now that the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now when his name was, was--
Speaker 1: --'cause I--
Speaker 2: --Herman, Herman Blount [Herman Poole Blount] was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, see--Blount, like B-L-O-U-N-T--
Speaker 2: B-L-O-U-N-T.
Speaker 1: Well, okay, 'cause that's why I'm saying I was like thinking (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but he changed his name to Sun Ra around 1949 or '50 [1950], very early, before other people--African Americans were changing their names; but there always like a kind of spiritual kind of existential black, you know feeling in Chicago.  I don't know what it is about the climate in Chicago that fostered that kind of thinking, that mentality, but he was part of that whole black, intellectual scene in the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] all the way up to the beatnik times, you know Sun Ra was very much into that along with [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and a lot of those other people from that period.
Speaker 1: Right. But where did he learn to--you said that he was self taught, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was self-taught.
Speaker 1: --so but he still would write all of his music out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they said by the time he was fourteen years old he could sit down and write like, piano concertos and things.
Story_ID: 643792
Speaker 1: So what do you learn from--you worked with him for how long?
Speaker 2: Well, I played with him--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I had from 1976 to '78 [1978], is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's exactly, those are the years that I was exclusively playing with Sun Ra.  After that I started, I left his band and I would start touring with other people, but I would always go back periodically and play with him, still do to this day.  Two weeks ago I did a concert here at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] with the Sun Ra Arkestra, even though Sun Ra has been dead for twenty years.  I don't work with them as much now, but it was basically those two years and then I did some recordings around 1980 and '81 [1981] that I did with the band.
Speaker 1: Why did you leave them, was it just for financial or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Financial, you know, he didn't pay great and you know, I couldn't, I didn't adhere totally with his philosophy and--
Speaker 1: What was his philosophy?
Speaker 2: --he had a whole communal way of living.  I didn't want to live in the house with him.  He knew that and he respected me.
Speaker 1: Wait, you said that you didn't want to live in the what?
Speaker 2: In the, in the house; they, he stays in, he stayed in the house in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where the whole band stayed in the house, one house in Philadelphia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean there--
Speaker 2: --like twelve or fifteen guys lived in one house.
Speaker 1: Was that required?
Speaker 2: Well, it was just the way it was.  It wasn't required; so when I came in the band and he says, "Would you come, move into the house?" I said, "No, I don't, I'm not moving to the house, I'm sorry," so I never did.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then they would tour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there were things in that band that I didn't really agree with, so I didn't--after I did it, it gave me like a springboard into like--
Speaker 1: Are you more straight and narrow (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I think I am, more than that, more than he is, I tell you, everybody is straight and narrow next to Sun Ra (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 643793
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this though, because he [Sun Ra] is--well, I mean there were a lot of improvisational, but he was very improvisational because it was--
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: --sort of how, that's how he sort of built on an ever changing, sort of music?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, even though you said everything was written, but what, what are you learning? So are you by the end of those two years, have you mastered or feel that you've come a long way with using the French horn--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the way you want for, and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I felt like I was on, on my way, you know as far as mastering, no, to this day I, I, I you know, it's, it's always an improvement an improving situation you know, playing the instrument.  I think I will never ever reach a plateau where I say, "Well, I'm here now, you know, this is it, I'm the greatest," blah, blah, you know, I always try for more no matter what plateau I get to it, it just keeps building to the, to another one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know; so, but at that point I felt like I had started to get a grasp of jazz and I could play it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you, did you. But you, did you live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --because your son [Bahij Chancey] thought--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you always (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I always commuted from New York [New York] when I rehearse.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's not a bad commute, but--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 643794
Speaker 1: What about the next six years you work with, is it Carla?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with Carla Bley.
Speaker 1: Right, Bley. Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I worked with her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But how do you, how do you--?
Speaker 2: How did I change to work from her and to him?
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well she called me up one day and said, you know, "Are you [HistoryMaker] Vincent Chancey?" I said, "Yes." And she said, "I want you to work with my band."
Speaker 1: And how had she heard of you?
Speaker 2: I was you know, getting to be known around New York [New York] you know, you know as a player (unclear) for that instrument you know, there're so very few and she, she liked the instrument and she had written for the instrument before and she didn't like the guy that preceded--I don't think he was an improviser, so she wanted to use me and she was just intrigued about my personality and everything.  The first thing she said to me was, "What's your real name?"  I said, "Well, my name is Vincent Chancey."  She said, "Well, isn't that Chancey your stage name?"  I said, "No, that's my real name" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Because a lot of people used, would use a stage name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so, but you know, so she had a band and I worked with her band for six years until the next thing I think, Lester Bowie called me and wanted me to play with his band and you know--
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the experience of those six years though.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and her, she, she's a whole different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean she had a whole different, you know, most--her music was a lot more tamed and composed and you know, with solos and improvisations, but you know, not so wild and all over the place you know, a lot of songs and she's a you know, a very prolific composer you know, so she wrote a lot of recognized, people--songs that people recognized still today. And just the business part of playing with her, you know, you knew where you were going, you had an itinerary, you knew how much you were getting paid; with Sun Ra all that was you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was all a more (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --completely, yeah (laughter), you never knew what was happening, so I really liked it.  I said, "Oh boy, this is--," you really worked.  And she was working a lot in Europe.  We would go to--we would do like country tours.  We'd go to France and do a six week tour only in France, or an eight week tour only in Scandinavia or you know, an Italian tour you know, so she worked a lot in Europe and all around the states to, a lot in California and--not much in Chicago [Illinois] though, I can't ever remember playing with her in Chicago.  We played St. Louis [Missouri] and Texas and a lot of other places, Massachusetts, so I liked playing with her.  It was nice and it was just, I felt like I'd kind of arrived on the musical scene you know and, and I was getting more recognized working with her as well, so more people were calling me to you know, do recordings with them and to work with them here in the city (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who--
Story_ID: 643795
Speaker 1: Who were you doing, who--what type of people were calling you for recordings because you worked a lot of people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of people were, just were starting to move here [New York, New York] from Chicago [Illinois], the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois] people, so, Henry Threadgill.
Speaker 1: So who, who were the AACM?
Speaker 2: Muhal Richard Abrams called me; I did some things with him.  I did two or three records with him and some, some of the traditional jazz guys. Frank Foster, who played saxophone with the Count Basie band for many years, called me to play with his band.  I started doing some Broadway work.  I was working on Broadway.
Speaker 1: And what, what did you, what, what did you do, work on, on Broadway 'cause I know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A couple of shows that failed, nothing that (unclear).  The one that ran longest was one called 'It's So Nice To Be Civilized' [Micki Grant] and it didn't last very, maybe six month run (unclear), but and then doing recordings with other projects, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. So are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) films, some films as well.
Story_ID: 643796
Speaker 1: I want to go back to Carla [Carla Bley] because I--you're saying that you were learning about the, the business of music also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --with her, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so what things are, what things did you learn then because it's not like this was ever taught to you or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and are you--at what point, is it during those six years that you're able to live off your music, or are you still having to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, by this point I was only living on my music.
Speaker 1: --by this point (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right, even with Sun Ra, when I was playing with Sun Ra, I was only living on my music as well.
Speaker 1: You were? Okay--
Speaker 2: Between playing with that group [Sun Ra Arkestra] and then doing other things around town.  Of course, in those days I had like an East Village [New York, New York] apartment where my rent was $125 a month so I didn't have to work very much to pay my rent and you know, I was you know, living you know, very frugally (unclear).
Speaker 1: So what would it get, what would you get paid on a gig, you know, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Well I think when I started working with her I was making something like $1,200 a week salary, you know.
Speaker 1: That's not bad at that time.
Speaker 2: No, especially for that time.
Speaker 1: For that time period that's not bad at all.
Speaker 2: Yes, so I mean once she called me you know and told me what I would be making as compared to playing with Sun Ra where some days he'd give you $100, some days he'd give you $20, you know, you, you never knew what you were going to make, you know, but a lot of people in the band, which is also one of the reasons why I left the band, 'cause a lot of the people in the band he just controlled them so much he wouldn't pay them anything, but when I got in the band, I said, you know, "Sun Ra, I'm a professional." He said, "No problem." So after every job he would come and give me money, but I found out later that he wasn't doing that with the other guys who had been with him for twenty and thirty years, you know, so I was getting more than a lot of those old guys who had spent their lives working with him, because they never stood up to him and said, you know, "Well I'm a professional, I demand this." And when I went in I just said that you know, so he always paid me.
Speaker 1: Okay though where had you gotten that from because I mean this--
Speaker 2: I just think because I needed it you know; like I said, I left, I left home when I was eighteen years old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know, but your--
Speaker 2: --and I never had anyone that I could turn to for money.  I had to make it myself some way.
Speaker 1: I see, but I mean you're still learning by the time you get to him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean that's all I'm saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean you, you learn really from him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in some respects, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I did, no I did, I learned a lot from him as well, right.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), but maybe because like you said you had to be--and then he would, there was somewhat a dysfunctional environment there so people--
Speaker 2: Right, and then, and then he took a liking to me so I can remember like being in Paris [France] where he would say, you know, "Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Chancey] come with me I'm going to go to this restaurant and whatever," and I'd say, "Yeah." I was thinking, all these guys, why was he inviting me? But I would sit with him and you know other guys would come around, "Oh, Sun Ra, Sun Ra," I would be at the table, I would just watch the whole interplay, you know, see things.  One time he said, you know, that he was going to go meet somebody, so, I went with him to this restaurant and James Baldwin was sitting there, so we sat at the table with James Baldwin, so I said, "Wow," you know. So, I mean I learned a lot being around Sun Ra too, you know.
Speaker 1: Well he was an icon in, in that way, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 643797
Speaker 1: What other things--can you, are there other Sun Ra stories you'd like to sort of share?
Speaker 2: Travel stories?
Speaker 1: Travel stories or--
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) I have a million of them (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well, let's just share a few of them.
Speaker 2: Well Sun Ra, he, he traveled all over America unlike any other band that I've ever worked with.  He would play in every little town in you know, Missouri or Oklahoma or Tennessee you know, he'd go to all kinds of places. So this one trip, I was traveling, I don't know where we were going but we were traveling through Texas, I think we were going to Texas, going through New Mexico, driving in like two or three vans on, on the road, so as we're driving like one [o'clock] in the morning, like all, all the guys in the vans drove the vans, we didn't have drivers and everything was totally self contained, so this was the day of the CD radios, so you know, Sun Ra said, "I'm hungry," you know, and it's like one in the morning, so all the guys in the van started saying, "Sunny's hungry, Sunny's hungry." So I--all the three cars knew that, you know, so we had to find a restaurant so we saw this little sign that just said, "Restaurant," a neon sign in the middle of nowhere on the highway going through New Mexico.  I remember we, we were going through Deming, New Mexico, so he said, "Get off there and let's find this restaurant." So you know, we get off the highway drive down a dirt road for like three miles and then we pull up to this area that's like kind of a shack with like maybe a Budweiser sign and you know lights and some pickup trucks parked there, so, you know, one in the morning, mind. So we get out, open the door. When Sun Ra, when he traveled he wore everything that he wore, wore on stage so he had like this, this big tunic with a Saturn on it and a cape and then he had a hat that had lights that spin around, so the door opens, Sun Ra's standing there with this cape blowing and the wind and hat spinning with the lights on his hat and these guys are sitting at the bar you know, like drinking Budweiser with cowboy hats and so, so everybody just stopped and they looked you know, Sun Ra is there with all these guys, you know, the guys you know were wearing turbans and all kinds of stuff, so they were like, "What the hell?" So you know we all walk in the place, so a lady comes up and she says, "Y'all ain't from around here are you?"  That's one story I will always remember with Sun Ra.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know when I think of him, God, who do I also think of?  You know for some reason, but it's a whole different thing, I think of George Clinton in some respects (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: --because--
Speaker 2: --George Clinton said he learned everything he knew from Sun Ra, I mean that they, and he even said in an interview, somebody mentioned Sun Ra to him, he said, "Yes, we eat at the same lunch counter," you know.
Speaker 1: That's what I think, his earlier version.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah because when I first saw him, when I was in college [Southern Illinois University], when I was in Carbondale [Illinois] I went to one of their concerts and, well that's before I was playing with Sun Ra, I was, I think I was nineteen years old, I said, "Wow this guy is weird," you know, what a weird, strange band [Parliament-Funkadelic], you know, almost scary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, it was right--
Speaker 2: --I was kind of frightened by it.
Speaker 1: Do you know what--he also had like, they had a, that group thing had to have, you know, it was also--
Speaker 2: A cult kind of feeling, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I don't want to--cult. Oh, well not a cult. But sort of like, you know, everyone had this sort of, it was, you had, it was all in the environment--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Everybody had their own strange appearance and dress and yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 643798
Speaker 1: Do you have any other Sun Ra stories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, another time we were traveling through Ohio I think, and one of the cars got a flat tire, so CB [citizens brand] radio, so and they said you know, "Somebody's got a flat tire, so and everybody get--," all the vans pull over and then over on the CB, CB radio we hear somebody say, "Hey Chuck [ph.], hey Chuck, there're some Arabs on the road over there." So you know, guys start changing the tire and then about three minutes later they said, "Them ain't Arabs, them's niggers." (Laughter) Yeah, that was another story and it's funny because when this whole, when all of this would be happening, happening, I would be like cracking up laughing.  Everybody in the band [Sun Ra Arkestra] was like, you know like, "Why are you laughing?" You know, you know, they were just, they were so serious about the whole Sun Ra thing.  With me, I mean, I, I was always apart from it, I was there but that's why I knew that I could step away at any point because I was never, he never pulled the wool over my eyes.
Speaker 1: But what was his culture like?  What would he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well he, he was into like, mind manipulation with the guys, you know.
Speaker 1: So what would he do because you had, you had, you been an orphan--
Speaker 2: He was, he was a very brilliant.
Speaker 1: --you weren't raised in a family environment (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, I--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --you know, exactly.  He was a, he was a very brilliant man you know, he knew a lot you know, like I said he studied the occult and he could talk about you know, you know, Egyptology or even all the religions, you know, Hinduism or Buddhism you know, some, sometimes you'd go to his hotel room at one o'clock in the morning and he would be reading, you know like the Bhagavad Gita or you know, he was like very well read in a lot of the mystical arts and stuff, so he had a lot of this information and he used it to control a lot of, a lot of the people in his band; I mean not, I don't think he thought of it as like, controlling them, but he talked, when he talked everybody stopped and listened and, sat around, "That's right Sunny, that's right Sunny."
Speaker 1: Well people had a lot of respect for him--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they did.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: And then he would bring a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but people like that are hard to work with--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--
Speaker 1: --you, you have to flow the way they flow.
Speaker 2: That's, exactly, you know, he was, it was one way, his way and that was that.
Speaker 1: Was he disappointed though when you, when you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was when I left, he was you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he, he was, was he adopting you sort of as a, a son in some respects?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he kind of thought he was you know, but you know, you know I was into the growth thing and that was just a stop along the way, but you know, he didn't see it as that.  He was so happy that I was playing with him I think because he liked what I brought to the band musically because you know the other horn player that was in the band before me didn't really improvise; I would stand up, so a lot of the times when, when concerts, he would just call me to stand up and I would do a duo with him, just solo, just for five or ten minutes and at one point he taped, he put out a record called 'Taking a Chance on Chancey' ['Taking a Chance on Chances,' Sun Ra] and it was just about all the duals that I had done with him, you know, so he really you know, liked that and I think that the fact that he called his band an Arkestra [Sun Ra Arkestra], A-R and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) K--
Speaker 2: K and, and me playing an orchestral instrument and it brought it out of the jazz thing into more you know, broader spectrum as well, I think he kind of liked that as well.
Speaker 1: Did he ever replace you then once he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was nobody who played the horn, who could--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --I mean, after I left nobody was, could do what I did with the instrument, you know.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.
Story_ID: 643799
Speaker 1: So I want to understand also something, and that is, what--how do you rehearse, I mean how were you rehearsing and is it mainly, is this in the, in the jazz arena, is it that you are, you know, doing jam sessions and, and, and working that way, or, I mean I'm just trying to sort of understand?
Speaker 2: Well, well jazz (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And like--
Speaker 2: --you know, with Sun Ra or with anybody, just in general?
Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask in general then I want to go back to him, but--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean usually when, when a guy forms a band or something he has compositions that he's trying to you know, play, sometimes they are more involved than others.  I've played in some groups where there would be like ten, fifteen page composition, you know and then there is improvisation within it, but you know, for the main part the, the whole unit is reading along you know, together; so a lot of the rehearsals are about you know, being able to interpret and play and get the music to a, a tight presentation for performance, you know.
Speaker 1: So when you--for any, I mean when you are joining a group or things are, are you rehearsing how many times a week?  Is it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It varies, I mean, sometimes, some groups I, I play with there's no rehearsal at all, you just go in and you sight read everything on the job, those are few and then you have other groups where guys who want to get together and rehearse once a week and then other times where you have a concert so that they will set up like four or five rehearsal for one concert you know, so it, it really varies.
Speaker 1: But what about the improvisational part of that, that comes out of the rehearsal?
Speaker 2: Well the rehearsal, that's not so much paid attention to in the rehearsals.  The rehearsals are about getting the ensemble written things together.
Speaker 1: For getting it tight--
Speaker 2: I mean, as, as far as soloing, you develop that on your own, that's what you do when you practice at home, learn how to play and play to the harmonic changes that are going by.
Story_ID: 643800
Speaker 1: Carla [Carla Bley], I want to go back to her, she's known as important in the free jazz movement, can you explain what the free jazz movement is (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, well you know, free jazz is after I think the early '60s [1960s] it was, the free jazz movement came along and free jazz was about, well, jazz before then was about people playing compositions, songs, you know like, Gershwin [George Gershwin], Cole Porter songs, or whatever and the improvisation would be on those songs, you know, so you had the form, you know, it's a harmonic structure that maintains itself even throughout all the improvisation, to hold it together.  So when free jazz came around they're saying we're dropping all that structure when we solo it's just going to be like, completely free, like whatever comes out of it, so you're not playing to any structure; so that's what the initial free jazz was about; you just getting rid of all the rules, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who also was active in that movement at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, John Coltrane, Archie Shepp, all the AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois] people, you know (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) AACM I think, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were very instrumental in that.  It's a lot of names (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --but John Coltrane, he, he, he bridges several movements?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay--
Speaker 2: The latter part of his life, he went into that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but before he was a, a staunch bebop player.
Speaker 1: Right, okay. So were you with her when she did--
Story_ID: 643801
Speaker 1: I do want to ask you before we--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I want to ask your process because everybody has their own process and everybody--you had used a different tone, I--if you were a local music--I would say find your musical voice, but that's a--when, when you were determined--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know you could hear your instrument you were, you liked the sound (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right.
Speaker 1: --of the French horn--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --you could hear it and you wanted to use it and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you know, on, in jazz music, so the thing is what is, what was the process?  Have you ever thought about the process you went through? 'Cause the reason I'm asking is, you could hear it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The people who are trained jazz musicians are like, some of them, "No, no, no, no."
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what was that process because what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --I mean, it seems to be--
Speaker 2: --they could.
Speaker 1: --a very shorten process for you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that's what I'm trying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, it's not so short actually, it's ongoing.  In the beginning I heard the instrument and I knew that whatever I did it had to be with this instrument.  Later, when I wanted to play jazz I heard like the jazz sound in freezing and movement with the instrument that I'd never heard before, but they were in my head and that's, it's like a dog chasing the carrot, that keeps changing and it keeps, you know metaphor--
Speaker 1: Metamorphosing.
Speaker 2: Right, metamorphosing in my brain as much as I learn it changes and keeps going and going into more and more other things; so that sound is there and, and, and all my practice and everything is to reach it, come closer to what I'm experimenting, what I'm experiencing in my head.  I don't know if anybody else that that's happened to, but you know, I, I've never actually put that in words, but that's what's going on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 2: I mean I've heard it earlier.
Speaker 1: --because I was trying to think, that's why I was trying to think that you liked the sound but then you have to sort of figure it in this, you know, out in this venue and then you have to, you have to do that because then you're--people are listening (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and they're taking their own--
Speaker 2: I mean, I mean first it's here (gesture) then I have to translate it through the instrument after that, you know and I get it in my fingers (gesture), and to be able to process what's going on up here, so that's a major bond, I mean and it, and it's still, I keep saying it's a still growing thing.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But people hear me and they say, "Wow, I've never it, heard any instrument sound like that.  How do you do that?" And it's because I'm chasing that carrot you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know--
Story_ID: 643802
Speaker 1: And I want to ask another thing before I forget.  The whole thing about, you know, you said at first you know, because you were bucked teeth--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then you know I had read that you know, the mouthpiece you know, where the mouthpiece, so where is your mouthpiece position, or do you have a special place for it?
Speaker 2: Mine goes right in the center here.
Speaker 1: Oh, yours goes in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but I had heard sometimes that people put it to the side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's usually due to your teeth configuration.  Sometimes the teeth are a little crooked, some might you know move over, but generally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You do yours--
Speaker 2: --it's in the center.
Speaker 1: In the center, okay.
Speaker 2: It's in the center.  I try to keep it in the center.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, but is there any other technique that you've, that you use to create your sound?  That you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A personal thing--
Speaker 1: Yeah, a personal thing?
Speaker 2: I've created a whole system of articulation; it drives my students crazy because people think of the French horn as a usually slow moving melodic instrument and people say, "How do you play it so fast?  You play all of these fast lines."  I have a thing--there's this thing in, in horn playing called double tonguing whereas when you tongue you've got (makes sound), double tonguing is (makes sound).
Speaker 1: That's hard.
Speaker 2: Right, so I developed a whole system of double tonguing in all my playing.  I double tongue everything, so I'm able to play fast or slow 'cause you know, people say, "I've never heard the French horn player play that fast.  How do you do that?" You know, I'm double tonguing everything; but it took years to develop that you know, to get my tongue to be able to respond in that way.
Speaker 1: I see, I see and that's just through practice.
Speaker 2: (Nods head)
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and experimentation, okay.
Story_ID: 643803
Speaker 1: You're making good money at age twenty-seven.  I was just thinking; she did okay by you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just saying that was, okay--so I mean it's not, but anyway, so there.  So when, so what, how do you get in with Lester Bowie?  How--
Speaker 2: Well he, he was forming this brass band because he had always worked with all of his other units and stuff, but he wanted to have a brass band, so he had, he, his idea was he wanted to have a band that did pop music you know, so people never realized it, but the Brass Fantasy [Lester Bowie's Brass Fantasy] was the name of that band and we played like Whitney Houston songs and, and Michael Jackson songs and you know, old doo wops, you know, and The Pretenders and all of these songs and so, so he called me when he was forming this band.
Speaker 1: But how had you met him originally?  Was he just calling you?
Speaker 2: He just saw me around, I mean, yeah, in different places where I'd be hanging at, he'd see me at a concert or he may come to a concert where I was playing with another band, so he wanted my sound in his band you know, the instrument and my sound; so he called me when I was playing with Carla [Carla Bley] and said that he wanted me to play with me, he said--I said, "How much can you pay me?"  He says, "I can pay you two thousand dollars a week for a tour--," in 1984, so I said, "Carla, see you (laughter)."  But you know I mean, not that it was only the money, but I just felt like you know, I'd done a long time, six years.
Speaker 1: Well this was, this was something new?
Speaker 2: Right and it was something new, and it was a whole new experience and I wanted to do it.  It sounded like it was going to be fun and Lester was really a very nice guy to work for.  He was very easy going and he let everybody express, express themselves and he didn't have a dictatorial nature or anything, which so often band leaders do have, so I did it and it was a great experience working with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with, but this is more mainstream, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So with the, the style that you--so you were not experimenting so much with, with Lester, right?
Speaker 2: Oh well you know, he would, in the solos he would extend things away from you know, those songs, but that band was really a, a pop band (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, it was a pop band.
Speaker 2: --and that was its appeal.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: And it's funny because the band became huge in America--huge in Japan and in, in Europe, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But not so much here--
Speaker 2: --not, not in America, you know.  We would play in America maybe like ten concerts a, a year and then we'd go to Europe and we'd play you know, like a hundred concerts.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and what would your season be usually?
Speaker 2: You know, usually the summers I was in Europe the whole summer and then the next busy season was around February, March and then some in the fall as well.
Story_ID: 643804
Speaker 1: Now were you active with the (cough) you know, jazz festivals you know, have been--well--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they were popular then and continue to be popular (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So were you playing also many jazz festivals?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we were doing all major festivals you know Monterey [Monterey Jazz Festival, Monterey, California].
Speaker 1: And which of the festivals did you like the most?
Speaker 2: North Sea Jazz Festival in Holland [the Netherlands] is a nice one. There's one in San Sebastian, Spain [San Sebastian Jazz Festival; Heineken Jazzaldia] that's a really nice one; the Berlin [Germany] jazz festival [JazzFest Berlin], so many of them and in the, in the South of France.
Speaker 1: You're not mentioning, not a place in the United States.
Speaker 2: The South of France had a lot and in the United States, the Chicago Jazz Festival [Chicago, Illinois] has always had a special place in my heart.  Its, it's a really--not because I'm from Chicago, but it's a great festival.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They run a really good festival there and it's a free festival--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --so, you know the public is huge you know; you have forty thousand people coming to hear someone.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I really do like that festival.  And the first time that I played it, I played with Sun Ra in 1981 and I, I was playing with another band, so Sun Ra was touring, so he went there and I had to come and join the band later so I flew in separately and when I came in and I saw the guy with my name on a card at the airport you know, you know, a limo with a driver and I had my own limousine I said, "Boy, this Chicago festival is pretty cool"  (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You said, "I've arrived."
Speaker 2: "I've arrived," yeah, right.
Speaker 1: You're like Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: "I'm home" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 643805
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played with him how long, with Lester Bowie you said?
Speaker 2: I played with Lester until his death, so I played with him for fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Oh 'til his deat- 'cause that's what I was going to say, oh.
Speaker 2: In fact when he, when he, when he got sick, we were doing a concert in Portugal once and on the way back from the, from the concert he was on the plane and he said, "Oh god, I've got this feeling, this pain in my stomach.  I don't know what it is, just, you know, it's really bothering me."  I said, "You should go to the doctor Lester when we get home, when we get back."  He went to the doctor, the doctor told him that he had cancer and had six months to live, right, just like that.  So, you know, he had a tour planned like the fifth and sixth of those six months you know, so, so he said he was going to do the tour.  I said, "Lester, why are you going to do that, you should, you should really take care of yourself."  He said, "No, I mean I've spent my whole life playing music, music is what I love, what I do, so if I go out, I want to go out doing what I love." So when we did the rehearsals for the, for the tour he gave everybody in the band all these parts.  He said, "If I'm not there on this song you play this part where I play and you play--," you know, and all, he did all of the songs like that.  We get like three quarters of the way through the tour he was getting worse and worse and worse as it went on.  We got to London [England] and he went in the hospital and the doctors said, "Get this man home."  He went, came, he came back home and died in two days and we--he said but, before he left, he said, "Finish the tour." We still had two more weeks of touring, so we finished the tour and he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In his honor--
Speaker 2: --he had died before we finished the tour, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow. So no one was with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we weren't even there to play for his memorial or whatever, it was, it was sad.
Speaker 1: So he, he, he decided not to get any treatment?
Speaker 2: Well, he was doing some treatments, but you know, he had let it go so bad, I mean Lester was a big drinker, he had you know, some drug issues you know.
Speaker 1: You know, but he wasn't that old, he was fifty-eight, it might have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-eight--
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight when he died, he wasn't that old.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Speaker 1: So he--
Story_ID: 643806
Speaker 1: So do you have other stories with him because I mean, did he run a good--you said he was, he was, he was--
Speaker 2: He was very easy to work for you know, you know, yeah, now I, I really loved playing with him.  He was always business and made sure that we, we all got the best treatment.  We would arrive at hotels sometimes and if he didn't like the way the hotel looked, so he would say, "Don't go to the rooms."  He'd called the, the, the concert promoter and say, "We're going to the Grand Hotel."  We'd go to the Grand Hotel, check in and the promoter would have to pay for it, I mean he made sure we always got the best.  We always got the best money.  When he was sick on the tour and we were going to London [England] we had to take the ferry from, from France to England, you know that, crossing the English Channel, which is a horrible ferry, I said, "Lester [Lester Bowie], you know you're sick, you shouldn't do this, you know, take a, take a flight." And he said, "But if I take a flight it's going to be less money for you."  I said, you know, "Well, I don't care you know, take a flight." He still took the boat with us you know, because he wanted to make sure us guys got paid and he always you know, made, he paid us as much as he could pay us and you know, he was very well loved everywhere you know, by a lot of people.  I remember this one, this one gig we did in Palermo in, in Sicily [Italy].  The band flew there, I said, "What is this concert Lester?" He said, "Oh, we're, we're just going to do one gig here." So we checked in and then these guys came to the hotel, picked us up, we drive out of town to this like, big gate, pull in the gate and go like a mile down this road to this huge mansion you know, and then there's a courtyard where the band played only for like you know, like twenty-five people or something, you know; they were all mob, it was a mob thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was, it was a--
Speaker 2: --but they--
Speaker 1: --it was?
Speaker 2: --they loved Lester, you know and he use to go to Italy and all those people loved him and they would pay him top dollar you know.  We just went to like, that one show in Palermo or something; he'd given me like four thousand dollars or something and this was a ten piece band he had to pay you know.  So he, you know, he always took care of business and he always made sure everybody got as much and he wouldn't just take a lot and just give the band a little bit, he would--I know, I'm sure he was making more than the band, but he made sure that everybody made money.
Speaker 1: The band--but you know, but that's a good bandleader (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is--
Speaker 1: --you know, because people will be very dedicated when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I've heard people you know, other musicians, talk, you know, making sure the band got taken care of, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Right, right, so that's what I really loved about him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 643807
Speaker 1: So what other things are you--because fifteen years is a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now aren't--do you get married in that, in this time period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got married in 1990.
Speaker 1: So '90 [1990], okay, so half, almost halfway through (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So what, how are you meet--how did you meet your wife?  You said you met her--
Speaker 2: I met her here in New York [New York] at a party you know, I had a friend of mine that I was going out with who was a chef and she had a Lebanese friend who used to throw a Christmas party every year, so she said, "Why don't you come to this party?"  She said, "It's funny, she's, she's got a friend that I met, you would like her, she's your kind of girl." You know, this is my girlfriend telling me this and so, you know, "What are you saying?" You know, "Aren't you my kind of girl?" (Laughter) You know. So I get to the party and she introduces me and I said, "Wow, she's interesting" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your girlfriend was right.
Speaker 2: Right, she was right.  So, so we met and you know, I, I gave her a call.  She was with, with somebody and I was with somebody so I just left it at that.  I called her a few times and I got the feeling she was like, saying like, why are you calling me kind of thing, so I didn't call. So the next year for the annual party, when it came back again I said, "I think I'm going to go by--," I said, "You want to go to this party again?" (Laughter) And, and I was breaking up with my girlfriend and then my wife was breaking up with the person she was with.
Speaker 1: But you both came to the party?
Speaker 2: We both came to the party probably looking for each other.
Speaker 1: How--and what's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Leila Mae [Leila Mae Makdissy Chancey].
Speaker 1: Okay. And she's Lebanese--
Speaker 2: She's Lebanese. And when we got married somebody said, you know, "Leila Mae, are you from North Carolina or South Carolina?" (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That is true though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because we've got a lot of Maes in the South (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know right, but she said her name is very exotic in Beirut [Lebanon].  I said, "Maybe you should drop the Mae."  She said, "No I love my name" (laughter).
Story_ID: 643808
Speaker 1: So New York [New York] is sti- always during this whole time is your hub?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've always lived in New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, so you're not--now you're not teaching or anything during this whole--
Speaker 2: I had, you know, I'd do like master classes, but I never have been like, affiliated.
Speaker 1: But you do master classes where?  Wherever they would ask you?
Speaker 2: I did one, I was in Holland [the Netherlands]; I spent a stint where I was going to Holland a lot and I was actually working with an opera orchestra there.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, I read about that, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I did a master class at the, at the Amsterdam conservatory [Conservatorium van Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands].  I've done one at the conservatory here in Westchester [Music Conservatory of Westchester, White Plains, New York], north of the city.  I've done them in different places.
Story_ID: 643809
Speaker 1: When did you form the Vince- Vincent Chancey quintet?  When did you do that? Is that after Lester (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when I was working with Lester, I think '95 [1995], '96 [1996], yeah '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Now what made you decide to do that? You--
Speaker 2: Well you know I had been playing everybody's music for, you know, my whole career and I decided that I needed to do something for me so I started you know like, composing and trying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had you done any composing at, before?
Speaker 2: A few, I'd done a few little concerts and written some music but I wasn't really serious to it, about it as far as like, recording it or something; so at that point I decided that I wanted to start writing and recording my own music and form my own bands, get my own bands out there.
Speaker 1: Okay now, that's a whole different proposition, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Especially, you know, 'cause sometimes it's easier to be part of a group than the convener of a group, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I tell you, I was making a lot more money when I was a side man than I was as a leader you know, because you have to pay this person and that person and the rehearsal studios and the studio cost (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had to record (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --for recording and all, you know, by the time you do all that and you pay the guys in the band you're just left with what's left; so I kind of go in and out of that, I, I do it and then when--'cause I make much more money when I work with other people.
Speaker 1: Right, well you have to, but you--like any musician you crave to have your own voice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course, of course--
Speaker 1: --you know, sort of, especially because you were doing more traditional work with Lester Bowie, but it was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it was good, good money but, so, what, what were you desiring to do then?
Speaker 2: Well I mean the, the whole thing is to eventually work more as a leader and, and to, which I've kind of been evading lately because you know, I'm telling you every time I work under my name I can't make enough money but, I mean that's what I want to do.  I want to like finally get to a point, a record con- a label or something which is nonexistent these days, so that's, so that's gone, that's out of (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, the mus- it's changed, changed so much (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's all changed.
Speaker 1: (Cough) Now--
Speaker 2: So if I can just work more under my name and get paid better for it.
Story_ID: 643810
Speaker 1: How about 'Welcome Mr. Chancey,' can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was the first recording I did.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was the first recording I did.  I did it I think around '93 [1993] or ninety--somewhere at that point and you know, I was just, I was writing and I wanted to name the, the record something else, but I put it out by a German record label [In+Out Records] and in Germany there was this movie--remember this movie 'Being There' with, with Peter Sellers.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: It was a movie called 'Being There' and, and his, in the, in the, in that film he had the role, he was playing a guy called Chauncey Gardiner, so in Germany the movie came out not as 'Being There,' but 'Welcome Mr. Chance' so when the German record company decided to entitle the record he said, "We should do 'Welcome Mr. Chancey.'"  I said, "But that doesn't mean anything in the America, that, you know, it just means, you know, this is my first record."  He said, "Well, yeah, it could mean that too." But it also has this other meaning you know, so they put it out, so nobody here--
Speaker 1: So you recorded it in Germany?
Speaker 2: I recorded it here, but a German label picked it up.
Speaker 1: Picked it--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now I recorded it myself.  I had put all the money up for the recording, another lost project you know, money losing project, but then I sold it to this German company.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I mean it takes a lot, the, the--it's a complicated--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well but the business hadn't gotten as complicated as it is right now?
Speaker 2: Business, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's very--
Speaker 2: --I mean now all the record companies have gone under and--
Speaker 1: There're, there're only two in the whole, the whole of, the whole of the world I think 'cause (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there's no stores or anything anymore.
Speaker 1: Right, so, but it's still gonna be around, it's just a different form for the old timers--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just have to find (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The new timers got to figure.
Speaker 2: --find a way to work--
Speaker 1: Right, to work with.
Speaker 2: --within the new system.
Story_ID: 643811
Speaker 1: You wanted to with this ['Welcome Mr. Chancey'], you wanted to, you were hearing things and you wanted a chance to really show people what could be done--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --on the French horn.
Speaker 2: Right and, and give the French horn like more legs in the future to move into another area, you know.  I'm, I'm telling, I always tell all my students (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it's still an obscure instrument, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it is still an obscure instrument, but more and more people are, are playing it in jazz and you know, due to people like me and one or two other people who are also you know, like--
Speaker 1: Who are those other people that you are accrediting?
Speaker 2: Well, Tom Varner is one of them.  He lives in Seattle [Washington]; now he used to live in, in New York [New York], but he moved to Seattle; John Clark is another guy, basically just--there's a guy in Russia in Moscow, Arkady Shilkloper, or something like that.
Speaker 1: You ever--the, the--you guys should get together at some point.
Speaker 2: No we, we have gotten together.
Speaker 1: You have!
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was, I was sort of joking about it.
Speaker 2: No, no, we do get together and there is--what has been called a, a Julius Watkins French Horn Festival of jazz French horn players and every two or three years we'll get together in a different town.  Last year we played in--we were in Virginia somewhere, Richmond, yeah we played in Richmond at Commonwealth University [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia] and got together and there were all the people, the jazz horn enthusiasts around the country were there and all the student body, there must have been sixty French horn players there and then we formed you know, like ensembles to play with, we all arranged for them the things to play and work on improvisation and everything, so you know, it's, it's an ongoing thing.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It's not going to die with me, this jazz French horn thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: But when you, when you did that do you have other instruments that take sort of second fiddle and the French horn takes the predominate place?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but mainly they are French horns.
Speaker 2: Okay. I see.
Speaker 1: I mean, we'll have like piano and bass and drums to form a group or something, or I remember one, there was this, this big workshop with, I think forty French horn players and one saxophone player, so I just told everybody, I said, "Stop everything, look at this picture, it's always me sitting in the room full of saxophone players (laughter), and here is a complete reverse, so you know, just be mindful of that." Everybody laughed, they said, "Oh yeah, right."
Story_ID: 643812
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, artistically were you happy with your album, artistically--forget about the, let's put the business thing aside?
Speaker 2: You know, yeah, to a degree (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you go back and listen to it (unclear).
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm never 100 percent satisfied with anything that I do even when everybody tells me it's perfection you know.  My next, 'Next Mode' record you know, the French horn community raves about that record and when I hear it I can only think of everything that I should have did that I didn't do on there you know, you know, so I'm never completely happy with myself, but it's, it's a life process, you just move closer and closer to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're not happy with anything, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I am happy but--
Speaker 1: --but I mean but what--
Speaker 2: --not totally content, no.
Speaker 1: --I know, but what were you able to do--how much of, how much of the, the, the 'Welcome Mr. Chancey,' how much of it was new composition, because remember you said that you were, you know, wanting to do more composition?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no that, that's all--I think there's only one piece on there that wasn't my composition.  All the other ones were mine.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Right, the same thing on the 'Next Mode' album.
Speaker 1: So, but how long did it take you to do those compositions?  Were those years of work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were?
Speaker 2: Yeah they were years of work, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, um-hm. Okay, I'm just trying, okay, to understand.
Story_ID: 643813
Speaker 1: So let's talk about now and you know, where you are and you've, you've mentioned your students quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You keep mentioning your students but I'm thinking it's outside of master class, is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I have private students that come to me and you know, I give them a one on one lesson and it's based on improvisation and jazz.  All of them are classical players, you know, most of them are professional players, but they want to extend their range you know, to play jazz, so you know, they come to me and I go over and just try to get them over the hump because I always say classical is the one side of the brain and jazz is the other side of the brain.  It's a completely different way of thinking, so just to get them out of that box of reading everything, you know.  They can't play music unless it's on the page, you know, you know and teach them all the mechanics and what they need to learn to be able to play jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay, who of your, who of your students, or have you found yourself in any of, a future, a Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Chancey]?  Have you found anyone else who could be a future you?  The--are you seeing--remember because--
Speaker 2: I had one girl who was very good.  She came and studied with me for three years and she was always kind of like a wildflower you know, and she later formed a rock band where she was singing and playing French horn.  She's still going on you know, so I, I think she's interesting, but and I would recommend her for a lot of concerts that I couldn't do; but a lot of people say, "Yeah, she's interesting but we really miss having you, you know," you know.  I haven't found anybody yet who has, I think maybe it's just a dedication that I've always had, the whole drive and that thing from a very young child and I wanted to do that.  People would say, "Oh yeah it would be interesting to do that," but they don't have that same you know, like life you know, altering thing to, you know, make them do it, you know.
Speaker 1: And where are your students coming from primarily?
Speaker 2: Well you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh you--
Speaker 2: --this is within New York [New York] so they are here usually as classical players from all over the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had one girl recently I started working with, she's Japanese, so she's from Japan; but I worked there until I mean, I, I worked in Japan--I don't think that's on my site or anything, but there's a band there that I tour with every other year.  I do like a five or six week tour all over Japan, so I have a big presence in Japan as well and I, I've played, I played, I played at one jazz festival, French horn festival in Tokyo [Japan], whatever, about forty French horns plus there.
Speaker 1: You did that?  You convened that?
Speaker 2: But no, another guy put it together, but I was the, the--
Speaker 1: Is he the one that you, you're saying is the French horn player in Japan, 'cause you said there, I can't remember--
Speaker 2: No, I have a student separate from this guy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--okay.
Speaker 2: This guy is a jazz player in Japan, but he you know, he's not you know, a great player, but yeah, he's still interested in the instrument and keeps people over there interested.
Story_ID: 643814
Speaker 1: So where are you right now, that's, that I, I want to go back to that question--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --about where you are and what you still want to do with your life and you know, and your talents and career, 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Basically I think--
Speaker 1: I mean your health is good--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you're not you know, it's not like you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause a lot of people they lead the hard life and--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I don't live the hard life, that's, that's, that's the reason, you know.  I mean I read years ago that the average age of a jazz musician was fifty-five years before you know, and they topple over and you know, being involved and being around it, and seeing it all around me I've withstained [ph.] from a lot of the harms and things that I know that aren't good for me, you know and I've always had like a diet, you know.  I've been, I've been a vegetarian for a long time and I still don't eat red meat now for forty-five years now, so and I'm conscientious about that, but as far as my playing and what I want to do with my life I just want to put myself and the horn out more so I'm recognized more by the general public you know, which can only be done through recordings I think at this point.
Speaker 1: Recordings or live performances--
Speaker 2: Recordings and live performances, right--
Speaker 1: People are making more money off live performances, or I don't know on, on the other side, but there is a lot I don't know about.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there's, there's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, that's--
Speaker 2: --there's grand divide you know.  You have you know, the big shots who are making you know, like--
Speaker 1: Tons of money on the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --you know one hundred thousand dollars for a concert--
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause (unclear) they can fill up a stadium, you know.
Speaker 2: --and then the other guys are making two thousand dollars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --playing on the same festival you know.
Speaker 1: That is true.
Speaker 2: So I mean, it's, it's, it's difficult, but still not impossible.  I never accept that word impossible.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the thing that keeps me going.
Story_ID: 643815
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean I've recorded quite a few albums, probably close to three hundred albums with different people. And--
Speaker 2: For some reasons I thought it was 152.
Speaker 1: Well, well it was at the time that I wrote, I need to update that on my website.  Well I mean, one of the main reasons is because when I played with Sun Ra, Sun Ra use to record every concert that he made and put it out in record, so I know I did something like seven or eight studio recordings with Sun Ra.  One time I was doing a, a recording with this singer, Holly Cole, a Canadian jazz singer, very good singer; we were working at a studio and the engineer came up to me and he said, "Wow, you're [HistoryMaker] Vincent Chancey, you play with Sun Ra."  I said, "Yeah, I work with him."  He said, "I have the Sun Ra discography, you know."  I said, "You do?" So I said, "Let me see it."  He had like a book like this (gesture), you know, so I brought--he brought it out, I looked at it, so I looked under my name and under my name was like 140 recordings you know, so and that's on top of the 150 that I mentioned there and then you know, I've done a lot of film scores.  I've worked with Spike Lee, with I think, three or four of his films and some other film scores and just a lot of things behind other bands and singers.  I worked with Diana Krall, did some touring with her.  I worked with Elvis Costello for a while.  I just came back from Tennessee working with a, a pop singer, a young Danish singer, but just doing a lot of recording, jazz and otherwise you know, films and--
Speaker 2: Well really, I mean even though you're interest is--you know your heart is jazz you have, you go and you're training (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of yeah--
Speaker 2: --is classical, you've, you've--
Speaker 1: I think and do anything.
Speaker 2: --you can do anything.
Speaker 1: I can do anything.
Speaker 2: So let me--but the technique and things are the same on all of them?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean I always say you know, a C chord is C, E and G rather if it's played by you know, Dr. Dre or Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart], it's the same three notes you know.  So it's, it's the same, the, the thought pattern and the phrasing and the rhythm, that's what, that's what changes.  I mean, about two years ago this hip hop guy said, "Oh man, I hear you play horn?"  I said, "Yeah." So you know, he called me and said, "Do this gig with me." So I went and I pulled out my instrument and he said, "What the hell is that," you know.  He said, "I thought you played the saxophone."  I said, "No, I play this." So he said, "Play," you know, so I played it and you know, everybody in the place jumped up and they were dancing and everything, just, just dealing with the rhythms and everything of that music you know, I was playing with the deejay, I was playing with the deejay and after it was over this one guy came up to me said, "Hey man you got some fat lips on that trombone" (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Cause he thought it was a trombone (laughter).  Well, because he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They don't know the instrument.
Speaker 2: --they don't know that (laughter).
Speaker 1: They don't know the instrument you know, but you know, I'm saying that to say that I can play anything you know, I can--you can put me with a Brazilian band, you can put me with a reggae band, you can put me with a jazz band, you can put me with a classical orchestra you know, I've just learned all the different musics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that also means you have a distinctive--
Speaker 1: --and, and for me--
Speaker 2: --air, air too, as (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is; and that's what I tell all of my students.  I say, you want to play free music, free is knowing everything and making a choice, that's free music.  Free music is not that stuff that they tell you free music is; free music is knowing how to make a choice and be able to master every music, you know, form there is, you know.
Story_ID: 643816
Speaker 1: What of the things that you know, of those recordings are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know a lot of them, I had like a, like a kind of a pop dance band that I was working with and I did a lot of interesting things, it had three horns (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which, which band was that?
Speaker 2: It was called Abstract Truth.  We did--it was a big deejay thing you know, all of the clubs were playing it.  In London [England] it was a big hit and I made a lot of money.  I still get royalties from it, I mean this was like 1999 or somewhere around there.  So I did a lot of things with them and similar bands like that that I worked with, kind of dance you know, young kids and hip-hop generation you know, I've done things with them, recorded things for them.
Speaker 1: Have, have you ever done anything with [HistoryMaker] Frankie Knuckles?
Speaker 2: I've, I've, yeah, I have did a concert with Frankie Knuckles in Berlin [Germany] once, you know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I just, I just interviewed him; for some reason I was thinking of that because he also moved over--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Frankie Knuckles, now he's one of the initiators of the whole house scene and there's a whole music scene that he was very much you know, involved with and, and that kind of thing also differentiates me from other jazz musicians because other jazz musicians usually stay within their own genre (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They stay within their lane.
Speaker 2: Right and you know when I work with these other people.
Speaker 1: I mean maybe they'll go into Brazilian or you know, I mean but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they won't work with rappers or something like--you know.  I mean I think there's good music in every form of music and there's bad you know, there's bad jazz, there's bad rap and there's good rap and there's good you know, hip hop you know.  I just want to associate myself with the things that I think that are better representations of it.
Story_ID: 643817
Speaker 1: So, who are some of your favorite artists and have you--who, who haven't you worked with that you would like to work with, but let's go with who are your favorites, some of your favorite artists?
Speaker 2: Oh. I'm, I'm not very good with favorites (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh you don't--okay, so who would you like to work with that you haven't?
Speaker 2: You asked me what was my favorite food.  Who would I like to work with? I, I like Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] even though I have worked with her once, but in a grander setting.  I was part of a big orchestra behind her.  I'd like to work more intimately with her.
Speaker 1: And why, why is that, what do you like about her?
Speaker 2: Well I, I really like her, her phrasing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Her energy, her--
Speaker 2: --her, the way she sings and her phrasing and the timber of her voice and everything.  I think my horn will work well with that you know, another thing of that color and that sound I'm hearing, you know.  In the jazz world I mean, I have worked with several people.  I worked with Sarah Vaughan and I worked with Carmen McRae.  I worked with Shirley Horn.  Recently I did things with Diana Krall, Elvis Costello, you know a lot of different people, the Eurythmics, Annie Lennox, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not many people have that much span, that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, and [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves and Brandy [Brandy Norwood] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's what I'm saying, Shirley Horn to, to Brandy.
Speaker 2: I, I mean now they say you know, when people, people will follow me around on my gigs like in one month their, their heads will be spinning because one day it'll be like playing a church concert, playing you know, like Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] and then the next day it'll be like in the club playing at four [o'clock] in the morning to the deejays or something and then the next time it will be like a straight ahead jazz concert you know, and so it, it, it's always changing and I love that because you know, I think it keeps my head you know, you, developing and moving into different areas itself you know, it's all about me be, being able to do what I want to do eventually as well.
Speaker 1: So how do you get, how are you, how are you being booked, or it's just word of mouth?  Are people calling you, or do you have an agent, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I don't, I'm constantly trying to find an agent, but I can't find one or one who, who wants less than you know, 50 percent or 40 percent, they want so much these days.  I mean I don't want to do that. I, everything I do is word of mouth you know, just people know me you know.  People say, "Oh, I saw this guy play here," or, "You want a good French horn player? Call him." You know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 643818
Speaker 1: So I think, let me see, I'm trying, you know I was wondering would you want to play a little bit?
Speaker 2: Sure, I can play.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think that would be a good thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: (Plays 'The Barefoot Bahian Girl')
Speaker 1: Does it sound okay?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 1: (Plays 'The Barefoot Bahian Girl')
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's nice. That's nice.
Story_ID: 643819
Speaker 1: Can you describe how you feel when you play?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) It, it, when I play that song, that was a Brazilian song that I wrote called 'The Barefoot Bahian Girl' and that's a very joyous song of--I wrote about a little girl dancing you know, just barefoot in front of people; so that's a very joyous song. Depends on what I'm playing, but I totally connect with, with the sentiment of the music that I'm playing, the feeling of it, so you know I try to be there and be inside of it, I mean sometimes when I, when I improvise it's almost like when I'm doing more intellectual kinds of things I'll just open up the sky and let things filter in, into my brain and from there into the horn and you know, it's kind of just like a surrender you know, so I never know what I'm going to play.  A lot of times when I play people say, "How did, you know, how do you know how to start things over?" And, "What are you doing?" And when I put the horn to my face I don't know what I'm going to play.  I take a breath and something just comes out.
Speaker 1: So it's very spiritual I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, it, it for me it is very spiritual, yeah.  But even when I'm playing in like traditional jazz where I have to play like within certain harmonies or whatever, it's still the same way.  I'm playing within the harmonic structure, but I don't, I don't know what I'm going to play.  I just know I'm going use certain notes, but the placement of those notes or the rhythm of those notes are completely unknown until I do it.  That's another thing I always tell my students is I, I tell them, "I can tell you how to play but I can't tell you what to play because it has to be from (gesture) here."
Speaker 1: So, when, when you think about--we've been sitting here reviewing your life, when you think about the little boy--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, who was, what was it, you were scalded, burns--and then how you really found somehow, solace in music.  It was almost as if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you were directed--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --to that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you, can you sort of connect that, it's almost, it almost has a spiritual feel?
Speaker 2: It, it, it really does.  I, I really felt like you know, it called me when it happened because once I discovered music it was just like calling out or saying, you have to do this, this is what you were put here to do you know, and my whole life you know, it, it's been about that and until I leave the earth it's gonna be about producing and playing music even though, even if I have to do it without an audience or something, I just have to do it for myself, but I know I probably will be doing it for an audience though because people like what I do and I, you know, I can connect with other people and play you know.  Maybe I might settle into a, a teaching situation eventually, working with a school you know, but at this point I just love playing too much to confine myself to a classroom.
Story_ID: 643820
Speaker 1: So there really wasn't you know, sometimes I ask people if they had to do it over again would they do something different?
Speaker 2: I don't think I would, no.
Speaker 1: No, so--okay. So you were, I mean you, you're one of the people who knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you've--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pursued it with you know, a determined air (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so there would--if you went back to rewrite your story it would be the same--
Speaker 2: Maybe like--
Speaker 1: --that part.
Speaker 2: --maybe, maybe I could have a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] parked outside or something; no, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now (unclear).
Speaker 2: --not, not, absolutely, I mean I, I love music that's me you know, what makes me most happy doing and that's what--I know I'll always do it and it, it did, came to me just out of nowhere like day I was totally depressed and you know, what is this world I'm living in, next day music comes in and a light comes on and everything changed after that.  It, it, you know my whole childhood going through this abusive you know, childhood and everything; once I discovered music you know, none of that stuff mattered.  I can just, you know, go to my instrument, I can play and get away from all that.
Speaker 1: So it gave you the--it really was an escape mechanism (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in some respect?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 643821
Speaker 1: You know we were talking, you know you, you've been--you know you're married [to Leila Mae Makdissy Chancey], you have a son [Bahij Chancey].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know he seems to be on the right path of being an architect.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's the same way.  It came to him young as well.
Speaker 1: That's right, the directedness, so, so what--if you were talking to a child who went through an abusive situation what would you say to them that was similar to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean in my case I just think it was, the music was my savior but it may not be that for any other kid you know, that was just my specific case. It might be literature, it might be reading or writing or something you know, or painting but the arts I think is a good way to express yourself to get out of the, the quagmire of living in that kind of you know, day to day existence. For some, for some people it's sports too, sports takes them away from that you know.
Speaker 1: Some maybe passion--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, outlet.
Speaker 2: I mean I've never been a sports guy, I mean I--this is the most sport, sporty thing I do here (laughter).
Story_ID: 643822
Speaker 1: So what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I, just as a, a great player and a great you know a, a guy who brought the instrument out of obscurity, maybe more you know.  I don't know if it will happen in my life that the French horn will ever be considered a, a, a standard, tradition jazz instrument.  I know it won't happen you know, realistically speaking, but when I leave you know, I could leave my legacy and people knowing that it does have a voice, maybe not everybody can play it, you know the way I played it, but just knowing that it's there will give a lot of, you know young players the hope to have something to strive toward.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And if I asked you what your legacy, what you want it to be?
Speaker 2: Just the music you know, a guy who could play that horn like, like nobody else, who can set it on fire.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Story_ID: 643823
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the photograph that I got of my father [Cleo Chancey] that my sister gave me after he passed away.  She went to his house to collect all of his things and found some photographs and this was one of them.  I think this was probably, judging from the car in the background it looks like it's the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What's wrong with that?
Speaker 2: That's my, that's of course my wedding photograph.  That's when we were married in 1990, we had like--the wedding party, were--we had Lebanese food and an African band.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And you wife's name?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: My wife's name is Leila Mae [Leila Mae Makdissy Chancey].
Speaker 2: You have to spell it?
Speaker 1: L-E-I-L-A, M-A-E, two words.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION).
Speaker 1: Okay. And that's a picture of me with my two sisters and one of my sister's, my sister's youngest daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And everybody's names?
Speaker 1: The one on the right is called Bert [Gladys Chancey Lytle], I'm in the middle and Cleo [HistoryMaker Cleo F. Wilson] is with the yellow top and the daughter is Sulyn [Sulyn Silbar] named after a Chinese revolutionary.
