Story_ID: 611326
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and observing is Cheryl Butler.  And I'd like to have you start out and state your name and spell it for us, including a middle name if you have it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and I'd like to have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, Demetrius Edward Carney [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], and I will spell it.  Demetrius, D-E-M-E-T-R-I-U-S, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, Carney, C-A-R-N-E-Y.  My date of birth is April 29th, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay, Demetrius what is the derivation of your name? Demetrius (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Demetrius is a--has a Greek origin and it means James in Greek.  I'm really a Junior 'cause my father is James Edward Carney [James Carney] and Demetrius means James.  And when my fath- when I was born my father was working at a loading dock and he had a very good friend who was Greek and he advised my father of the translation.  So my father was choosing, I think it was a debate between he and my mother [Jessie Cane Carney], between Mark and Demetrius.  But because Demetrius meant James and his name was James, that's why he selected Demetrius, which is very unusual name back then.
Speaker 1: Can we have your--okay, the location where we are, sorry?
Speaker 2: Okay, this interview is taking place at--at the law firm where I'm a partner, Perkins, P-E-R-K-I-N-S, Coie, C-O-I-E, LLP [Perkins Coie LLP] and it's located at 131 South Dearborn [Street], Suite 1700, Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February the 5th, 19--no excuse me, February the 5th, 2008.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Election Day?
Speaker 2: Yeah right, Election Day, very close.  I'm so excited.
Speaker 1: Me too.  And I'd like to have your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney and I'm a partner at the law firm.
Story_ID: 611327
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers.  I'm a little hoarse.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, as crazy as it is, is vegetables and sushi.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, summertime--spring, spring, summer, spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color would probably be, probably blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Caribbean islands.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Ski the mountain in front of you.
Speaker 1: That's a good one, I haven't heard that one before.
Story_ID: 611328
Speaker 1: --I wanna start out by asking you about your family, and I want to have--start with your mother.  Can you give her name and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: My mother is--her name is Jessie Lena Carney [Jessie Cane Carney].  She is eighty-two.  She was born in Chicago [Illinois].  My mother's still alive, very, very active.  She is an eighty-two year-she's eighty-two years, but really forty (laughter).  She's very active.  My pride of my mom is she takes absolutely no medicines, and she is very, very healthy.  She works out every day.  She travels extensively.  Plays bridge, goes line dancing.  I communicate with my mother by voicemail, because she's too busy (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], so what was her maiden name and what do you know about her growing up?
Speaker 2: I know quite a bit about her growing up.  My mother was really--grew up in the Black Belt of Chicago, the South Side.  She is a product of the Great Migration, first generation.  Her parents [Emma Cane and Wesley Cane] came up from Mississippi.  She is the third in a--a family of six girls.  Father came up on the railroad from west Mississippi, settled in Chicago, then brought his family up at the time, which was my grandmother and they had one daughter.  And just fighting to survive in the South Side Black Belt.  Uneducated, at least my grandfather was.  My grandmother was educated, she was a school teacher down in Mississippi, but just came up here for a better way of life.
Speaker 1: Now, what was--did your mother share any stories of growing up on the South Side?
Speaker 2: My mother--her--her primary story is that they were very poor, that there was a lot of tragedy in her family.  She remembers as a--as a young girl going back to the South every summer.  And the one story that I can remember is that they were traveling and you know, because it was segregation on the trains, I think that they were--she was thirsty and a--a lady gave my mother's sister some water to drink and the water was contaminated with malaria.  And so my mother--one sister died as a result and my mother was very, very ill and she almost died as well.  But it was a very tragic time in their family, it was in the '30s [1930s] and that's the--the one incident that stands out.  And the sister that passed away, she was probably a year difference between the age--ages and my mother, I think, was very traumatized by her passing.  Matter of fact, my mother was in the hospital for--for a very long lengthy stay and the sister that she was close to passed away while she was in the hospital.  So when she came home, she did not know she had passed, and so it was very traumatic when she, you know, was, was, was advised that--well her sister's name was Mattie Lee [Mattie Lee Cane] was no longer with the family.
Story_ID: 611329
Speaker 1: Now your grandparents, her--her parents, do--their names, do you--
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father--my grandfather's name, ma- maternal, was Wesley Cane and his mother [sic. wife] was Emma Kenn- Kennedy Cane [Emma Cane].
Speaker 1: Did you spend much time with them while you were growing up?
Speaker 2: My grandmother passed away when I was five, so I don't--I remember her, but I don't remember her.  I rem- I remember stories with her and I remember she was kind of like the glue that held the family together.  She was a-a, at the time a homemaker.  She had six girls and they were living in a little kitchenette, if you will, on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  And so--and my grandfather was just a, you know, he was a factory worker, just looking for work in the North.  You know, he came up for a better way of life from--from the South.
Speaker 1: Did you think your mother [Jessie Cane Carney] spent any time in Mississippi after they moved here or they were basically here?  Do you think she spent any summers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure if after the--I mean--I think it was because her grandmother was still in the South.  It was a big deal for them to get on the train and go back south every summer.  But after the incident with malaria I don't rem- I don't recall her talking about it very much.  I think that's a very painful time for my mother and I, you know, I don't remember many stories after the passing of her sister [Mattie Lee Cane (ph.)].
Story_ID: 611330
Speaker 1: Your father.  His name? Do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's James Edward Carney [James Carney].  He also, very much like my mother [Jessie Cane Carney], was the first generation of the gr--of living in Chicago [Illinois] as a result of the Great Migration.  His father [William Carney] came up from Mississippi as well and worked on the railroad, and settled in Chicago.  His father became very--he got involved in the--in the automobile industry working as a factory worker, but also at the time if you--you do a transformation back to history, it was a great time of union organizing.  So he was very much a union man and kind of got a lot of--of stature in his--in the industry especially for men of color at the time for organizing the union and I remember he became a--a union steward.  And so that was a big deal.
Speaker 1: So this is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: This is my--this is my grandfather on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On your--for your father?
Speaker 2: --paternal.
Speaker 1: On your, on your father's side, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My--on my mother--my paternal grandmother, I never knew her.  Her name was Cosie [Cosie Carney (ph.)] and she passed away very early when my father was--was very young.  And then my grandfather remarried and he remarried a woman by then name of Li- Elizabeth [Elizabeth Carney], and she married my grandfather with six kids, and everybody says, "Wow (laughter)," you know.  But I think they were very, you know, religious, very churchgoing folks.  So I think he met her, got involved with her in the church, and so she became a stepmother to six children.
Speaker 1: So there were six kids on both sides? Yeah--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's absolutely right.  There was six.  An interesting thing on my mother, they were all girls.  And then my father had--there were five boys and two girls.  No I mean--excuse me--four boys and two girls.
Story_ID: 611331
Speaker 1: What was your father [James Carney] like?  How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: My father was a very, sometimes angry, sometimes frustrated black man.  Because my father--if society, if it had been different, my father would've been a very accomplished commercial artist.  He was just phenomenal, just phenomenal.  You know, when he--when he--when he really sat down, I always noticed his penmanship and how perfect he, you know, he could write.  And I also noticed how perfect his--his drawings, sketching and he would do paintings, and it was just very interesting.  My father was a--was a junk collector.  I mean, you know, he could take junk and turn it into a prize.  And you know, I always used to like to go over to the Maxwell Street area in Chicago [Illinois] and just buy stuff.  And always very handy around the house, could fix anything, could fix a car, just had that knack of--of how to make things work.  And he would buy old silverware and he would come home, he would do it by himself, and then he would carve it into jewelry.  And then he would--he became big in the Hyde Park art fair [57th Street Art Fair, Chicago, Illinois] and various art fairs around the city.  And my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] would look, at it and say, "Oh, who's gonna buy that junk."  You know, he'd take forks and he'd make this--this--we would think gaudy stuff, you know.  And he'd come back and he'd have two thousand dollars of jewelry that he would se- that he would sell at the art fair and people would know him on the street for his art work.  And I still have a couple of his pieces right now and after a while, even after as an adult, I would go with him to the art fair and help him set up and help him sell, 'cause you know, I like people so I would just--I would be having a good time.  But that's what he would do.
Speaker 1: Now what--did he share any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father had a very, very rough childhood.  He also was very poor.  He dropped out of high school in sophomore year just to work to have money, 'cause he--parents were, you know, old school.  You know, there just wasn't much money.  And so he just--I just remember is when his family came up from Mississippi, some of my grandfather's brothers stopped off in St. Louis [Missouri] and they--they had their origin in St. Louis and also in Chicago.  My father would always tell the story of his--of his father [William Carney], that his father was a very tall, good-looking, black man and would really dress his kids up and wanna take them down to the World's Fair, take them to places where, you know, to try to give them exposure.  But money was just always an issue for my father.  And so he was always scrimp- you know, scrimping to get by and save and have money, and to try to have some type of life.  And--and once again in the Black Belt of South Side Chicago which, you know, went from I'm sure at that time maybe 35th Street to 47th Street, and maybe from State Street over to the lake [Lake Michigan].  And so that was kind of his life.
Story_ID: 611332
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] meet?
Speaker 2: I've asked them that.  They--they met at a dance when they were, I think, teenagers.  My mother said she liked my father because he was a great dresser.  I said that's a good reason (laughter).
Speaker 1: So now, how many siblings, can you give the siblings, your siblings in birth order, of you?
Speaker 2: Of me?  I mean of--of--oh it was just my brother and I.
Speaker 1: Just you and--oh, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, just my brother.
Speaker 1: My, I, I--my brother who has passed away is seven years my junior, also born on April 29th, and that's Victor [Victor Carney].  Yeah, and Victor was also a lawyer, a tax lawyer at McDonald's.  And Victor, unfortunately, was a victim of MS [multiple sclerosis].  And so had a stellar career, very, very smart, went to the University of Illinois.  But the illness is uncontrollable and so it finally led to his demise.
Speaker 2: You were both born on the same day, seven years apart, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, that's amazing.
Speaker 2: --that's amazing.
Speaker 1: It's amazing, yeah it's amazing, that's amazing.
Story_ID: 611333
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up, earliest?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is--this is what I remember.  I remember my father [James Carney] worked for I think it was Ford Motor Company.  And every year Ford Motor Company would have an outing every year where they would rent out Riverview Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And so there would be a huge picnic.  It was big back then to have picnics in the '50s [1950s], and the family, everybody would go to the great picnic at Riverview.  And all the rides would be free and it was just a great day.  That was--that was just--you live for Riverview and the--and the company picnic, it was just great.
Speaker 1: Now how old do you think you were then?
Speaker 2: Probably six or seven.
Speaker 1: And can you sort of take yourself back to that day sort of and describe it, I mean from a child's eye?
Speaker 2: Well you know, it was--it was--I don't think my brother [Victor Carney] was around, and if--if he was he was very, very young and my cousins would go and my mother's [Jessie Cane Carney] sisters would go, and it would just be a lot of gathering.  And it would just be a lot of getting ready to go together on the--on the company picnic.  There was just a lot of excitement.  I don't think we had a car at the time, so it was quite a journey from the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] to Riverview, and I just remember that it took forever to get there.  It was taking the "L" train [elevated train] and once you got off the "L" train [elevated train], getting on the bus, and now as I re- as an adult having grown up in Chicago [Illinois] I know the route.  It was from the South Side to Belmont [Avenue].  Then you get off and take the--the Belmont bus or perhaps back then the streetcar.  You take the streetcar over to Riverview Park.  So it was just a great day and--and riding the roller coaster, that was my cousin.  I had two cousins, my mother had a sister, Rosemary [Rosemary Cane], and she had two children, Vertinia [ph.] and--and we called him Bobby [ph.].  So we were all very close in age, and we would just--we hung together and just ride all the rides and just have a good time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause Riverview was a big deal.  All this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a big deal, it was just a huge deal, you know, to go there it was--it was--it was--and--and to us it was very expensive, you know, so you didn't go very often.  You know, you--if you--we went on the--on the Ford free day and then if we got a chance to go on our own and save a little money to go or our parents gave us some money to go, we would go and that would be fun as well, but we'd always run out of money, have to come home (laughter).
Story_ID: 611334
Speaker 1: Now Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], tell me what your address was, where was your house, where--where did you live growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember that my grandmother had a--owned a building, this is my father's mother.  He--and this is his stepmother [Elizabeth Carney].  They owned a building on 42nd [Street] and Drexel [Avenue].  And so it was, at the time it was--it was one of those old greystones and I remember that my grandmother was big and renting out rooms.  So there was always roomers living in the house.  So we lived in the basement apartment and we lived there for a couple years.  What I remember there, I remember the big cat, Snowflakes, a big, huge cat.  I was once afraid of, I got to be very friendly with--so that's--that's my memory there.  And I remember that learning to play the piano in my grandmother's living room.  So that's--that's my memory there.  And it was also a nice gathering with my father's [James Carney] family from time-to-time.  But what I really remember is that my father had a brother Robert [Robert Carney] who went off to the war [World War II, WWII] and he was in--stationed in Japan.  And he married a--a woman of Japanese descent.  And you know, brought her back to the states.  And I was--it was interesting, you know, to bring somebody from a different culture, back.  And she would dress in traditional Japanese attire and it was just--it was a phenomenon for us.  It was like (gesture), then we got, you know, what I mean, we just--we didn't know how to deal with it you know.  But what I do remember is that they had a--a son by the name of Johnny [Johnny Carney (ph.)].  And my aunt, her name was Yasako [Yasako Carney (ph.)].  She did not speak any English, but my--my uncle could speak fluent Japanese--fluent Japanese.  I mean he was never formally educated, but spoke when--when he was stationed over in Japan and spoke fluent Japanese.  It was--it was just amazing.  So therefore, he would talk--my--my uncle would talk to us in English and talk to his wife and his son in Japanese.  Well my aunt was my babysitter, so I used to speak Japanese.  And so my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] would--I would come home and I would start saying these Japanese phrases and my mother would look at me like (laughter).  But you know, you wish you could--wish you could've developed those--those times so that you would've spent more time with--with--with Johnny and Yasako because my Uncle Robert was a--was a [U.S.] Army--you know, he was a career [U.S.] military man.  So eventually they moved away.  I think they moved to California, moved to Omaha [Nebraska].  We kept in contact with them, and so I kept in contact with Johnny over the years.  He also passed away early from cancer.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any discussions at all with the--the grownups about this, you know, woman who was Japanese, you know, coming into the family?  Do you remember any-no, no discussions as a child (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there were--oh there were lots of discussions (laughter), lots of discussions, you know.  It was fortunate that, you know, I--I don't remember anything negative, I just remember that it was different.  That--that's what it was, it was just different.  My grandmother and my grandfather [William Carney] were very--they were very open and embraced her.  It's just--it was just--all I can say it was different.  But what was unique was that on 42nd and Drexel where we grew up, 42nd and Ellis [Avenue], there was a Japanese community over on 43rd [Street] and Berkeley [Avenue].  And so, you know, there were people of her own culture, so she also had friends.  And I remember Yasako taking Johnny and I--took us on a trip downtown and she lost her wallet on the bus and that became a big issue.  I mean, I remember those--those kinds of things with her.  But I remember going places with her.  I remember walking over to the Japanese community.  I remember eating their knickknacks, and eating their foods.  It was--it was just different.  And then we would take family photos and I'm sure if we--if we--we looked around we could still find some photos with her with her Japanese garb on.  And so it was--it was just very different for--for us.  But the family, they were pretty close.  I mean they were--they were--it was nothing--I'm sure it was probably more of a problem for Yasako's family then it was for our family, because I mean it was a big deal for her to leave Japan and come across the Pacific Ocean and come to a land that she knew nothing about, and--and settle into Chicago [Illinois].  But, you know, she was following her husband. And it was--it was--I would love to know the story of how they met, you know, in the--in the--I mean it was a result of course of, of the war.
Story_ID: 611335
Speaker 1: Where did you move after, you know, after 42nd [Street] and--and--
Speaker 2: After 42nd and Ellis [Avenue], we moved right around the corner to 4161 South Drexel [Avenue].  And of course, you know, it's just a whole issue of after a while my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] outgrew a basement apartment and we moved to a one--a nice apartment right around the corner in a courtway building.  It was still only a block away from my grandmother [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney].  Because my grandmother, it was really funny, there were three buildings.  My grandmother had one and then the lady that I call my--my--also my grandmother, Leila [ph.], she had the building next door and then the third building was owned by my Aunt Haddie [ph.] and her husband, and it was my father's--my grandfather's [William Carney] brother.  So in those three buildings I had, you know, a family that I went from one to the other to the other, you know.  And so they were--I think they were a support for my family because I remember that my mother had to go to work, and so therefore, they were my babysitters when my mother returned to work.  I--I remember my mother not working when I was born.  Probably when I was about four, I remember we were sitting on the steps to the basement and she told me that she was gonna go to work and I didn't know what that meant.  But she said not to worry because, you know, I would--I would stay with grandmother, I would stay with Leila, Sister Leila they called her, or they called her--Hattie B, I would stay with--with one of them when I came home from school, so it all worked out.
Story_ID: 611336
Speaker 1: Now I want you to take yourself back to that time and will you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sou- sights, sounds and signs of growing up (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Smells.
Speaker 2: Smells of growing up.
Speaker 1: It doesn't have to be in any particular order.
Speaker 2: There was always food cooking, I remember that.  My--
Speaker 1: What kind, what kind of?
Speaker 2: Probably a lot of fried chicken (laughter), and a lot of greens at my grandmother's [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney] house, also when I'd go to Sister Leila's [ph.] house and also my mother's [Jessie Cane Carney] house.  My mom was a--was a tremendous cook.  And so there was always food cooking.  What I also remember is every Sunday, my mother was a great baker, tremendous baker.  So my mother would make cakes from scratch and she had a reputation for that.  So I always remember my mother alw- my mother, her family was a member of the Liberty Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], so there was always getting up early Sunday, getting dinner in--they called it, getting your dinner on, before you went to church and go to church, and then come back and you would eat dinner.  So those are--and then the sights I remember, I remember the courtway, I remember playing in the--in the--in the courtway in backyard.  I remember there wa- there wasn't, there were no playgrounds so we used to play in a big vacant lot and a big alley in the back.  It was a kind of desolate area, but I had a good friend by the name of Ronnie [ph.].  So he--he was my--my buddy, so we used to just hang around.  There were not a--there just a--I don't remember a lot of kids in the area.  But I used to love to do was to go over to my mother's--with her family and they lived on 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  And, you know, my--my grandmother's place was very manicured, flowers, it was very pretty.  My, you know, grandmother was always out planting flowers or watering the grass, and it was at a time, you know, this was in the '50s [1950s] and she owned her own property, that was--that was a big deal.  And it was a big deal for them to make sure that, you know, they got rid of the myth that black folks don't keep up their property.  So she was--she was immaculate with that front lawn and the flowers and the geraniums, and all the--all the fancy flowers, and that--that was a big deal.  And then, I would take the Drexel bus over and I would get off on 38th[Street]--I used to take the bus by myself and sometimes go with my mother and visit her family on 38th and Indiana.  And it was truly in the ghetto.  And it was everything you would imagine about a ghetto building, and huge building and we go out in the back and there'd be people hanging over the railings on the third floor, tons of kids and boy did I have a great time over there.  And in the back there was a playground, Anderson's playground [Anderson Playground Park, Chicago, Illinois] and I had the best time in my life at Anderson playground--Anderson's playground.  And with that and--and I would go over and my mother had a sister that she was very close to, Rosemary [Rosemary Cane], and as I mentioned before she had two children, my cousins, my first cousin Bob [ph.] and Vert [ph.], and I would hang out with them all day.  I mean from sun up to sun down, there were always games and it was just--it was--it was really--it--it, you know, we didn't know it was a ghetto environment, we didn't know the economic conditions.  We just knew that there was always food and there was always tons and tons of kids to play with.  And learned to ride a bike over there, and just playing up and down the alley and playing on all the--the maypole and the--and the swings and the seesaw at Anderson's playground.  And as a kid, Anderson's playground was--I mean it was just bigger than life. Then you come back as an adult and it's about this big (gesture) you say, what happened (laughter), you know.  But there--there were all kinds of programs going on over there and so that's what I remember.
Story_ID: 611337
Speaker 1: I also remember when my family lived on 41st [Street] and Drexel [Avenue], I remember always walking to Holy Angels grade school [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois], that's where I--that's where I went to grade school, Holy Angels.  It was a--it was a Catholic school.  And I have fond memories of--of Holy Angels.  It was--it was a big deal in my family because my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] who was a Baptist didn't really--she didn't really buy into this Catholic education.  She didn't really understand those nuns and what they wore, and these priests and you know, it was just--it was foreign.  But my father [James Carney] was, for his time, was kind of avant-garde and he took the initiative to--he was gonna make sure that his son and/or his sons got a great education.  And one thing I can always remember my father saying is that, you know, "Get your education 'cause that's something they cannot take away from you."  I said I just my--my father really, really instilled the education, the whole issue of getting an education.  And I was a good student in Holy Angels because my father demanded good grades.  I mean it was just--if you didn't get good grades there was a consequence.  So, (laughter) I did not like the consequence, I learned that early on.  And so I did very well at Holy Angels.  And what was interesting about going to a Catholic school at that par- at that point in time was that the nuns at Holy Angels, they were Franciscans.  And it was--it was--it was--I mean you know, the Catholics and their rituals and big processions, and--but they--these nuns had the--their--their whole initiative, they were like missionaries in our community is that they were gonna teach us, the, the, the Negro heathens, they were gonna convert us to Catholicism and they were gonna make sure that we were very smart kids.
Story_ID: 611338
Speaker 1: What sounds did, remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sounds I, you know, I can probably remember a lot of--you know, on my father's [James Carney] side on 42nd [Street] and Drex- 42nd and Ellis [Avenue], 42nd and Drexel [Avenue] this--I don't have any memories of sound, I just remember it being, you know, quiet.  I know, I--I remember television as coming out as a big thing and--and--and watching television, those types of sounds.  There was a lot of--sometimes a lot of screaming of arguments--
Speaker 1: In the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, family.  I remember--I'm just--I'm just trying--I'm trying--I'm going back in childhood now and trying to remember so--it was quiet.  It was just--it was--it was qui- quiet.  'Cause I didn't have a lot of playmates over there.  I remember the sounds of me playing the piano.  I think both of my parents were pretty structured people, so there wasn't, you know, there was--there was a time you get up, you do this, you do that, I mean the--the day was very structured in terms of what you were gonna do.  My mother [Jessie Cane Carney] is a very organized person.  My father was pretty organized as well.  So I don't remember a lot of sound at that time on 42nd and Ellis, but I--I would take the--the--the bus and go over to my cousins on 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  There was laughter, there was hollering, there was a lot of music playing, there was just always good times.  I mean there was just people screaming on the back porches, kids playing in the playground, a lot of laughter.  There was much going in the--in the playground [Anderson Playground Park, Chicago, Illinois].  And then at night, people would get together and they would get out and we would see agu- a game of--the--the--people would be doing the billy billy.  You know, there was just a lot--just, you know, just a lot of activity all the time.  That's why I lo- li- I think I just liked it over there so much, it was just--it was--it was the hustle and bustle of the activity.  I do remember a sound also of--of--of the "L" train [elevated train] going by where my grandmother [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney] used to live or used to be the Kenwood "L."  I remember the Kenwood "L" creaking along all the time.  And I used to take the--sometimes take the "L" over to my cousins.  And so those are--those are basically the sounds I remember but--remember.  So I went from my father's side that was very quiet, I would go in my grandmother's house and it was just, you know, it was--it was a--a greystone and it was kind of dark and I would just--sometimes it was--it was mysterious and you'd always go through and my grandmother would have some food cooking in the back and it was very quiet, and you'd hear people talking.  They would--I just always remember the weekend, everybody was getting ready to go to church.  It was always the big thing of going to church on the weekend.  And then I--I--I transformed myself with--with the thirty minute bus ride and it was a whole different world over there.  I didn't, you know, and it's--it's funny is that when I would take the bus you would see white people, but they were just not part of my world.  I mean they--they were there, but all my community was all African American.  And a funny story, in the courtway building that we lived in, it--where my family moved and I guess it was a--it was a--I didn't know it at the time, but it was a--it was a--it was a neighborhood that was in transition because as more African Americans moved in, it was predominantly Jewish because it was very--it was a little bit north of Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  So you know it had the big courtway buildings, the big apartments.  And I remember that there was this--and after--I will tell a current story and then I'll go back.  And 'cause it--it brought back memories.  I got a call out of the blue as an adult, probably about five or six years ago, and this woman her name was Virginia [ph.].  And she--I, you know, as she saw me on television as president of the police board, and she called me to re-acquaint herself with me in that we lived in the courtway building to--together as kids on 41st [Street] and Drexel.  And that the way she remembered me, I guess there were a few kids in the neighborhood, there were a few when we moved around the corner.  I was the only kid that came to her birthday party.  And she remembered that.  And I do remember my mother dressing me up, I had on some gray slacks, I had on a--a nice shirt.  My mother says, "You have to go to Virginia's party," and my mother got--bought me a present and I took it to the--to her party.  And I do remember I was the only kid at her party.  And I said to mom, you know, and--and I mentioned it to my mother, but my mother didn't, you know, well, you know, I'm sure my mother made some--some excuse of why I was the only kid there.  But it was just interesting that I--I recall that, I remember that.  And you know, you move away, she moves away and then forty years later you get a call out of the blue about, "You were the only kid that came to--to my birthday party."  So, that's a--that's a--that's a--a memory that I have of that neighborhood.
Story_ID: 611339
Speaker 1: So there just weren't a lot of kids in that neighborhood is what you're saying, it's just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No there were not a--there were some kids.  I--I--as--as I started to--and I attended the Holy Angels School [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] there were, you know, we'd walk home in groups and I remember, you know, there were kids and they would drop off along the way.  So I'd--I picked up friends when I--elementary school--I picked up some friends.  But there was a public school close by.  I think it was Oakenwald [Oakenwald School, Chicago, Illinois] and some kids went to Oakenwald.  But there's still, there were just not a--I did not have a lot of friends ov- over in that area.  There're just not a lot of kids, and mostly adults.
Speaker 1: So when you actually went to school at Holy Angels you were still an only child?  You--Victor [Victor Carney] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in--up until second grade.  My brother was born in second grade.  But I remember walking over to Holy Angels on those cold days by myself, because that's what kids did at the time.  There--it was not unusual, you did not have to worry about, you know, all the childhood issues you have today.  I mean it was--it was very, very safe.
Speaker 1: Now, you know you--you spoke of--of the nuns, you know, and how they were, you know, on a mission (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Missionaries, they're--they're--
Speaker 1: --was--was that apparent at that time or you--that's sort of on hindsight?
Speaker 2: That's on hindsight, very much on hindsight because, you know, the nuns were bigger than day, the priests were bigger than day, you know.  They were white so whatever they said was right and you got involved in this whole Cath- Catholic rituals and all the things that they taught you, you know.  It was kind of--it was hard for me because my mother [Jessie Cane Carney]--you know, they--they had a rule that your parents had to attend church on Sunday too at the Catholic Church and you know, my mother came from a--from a Baptist setting, my whole family came from Baptist setting and then all of a sudden to go to this Catholic Church with all these rituals which is very difficult for them.  And so my mother, she would attempt to go to Catholic Church and then she would leave and go to Liberty Baptist [Liberty Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean, this is--is, you know, and after a while she just told my father [James Carney], "I can't do this (laughter)," you know.  It was just--it was--it was--it was a ritual of Catholicism that just was kind of antithesis to our culture at the time.  I mean everything was rooted in the Baptist church.
Speaker 1: So was your father, was he going or not?
Speaker 2: No, my father--my father was not religious at all.  Every once in a while he would go to Mass 'cause they--they'll kick me out of school if you didn't--if your parents didn't show up.  So my father was quite a party guy, used to hang out on Saturday night and you know, he'd sleep on Sunday morning.  So, you know, he--he was not about to get up and go to church.  And my mother would get up and go, sometimes she would go with me or sometimes I would just go by myself.  And of course, you know, black folks, you know, you always had a system and then after a while my cousins who lived on 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], they came to Holy Angels and--and in that household was my aunt and a couple of the sisters, I mean there was a number of people living there.  And my mother's youngest sister, Bea [Bea Cane (ph.)], she got involved, I mean she was--she was the--I think she was the designated adult to go to church.  So my aunt and my mother, they would all give her the envelopes to put in so they would, you know, justify their attendance.  So, therefore, my Aunt Bea who was, I'm sure a teenager at the time had all these envelopes that she would drop in the basket and that was how they took attendance (laughter).  For my mother and--and my cousin's mother, Rosemary [Rosemary Cane], they'd be out partying on a Saturday night, sleep on Sunday morning.  Then my poor Aunt Bea, she had to get up and take us to church, you know, and--and--and--and do the attendance thing.
Speaker 1: Now, did you accept Catholicism yourself, I mean you said it was sort of strange, but did you sort of--
Speaker 2: Did I buy into it?  You--you know I bought it into it because you're almost brainwashed into it.  I bought into it not thinking about it, 'cause it's a big thing to be an altar boy, you know, I became an altar boy, became a choir boy.  'Cause always just all the things.  That was--that was the socialization, I mean if you wanted to have--be involved in the school socially, those were the things that you did.  So I--I--I became involved in it, yeah to a certain extent, but did I buy into it 100 percent?  No.
Story_ID: 611340
Speaker 1: So the teachers, they were all white you're saying, the kids all black?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: All black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all--the kid were all black.  I just--because Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] was also very close to Ida B. Wells [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], which is a housing community, also close to Madden Park [Madden Park Homes, Chicago, Illinois], which is also a housing community.  And I--I do remember that my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] would say growing up that they tried to get into Ida B. Wells.  That was a big deal to--to--to move into public housing and peo- kids that live in Ida B. Wells, they had a house that had a upstairs and downstairs.  You said, "Wow, they got a upstairs and downstairs just like on TV," you know.  So it was--it was Holy Angels--you--you drew students from those areas as well.  So, therefore, it was an all-black school.  I do remember one time there was one white student that came to the school and we all looked at him like, "Hm, what's he doing here," you know.  But he--I don't remember him having any problems.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any teachers that influenced you during that--you know, during your time at Holy Angels?
Speaker 2: Let me see, I would think that there were a couple of nuns, God, believe it or not, Holy Angels had African American nuns.  Yes, there was a sis- a nun by the name of Sister Gregoria [ph.] and she was my first grade teacher.
Speaker 1: So they didn't have all--all-white teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right.  As you--as you ask me these questions, it--it brings back memories.  There was a--a--a woman by the--my first grade teacher was African American.  And then my fourth grade teacher was a nun, a big healthy nun and ve- a disciplinarian that you would not believe, but she was--she was a very good teacher.  Her name was Sister Danielle Marie [ph.].  So those are the two that stand out, now if you had to me recall those two, they--they were the two that stood out and--and that I would remember.  It's very funny, I remember the African American nuns.  There were a couple of--yeah those were my favorites.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the order, like what order they were?
Speaker 2: They were Franciscans.  Were Franciscans, right, right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were Franc- oh you--St. Francis, you did say Franciscan order, okay.
Story_ID: 611341
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], what were you like as a little boy?  Like were you very outgoing, were you rambunctious, were you well mannered, were you a--thi- think, were you a quiet person (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was probably a deep thinker.  I was probably well mannered.  I had two personalities, I had the personalities with my--with my paternal grandparents [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney and William Carney] where we lived with my father [James Carney] and I was very well mannered.  Did what I was supposed to do.  I was, you know, my father was a disciplinarian so you didn't get out--you didn't, you know, you didn't get out of control with my father.  That was--that was unacceptable and you knew that.  And then when I would go over to 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], I'd change personality.  I was an outgoing kid, I was running, I was playing, I was having a good time.  So I--I mean I had two personalities, you know.  My mother's [Jessie Cane Carney] side there was a--a--oh a lot of activity, a lot of fun, always laughing.  I mean it was--it was a poor situation, but I mean it--I brought two personalities together.  So not--not very athletic, I pr- I had a slight foot problem, so I used to try and play sports, but--but not great at sports be- because of a physical handicap.
Speaker 1: What was the physical handicap?
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I had a, a, a foot that is a little--a little club a little bit and had trouble walking, you know.  And my parents they just--everybody just thought I was clumsy.  It wasn't until I--an adult that I started to realize when I started having problems that I started to realize that I became aware that it was a genetic foot disorder.  It's very slight, I mean you--you--I notice it and if I bring it to your attention you would notice it, but the average person would not notice it.  But it does impact wa- always impact--had a significant impact on--on walking and running.  But at the time I used to fall and stumble all the time, and everybody would laugh at me 'cause I was just a clumsy kid.  And you--you grow up with, you know, low self-esteem because you think that the reason you're not a fast runner and all these things, is you're just not good as--you know, you're just not as good as the other kid.  But you never know that it was--is a physical handicap that you have.
Speaker 1: Now in your quiet moments, what would you think about, you know, I mean, you know what, 'cause you said you were two people, so what would you think about in your quiet moments again (simultaneous) ?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I think in the quiet moments I would read a lot.  I would, you know, this--this is some of the interesting--what I remember.  I remember my--when I was over at my mother's side of the family, I'm getting nervous, sometimes my--my eye goes a little--yeah when I get a little nervous.  On my mother's side, I remember my cousins, Bob [ph.] and Vert [ph.], they--their father, their parents were separated.  He would come over and get us and take us for rides in his car.  He had a 1955 Ford and it was just great.  And he would pack us in, the kids, and he would take us for rides in these white neighborhoods.  And I'm sure these white neighborhoods were--these neighborhoods were somewhere on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], they were out in the bungalow area.  And the houses were very manicured, it was almost like on TV.  And I never knew, you know, because I grew up in the ghetto it was always, the way people lived, people shared rooms, that--that was the world I knew.  And then all of a sudden you see all these houses that are manicured and I always thought to myself, I'm gonna have a house like that one day, you know.  I wa- I wa- you know, how do you get that, why don't we live like that?  And I ju- I would just--I, I would--that--that confused me.
Story_ID: 611342
Speaker 1: Another childhood memory I--I remember was with my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] and her sister, they had a family on my mother's side that was in Detroit [Michigan], and it was a big deal.  And we'd go on vacations and we'd take the train from Chicago [Illinois] to go up to Detroit.  And my mother's cousins had kids that were my age and that we--we--we'd have a great time.  And I just--I would just remember--I liked exposure to different things, that--that's probably the--what--what it was is that, you know, taking the train for me or--was a big deal.  Another big deal for me was that my parents got me involved in a--there was a Oakwood Community Center [Chicago, Illinois] and every summer that I would go for--to summer camp up in Janesville, Wisconsin.  And that was just, now you're talking about childhood memories that I loved.  'Cause there was a lake up there, that's where I learned how to swim.  There was boating I mean but, you know, it was--it was a camp for all African American kids.  And I--I remember that you--
Speaker 2: At Janes- you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was in Jane- Janesville, Wisconsin.
Speaker 2: What's the name of it?
Speaker 1: It was Abraham Lincoln Center camp.  And so my mother was very neat and my father [James Carney] was--you know, my mother would--pressed my clothes and get me all ready for camp, and you know, do the catalog shopping in Montgomery Ward and buy me nice clothes.  And then I would come home and you know, I had to wash my own clothes up there and I'd come home in rough-dried clothes.  And my mother would just go ballistic when I got off the train and had these rough-dried clothes on coming from camp and I'd be with my friends, I'd be having a good time.  And so, you know, the year after I came in rough-dried clothes, my mother had an outfit for me to wear to camp and then that was the outfit that I was supposed to wear home on the train.  You know, be- because it was very important that you looked appropriate in front of white people.  You know, you're riding the train, there's white people on the train, you have to look nice and you have to act a certain way.  So, that--that was a--a memory.  My mother--I just remember my mother being so upset with me coming home on the train with rough-dried clothes on (laughter).
Story_ID: 611343
Speaker 1: What else about school then, you know, did you like or--like subjects?  Do you know early what subjects you were gonna to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--I was a very good reader.  Very good student in math.  I was--I was--I was a very good student.  I did not have a great penmanship.  I knew that they were really working on me on penmanship.  They put a lot of effort (laughter) in me in terms of how to, you know, because at the time, penmanship was a--was an art and, and, and, and it was a sign of, of, you know, writing ability, and you had to write your letters and, I mean it was just a big deal.  And I just did not have great penmanship, I just, you know--they worked with me.  I finally developed a--a style that was eventually very acceptable.  And my father [James Carney] struggled with it, because he had--my father had perfect penmanship and my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] also had very, very good pe- penmanship.  'Cause I look at her letters today--
Story_ID: 611344
Speaker 1: So you were a good student.  What did you like reading, back then?
Speaker 2: Probably at the time short stories, mysteries.  I would just read whatever there wa- you know--as a kid you read whatever is assigned to you.  But going to the library was a big deal to me, you know, and--and picking out books.  And what happens, is that this--the Catholic schools, they would have assigned books for you to go to the library, I mean it was a whole, it was--the issue was teaching you how to use the library.  So there were books you had to, to, to read and there was a reading list and so, it was a big deal to go to the library, check out the books and, and, and read what was on the list.  But I didn't really like--I didn't really like stories, mysteries or something evolving around kids my own age and experiences that--that--that other kids were having.
Speaker 1: Were you a comic book person?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Comic books?
Speaker 2: Oh I actually loved comic books.  I would love--I was a big Superman fan.  Superman, Superboy, Batman, all, all, all the above, you know.  Whatever--whatever they're printing out on Superman I loved.
Story_ID: 611345
Speaker 1: Now how was it adjusting to Victor [Victor Carney], you know, since you were essentially an only child for?
Speaker 2: Oh I, I--it was a big deal to me to have a little brother, it was a real big deal.  I remember my mother [Jessie Cane Carney] was, was pregnant with Victor.  I remembered--I remember the day Victor was born.  I remember my mother going to the hospital.  I went over to Sister Leila's [ph.] house and I came home, my brother was there.  It was a big deal.  It--I, I, I liked it.  I really liked it.  Now as he got bigger, you know, I didn't like it so much.  But (laughter) 'cause it's always the sibling issue.  But it was, you know, it was--it was a good time.  It was a--it--I remember the unity of the family around the birth of Victor.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember any other family times, like around holidays or memories that you have, you know, growing up, trips, vacation--I mean?
Speaker 2: I--I remember--I remember summer camp.  I remember my cousin Val [ph.].  In--in my aunt's building, not my aunt, but my grandmother's [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney] building, when we lived in the basement, my mother's oldest sister [Alice Cane] and her husband and her--and his--and her daughter lived in the apartment upstairs.  And so I--I had a great relationship, her name was Val.  I had a great relationship with her.  I remember a lot of--a lot of fun times in the--I remember 4th of July, that was a big deal with the firecrackers and hanging out.  I mean we--we--everybody got into the celebration of the 4th.  Christmas was jus- was bigger than life.  You know, it was getting ready for Christmas, buying the Christmas tree, decorating the Christmas tree, I remember that very well.  My mother's family, there was more--there was more family interaction on my mother's side, much more than my father's side.  My father [James Carney]--what I remember on my father's side, there was a lot of--there was always a lot of sibling issues, you know.  A couple of my father's brothers had gone off to the war [World War II, WWII].  I remember my--there was a big deal that my father had cosigned for his brother to get a car.  My brother skipped out--his brother skipped out on the payments, left my father holding the bag, and that caused a lot of issues.  There was always a lot of friction.  But on my mother's side, you know, there, you know, there was six girls, one of them passed away.  I'm sure they had their friction too, but there was always a closeness, there was always family gatherings.  There was always, you know, all the holidays were traditionally spent with--on my--with my mother's family.  Either it was--and when my grandmother [Emma Cane] passed away it was going to her sisters, and she lived on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And it was always a gathering someplace for, for Thanksgiving dinner.  There was a gathering someplace for Christmas.  From time-to-time we would--we would do things on my father's side, but it was--it was kind of a big deal when we did it on my father's side, but it was--it was still--my father had his brothers and his sisters, they had kids, they were my first cousins, I knew them and I liked them.  But I just wasn't close to them as I was to the cousins on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 611346
Speaker 1: Now you went to Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] until what, sixth grade or did?
Speaker 2: I went to Holy Angels until sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at Holy Ang- it was a very--it was amazing, Holy Angels I was what you call probably a good student and a good student is probably a B student as I look back on it.  I remember on the report cards I would get VGs, very good, that's what my report cards were primarily.  Every once in a while there was--they had a grade called E for excellence and nobody ever got a E and once in a while I got a E and that was a big deal.  But, you know, I was--I was--I was a very good student.  And I remember that my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] left 41st [Street] and Drexel [Avenue] and they moved to 88th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  They moved to the--out to the white Irish belt.  And it was a big deal 'cause my mother wanted a house.
Speaker 1: So now is this when you're going into seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Going--I'm--you know, my--we moved out to the far South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay so that's two years before, what--
Speaker 2: No Victor [Victor Carney], Victor--Vic- two years before what?
Speaker 1: Well I--I had you going into seventh grade in 1959, is that not right or?
Speaker 2: Prob- probably correct.  So in 1957, I was going into fifth grade, and so we moved out there between my fourth and fifth grade.  But I did not wanna transfer to the school out there.  I wanted to stay at Holy Angels.  So my parents said, "Okay, you could just take the bus and come back down to Holy Angels," which was a big deal from 88th and South Park at the time, going all the way back down to 39th [Street] and Oakwood [Boulevard].  And so, but it was also--it was--it was expensive, you know, 'cause my parents didn't have a lot of money.  I remember when we first moved into this little--as I look back on it, there were all these little bungalow houses, I called them--I call them now bourgeois bungalow, you know.  My, my folks had a roomer in the house and money was very tight.  I mean my, my folks they could not obtain a mortgage so they had to buy their house on contract.  My father had the good sense to get a lawyer involved and as we look back on it, he talks about the, the, the contract being very well written, but my mother was the moving force behind us buying this house.  And to our family, it was the--well my grandmother [Carney's paternal step-grandmother, Elizabeth Carney] on my father's side and my mother's side it was a big deal.  We were going--why are we going way out there.  I mean it was like going to the country to them.  You know, it was just a big deal for us moving--buying this house.  Why are they moving way out there?  So we bought this house in this--in this Irish neighborhood.  And after the first year, because it was just too expensive for me to go down to Holy Angels and money was really tight, you know, folks are buying a house on contract, I transferred to the Catholic school in the neighborhood.  And it was all--it was white Irish Catholic.  To the T.  And I remember I had a--when we first moved out there we were the second African American family on the block.  I remember, remember we had police protection.  People were very pissed off at the neighbors that, you know, the people that sold to us.  The neighbors were angry about it.  So I do remember a police car sitting out in front of our house.  I do remember transferring to this all-white school [St. Joachim School, Chicago, Illinois] and how the kids didn't want to sit next to me.  You had to go to church and the kids would let me sit in the pew by myself.  And I--I was in the sixth grade when I--when I transferred to this school.  When I transferred to this school at Holy Angels I was a very good student, when I transferred out to this white school I was the smartest kid in the class.  I was--I was--it was really a mistake for my parents to move me to this school, because they were a year behind in this white school.  I was so well prepared.  I mean and I remember that in the afternoon, they would bring this lay teacher in at the time and she was teaching English and the big thing at the time was to diagram sentences.  At Holy Angels that was just instilled in you, you knew how to diagram senten- sentences, you knew math, you knew your multiplication tables, and I would help the teacher diagram the sentence.  I'd say, "Oh no Miss Callahan [ph.], that's not correct, the adverb goes here or the adjective goes here, you know."  And when she would get stuck, she would call on me to help her diagram the sentence.
Story_ID: 611347
Speaker 1: So can you just talk about the experience--you were talking off the camera, I'd like you, you know, just to talk about--
Speaker 2: When I--when I went to--to St. Joachim [St. Joachim School, Chicago, Illinois] there was more of a--you know, they had a football team, and I played on the football team, not very good.  They had--they had a little basketball team.  There was more activities there, but I--what, what that neighborhood opened my eyes to a different way of life.  Because kitty-corner from St. Joachim was Burnside [Burnside Elementary School; Burnside Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and that was a public school.  And there were just a lot of black kids that went to Burnside.  And they came from, what they call kind of middle class, upper middle class families.  They all lived, probably, east of King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and then South Park [South Parkway].  Their families were postal workers or, you know, a lot of the fathers were educated but they couldn't, you know, they had--they worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  A lot of school teachers and so I became friends with a lot of these kids.  I mean there were, just you know, that was the first time I really developed friends of my own.  Well you know, I had friends at Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois], but then I--then I really developed friends out--when we moved, you know, out south.  It was a neighborhood where you could ride your bike.  So I got a bike and I used to always go on the--excuse me on the west side I mean of--of South Park.  And then I'd go a little bit further north and that was the old Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] neighborhood, and still is Chatham, but very nice community, predominantly at the time, African American.  And met a lot of nice families along the way.  It was very funny, my best friend growing up was a kid by the name of Ronald Murphy [ph.], and his mother was a school teacher and his father was a policeman.  And as I look back on it, his mother was--we'd go to these great parties--she would take me with them, but she was a member of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  So they were the Jack and Jill parties.  And so I would--I remember there was a costume at--for Valentine's [Valentine's Day] and my father [James Carney] made a costume for me called the King of Hearts.  'Cause my father's very artistic and I won first prize at, you know--so he got this poor kid, lower middle class, parents struggling to make ends meet and all of a sudden I get transformed into this--these kids whose teacher--parents were teachers and you know, policeman, and you know, was--they--they had--they had the benefit of education.  My mother [Jessie Cane Carney] finished high school, was very, very smart, started Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], but she just didn't have the economic wherewithal to support herself and you know, she had no support mechanisms.  So it was just education, high school education was probably the best that you could do on my mother's side at the time.  And then I got exposed to these kids whose parents were educated and they just had a little different value system in terms of education and family life.  And became very, you know, just--there was the exposure in which--that's how I would look on it, it's just exposure.
Speaker 1: When you went there at--for sixth grade, how many blacks were in your class?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two, okay.  And then you said that Jeanne Moutoussamy [HistoryMaker Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe], she was the first of her, her, her family to come, you said (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I thi- yeah, her brother was older, Johnny Moutoussamy [John Warren Moutoussamy, Jr.], so I remember he mus- he probably was in high school.  But Jeanne Moutoussamy, she had a brother named Claude [Claude Louis Moutoussamy], they were at--they attended St. Joachim with me, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And so this was really sort of expo- you know, you talked about, you, the drives with I think your uncle, but you know the drives into, you know, white neighborhoods, so this was another type of exposure to?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, and--and as I look back on taking those drives, that's the kind of house I grew up in.  I mean it was--it was--I grew up in a very neat house.  My father was a perfectionist in terms of his yard.  I mean he would get compliments.  My--you gotta remember my father is very artistic.  He would just arrange flowers.  I mean we had a apple tree in the back yard.  We had a pear tree.  We had grapevines and my father would make wine from the grapes, and you know, it was just--we probably had the--in terms of--we had a side yard that was just absolutely beautiful with flowers and trellis, and you know, it was just, my father was just a very artistic person, you know, and keep it up.  My mother was a driving force to get things done.  But my father, once he bought into it, he was a man that kept his property up and--and, and kept everything moving in terms of the, the, the, the maintenance of the house.  And, and there was nothing this man could not fix.  There was absolutely nothing he couldn't fix.
Speaker 1: So, so, you know, you described him, but even though he, he liked collecting things, you know, he had the neat side to him also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 611348
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I have a question about at Jo- St. Joachim [St. Joachim School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Joachim.
Speaker 1: Joachim, Joachim.  So you--you're saying that you did well the whole time but it wasn't academically challenging?
Speaker 2: At St. Joachim, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: No it was aca- it was not --
Speaker 1: The whole time?
Speaker 2: --academically challenging at all.  I mean, as a matter of fact, I, I think I kind of digressed a little bit because, you know, you just eventually you reach a plateau and let everybody catch up with you.  I think if I had stayed at Holy Angels [Holy Angels Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] I would've been much further along.  Now was I prepared when I went to high school [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois], yes.  But you know, at--in high school I was in kind of a B tier at the entry level, but if I had stayed at Holy Angels I know I would've been in the A tier.  Because Holy Angels was just--they were--they were driving reading, they were driving math, they were driving English, and this school was just not, it was not academically challenging for me at all.
Speaker 1: Now what about the relationship between you and the Irish students?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It was awful, it was awful, awful, awful.  I mean they were just white Irish Catholics and they were just--anybody that didn't look like them and plus, you know, it's the late '50s [1950s] and we just had Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and you know, it was just the, the, the embryonic stage of the Civil Rights Movement.  There was just a lot going on in society and they just hated me.  You know, they, they didn't hate me, they hated the color of my skin.  So it was--it was very difficult.
Speaker 1: A lot of name calling?
Speaker 2: A lot of name calling.  A lot of chasing home from school.  Had a couple fights on the way home from school.  I got jumped on by a gang of Irish thugs one time coming home from school, was able to push that off.  I just, you know, I--the mistake I made, I took the shortest route home, I shouldn't have done that, you know, that day.  I was--I was, you know, how you just get to the point where, I'm going this way anyway, you know what I mean.  I have a right to go this way.  And not a good move that day.  You know, those, those are the things that I remember.  And I never told my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] about them, you know, I just--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --into the school.  But it was still predominantly white Irish Catholic and it was just--it was a very hard time for me.
Speaker 1: You mean as a young, young, young--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because you're coming of age.
Speaker 2: Becoming of age and noticing--and that's where you notice, that was the first time in my life where I started to realize there is a color difference, you know.  Growing up on Drexel [Avenue], and 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue], everybody was black.  I mean, you know, the, the only time I remember white folks is when I saw the nuns at school or I went on the bus, and, and I--we were young kids and so, many times we'd go downtown by ourselves, my cousin Bob [ph.], Vert [ph.] and his mother [Rosemary Cane] at the time, and--my mother's sister worked for the transit system [Chicago Transit Authority] and so we would get confused when we got into the subway.  She would say now, "If you get confused just get on the "L" train [elevated train] where all the colored people are getting on (laughter)," and so we would follow the color--colored people, as they called them.  And then, you know, once we got on the subway we'd know--we would know where we were, but th- that was--that was the guiding light.  And so that was--that was--that was my exposure to white people.  I mean that--that was it.  And then you get--all of a sudden you get out to a Catholic school, they don't wanna sit next to you, you know what I mean, it was just a lot of, you know, "He's different, we don't like him, you know, 'cause the color of his skin."  You--you--it makes an imprint on you as a kid.
Story_ID: 611349
Speaker 1: But I think the salvation for me was that kitty-corner from St. Joachim [St. Joachim School, Chicago, Illinois] was Burnside [Burnside Elementary School; Burnside Scholastic Academy, Chicago, Illinois], the public school and there were a lot of black kids that went to--to Burnside and I became friends with a lot of those kids because there were no friends for me to--to have at Holy Angels [sic.], just a few, but I really got involved in those kids and those kids were on the west side of, of, of King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  And you know, they were probably economically a little better off than my family.  So I, I just hung around these kids and just got exposure.  As I said, the one kid his mother was in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  And I didn't know it was called Jack and Jill at the time, I just know they would go to a lot of parties and his mother, Ronald Murphy [ph.], would always take us on a lot of summer outings and she would always include me because I was friends with Ronald.  So, I just--I just--I just got exposure.  And I suddenly bought into school, but I also because of my family's economic situation, I had to work all through high school.  I worked at the groc- at you know, a local grocery store to help pay tuition at, at--when I left St. Joachim my father [James Carney] did not want me to go to the public high school which was Harlan [John Marshall Harlan High School; Harlan Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and of course I wanted to go to school where all the girls were.  You know what I mean, all the pretty girls went to Harlan and that was what was happening.  But my father just felt I would be better off in a Catholic school, a boys high school.  So the school to go to at the time was Mendel [Mendel Catholic High School, Chicago, Illinois].  But it was just, that was--that was like going to Little Rock high [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] (laughter), you know what I mean.  So, I--I had good sense not to do that, go to Mendel and so I don't know how I got sold on De La Salle [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois].  I--I think there were some other African American students in my--students in my eighth grade and they were going to De La Salle.  So I--I followed them to De La Salle.
Story_ID: 611350
Speaker 1: De La Salle [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois], was that--did you have to interview for that school back then?
Speaker 2: Take a test.
Speaker 1: You had to take a test? Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Take a test.  Take a test and got in, and I, I qualified.  I was a pretty good student.
Speaker 1: Okay. De La Salle is located where?
Speaker 2: It's located on 35th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're back close, close back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--I took the bus and the "L" train [elevated train] down to De La Salle.  And De La Salle was a--talk about a eye opener.  It was just unbelievable, because there were not very many African American students there.  Most of the black kids came from St. no--kids--all the black kids were kids that gone to Catholic grade school, St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeth Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois], St. Anselm's [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois], but De La Salle, you know, there were--it was the first time I became, I just thought they were still having come from out south they were just white people.  But at De La Salle I learned that they were Lithuanians and that they were Ukrainians and that they were Italians, and they were--everybody was polarized, everybody was fighting, you know what I mean, it was just--it was--it was--it was a jungle, it was a school to navigate your way through and you know, the black kids, we stood out like a thumb but we all kind of stuck together.  It was, you know, it was really funny I remember my first day at De La Salle and went down to the lunchroom 'cause it was a huge Catholic school, went down to the lunchroom and all the black kids sat together.  You know, you just--you just--I mean I don't you know, there is a book, 'Why-'--'Why do the Black Kids Sit Together in the Lunchroom' [sic. 'Why Are All the Black Kids Sitting Together in the Cafeteria: And Other Conversations About Race,' Beverly Daniel Tatum].  I mean it's just--you just knew that's where you would go.  But you know, when you look back at it in hindsight, you just--you're just eating lunch with people that look like you, you know.  All the Italians were together, all the Irish kids were together, all the Lithuanian kids were together.  But of course we stood out and it was like, "Why don't you guys integrate or why don't you guys sit with the white kids.  Why do you segregate yourselves?" You know.  We'd just say 'cause they're my friends, you know.  But that was--that was a big deal on going to De La Salle.  Tremendous exposure.
Speaker 1: Okay and exposure in terms of?
Speaker 2: Just, just learning about Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], learning about Back of the Yards [Chicago, Illinois], learning, learning--it was a big exposure into what made up Chicago [Illinois] and how Chicago worked.  De La Salle was a school of blue collar.  It was--it was really funny, De La Salle for black kids, our parents, it was giving us a better education.  So we all went down to De La Salle.  For the white kids, it was just, you know, a lot of them Catholic, that was a Catholic high school that you--that you attended.  When I left De La Salle years later and I kept up with a lot of my friends, black friends at De La Salle, most of my black friends finished college.  The white kids, very few of them finished college because they went on, it was Bri- Bridgeport, it was Back of the Yard, they became policemen, they became firemen, that they were really smart when they got the dip- the diploma it said go to the Department of Planning [City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development], or Streets and Sans [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation].  So it was--it was--it was almost a vocational school for the white kids in terms of what--how they were gonna spend their career after high school.  But for us, you know, our parents were trying to do the best they could for us, not to send us to public school, but to send us to a Catholic school.  So we went down to De La Salle and all of us went on to college.
Story_ID: 611351
Speaker 1: So do you remember at that time, 'cause we're talking, you're right smack dab in the mid- middle of the '60s [1960s], you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I, I, I, you know, I, I remember Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], I remember that decision coming out.  I remember the Little Rock Nine; that was a big deal.  My--my--my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] were really into, they weren't activists, but they were conscious of the fact that they were, they were black.  You know, I, I remember just watching the TV, especially in Brown versus the Board of Education and the [U.S.] Supreme Court has gone crazy and you know, all the protests that were--became about as that--from that decision.  I'm reading a book now on, on, on the whole Brown versus the Board of Education by Justice (unclear), and it's just it's just--it's fascinating to see what's going on in the country at the time.  And then, you--you're just starting to move into the '60s [1960s] into the Civil Rights Movement.  So, you know, I, I, I remember, like I said, Little Rock Nine.  I remember the, the bomb- the bombing of the little girls in, in Alabama [at 16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  You know, I just--those are the things that--that like I--I--that--that I recall that were going on socially at a time when I was in high school [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois].  And it was causing a lot of confusion at school because it was like, "What are these Negroes doing, what do they want, blah, blah, blah."  You were always defending yourself in school because of the color of your skin.  We--we were big integrationists at that time, so we were busily--busy trying to integrate each other.  We were just as good as they were.  It was a tough time, it was a tough time.
Story_ID: 611352
Speaker 1: Either at St. Joachim [St. Joachim School, Chicago, Illinois] or De La Salle [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois] were there black teachers there?
Speaker 2: At De La- at, at St. Joachim, no, there were no--there were no African American teachers whatsoever, no.  At De La Salle, there was one tea- there was one--was taught by the brothers, Christian brothers, there was one, one priest that was African American.
Speaker 1: So wha- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who, he was a very good teacher, as I remember.
Speaker 1: So wh- what are you, how are you sort of forming as a young, you know, a young, young person, you know, I mean, you know, what, what is influencing you, what are you, you know, you said you were a B student, you know, I assume that college was always, you know--
Speaker 2: I, I was gonna go to college, not sure how I was gonna pay for it.  I worked--the, the, the tragedy for me in high school was working so much.  I just became, I don't know what made me become so independent.  I think my father [James Carney] was raised by a father [William Carney] that said don't ask him for nothing, and my father had the same philosophy is that once you get in high school you pretty much you figure it out.  And so I had to figure it out.  So I got a job at Jewel [Jewel-Osco].  My father really believed in working and doing a good job.  And being able to one day you're gonna have to be able to support your family and, and, and, and start making money.  So and plus it was paying the tuition at De La Salle which was a heavy toll on my parents.  So I started working at, at the Jewel grocery store.  And I worked too many hours, I mean I would--I would get off from school, out of school at three and I was at the Jewel at four, and I worked until eleven or twelve o'clock at night.  You know, sometimes six nights a week.  And I was, you know, it was a lot to take on for a high school student.  I remember, and this was from sophomore year on, especially--when I first started Jewel it was a pretty nice job.  I mean they changed managers and he made us work a lot longer hours and my parents were very confused by it, but you know, I just felt I had to work.  So it was--it was what I had to do.  But I remember, I remember at De La Salle there was a lot of reading and every day in this English class I would fall asleep.  And this priest would pick me up--wake me up and, and walk me around the school and wanted to know why I was always so tired.  And he was just astounded that I would--and I was working full time when I was sixteen and going to high school.  And but I mean, I--a lot of kids at De La Salle did that.  I mean, because you had to pay tuition it was--you came from a lower middle class family and that--that's what you did.
Story_ID: 611353
Speaker 1: DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], was it assumed that you were gonna go there?
Speaker 2: No, to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I went to Loyola (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean Loyola, I'm sorry, I meant--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Loyola.
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry, I'm sorry, sorry.
Speaker 2: I really was not, you know, I really didn't know what I was going to do when I got, I knew I was going to college and I applied to some schools, like I applied to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and they rejected me.  Just not--just not having good guidance, and--
Speaker 1: So when you say not having good guidance?
Speaker 2: At De La Salle [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois] they, they--at De La Salle there was no--when I got to be a senior I was told at De La Salle that I should go to a trade school.  I mean they, they--all the black kids were, were, were told you should pick up a trade because, you know.  I mean they w- 'cause these white teachers knew that you'd have a hard--tough time finding a job.  So find a trade for yourself.  So I was told that it would be a good move for me to go to DeVry [DeForest Training School; DeVry University].  And so I don't know what made me apply to Loyola.  It was just--it was a school that I applied to and for some reason I got in my head that for a short period I thought maybe I'd go to night school, I'd go to night school and work during the day and save up some money.  And I went down to Loyola and I met this priest and this priest convinced me that I should go to the day school.  And so I knew--I knew my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] wanted me to go to college full time, but I was--I hadn't told him what my thoughts were in terms of how I was gonna go to school.  I just knew I had to pay for it.  So how--that was the issue for me, how was I gonna pay for my education, you know.  I got accepted at a few colleges, but nobody was offering me any financial aid and it's because I really didn't know how to apply.  It was just money I didn't have and my parents didn't have and I knew I couldn't go to my parents.  So I figured I would--if I went to Loyola for a while at night school I, I would make some money and then eventually I would transfer to the day school.  But, when I went, went there and I--I'm sure Loyola and DePaul, those schools were advocated, you know, by the Catholic schools, you know, "Go to DePaul, go to--go to Loyola."  And so I went down to apply to Loyola and I, I got accepted and this priest convinced me that I should do the day school and set up a financial aid package for me.  So I said, "Oh okay, I'll do that."  And they also provided for me that they thought I--it would be good if I could live on campus up on Lake Shore [Drive].  So that's how I went to Loyola.  Just kind of total serendipity.
Story_ID: 611354
Speaker 1: And Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] initially for me was a struggle 'cause I really didn't know how to study 'cause I had worked all during high school [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois], you know.  And I got through high school just 'cause I was--I was--I was pretty smart, you know, and I could half study and, and, and do--and do fairly well.  And so when I got to Loyola, you had to study.  So I wasn't used to that.  So, first semester I did not do very well, but after a while it kicked in and I figured I'd study and then I started performing very well in college.  And Loyola was--college was a good time for me.  It was being away from home, it was being away from the strict discipline of my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney].  It was a, a time, I, I had an aunt that had finished college, my mother's youngest sister [Bea Cane (ph.)] finished college and she made a big deal of going to college.  So I knew that--I felt like I had to compete with her a little bit and do well in school.  So I, I became a fairly good student.  But I got exposed to--it was mostly white kids 'cause there weren't very many black kids at the school, just in terms of--they were kids from different cities that were there, and just--it was just an exposure.  And I--and I enjoyed college.  It was--it was a--it was a Jesuit high school [sic. university] so it was academically very challenging, but I was--I was able to survive and do well.  And I, I, I bought into college.
Speaker 2: So what did you major in?
Speaker 1: I started off as a math major, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So were you always good at math?
Speaker 1: Yeah, pretty good.  Pretty, pretty good math student.
Speaker 2: And, and then what ha- then what--you started off and then what did you finish?
Speaker 1: I started off in math until my junior year and I remember I, I came into this class called differential equations (laughter).  And I kind of said, well maybe you ought to rethink this (laughter).  So I, I, I transferred out of the math program, I went into psychology.  It was--they had a psychology program where you had to have a science background.  And so because I had all the math it was easily convertible into--into psychology.  And so I thought during Loyola that I wanted to--there was a dorm and one called Gonzaga Hall, and kind of discovered I had leadership abilities.  I became the president of the dorm and you know, I started to develop a lot of--a lot of friends and my personality really started to come out on my own in terms of just being very social, organizing parties, very involved in student government.  You know, I be--I came--I just became--came into my own being away from home and, and, and just--you just come into your own.  I mean you discover who you are in college.  So I'm really glad I had the experience to, to go away to school and discover that about myself.
Story_ID: 611355
Speaker 1: And then I decided--I took a, a, a teaching course and became a student--you know, got into a teaching program and decided that I was gonna be a high school teacher, that--that was gonna be my career.  And so I--when I graduated I got a job offer at St. Ignatius [St. Ignatius College Prep, Chicago, Illinois].  And so that's where, that was my first teaching experience.  And it was really funny because when I left Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] I wa- just--you know, you know, I, I, I was completing college, I was coming to the end, what was I gonna do with my life.  And at the time, the Vietnam War was going on, you know, a lot of the white guys they, they got married young, right out of college, they were getting married, you know.  I knew I didn't wanna do that, you know, just--but there was no significant girlfriend, I mean I had a girlfriend at the time but it certainly was--wasn't somebody I wanted to think about getting married, so I didn't wanna do that.  So what do you do after you graduate from college?  So I, I got a job teaching and I went back and I lived at home for a year.  And I knew that wasn't gonna work (laughter), you know, 'cause you--you've been away at school.  So I, I taught at Ignatius, it's ver- the Vietnam War is going on and the black movement is in full stride--
Story_ID: 611356
Speaker 1: You weren't very involved in the black movement (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] I was.
Speaker 1: You were involved?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Loyola I, I mean you, you, you just got--I wasn't an activist but I was certainly going to all the rallies, I was certainly going to all the meetings.  I certainly bought in the black power.  I certainly had a natural--I mean I was coming into my own and it was really funny, I was living in this white dorm and I was the president of this dorm [Gonzaga Hall], but I was starting to change, you know, and everybody knew thi- noticed the change and the white guys, "Why are you getting involved in that, why are you growing your hair out like that?" You know, what I mean.  And it was--it was--it was--it was--it was a push and tug at the time 'cause there were more black students coming to Loyola and that's who I was hanging out with.  And then there was Mundelein College [Chicago, Illinois], it was the girls college up there and there were--there were black girls up there so that's who I started to hang around with, you know.  You really--you really growing as a person.  You're, you're, you're, you're developing.  And so I started to really pull away from these, these white kids that were my friends when I came in freshman, sophomore year and started pulling away to the black kids and going to all the symposiums on the whole Black Power movement and the--[HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni came and she read her poetry and it was, I mean I started to read all the black literature.  And then it was sending my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] crazy (laughter), you know, they, they--you know, you come home from school and you got this natural and my mother doesn't understand it and you know, I'm talking about this black power stuff and I mean it was just--I mean I was caught up in it (laughter), you know.  I was--I was into it--wasn't an out there activist 'cause, you know, all through college I'm still working, you know what I mean.  So I always had to realize where was my next dollar gonna to come from in order for me to, you know, make it economically.
Story_ID: 611357
Speaker 1: Where were you working during the summers at school [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I worked at Jewel food store [Jewel-Osco], I got a job at First National Bank [First National Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I, I, I always worked, I always had a job.  You know, I worked at the library, in--in college I worked at a funeral home.  I mean I, I had to have money.  That, that was one thing that was fundamental to me.  I had to survive economically.  My parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney], they just didn't have the means to provide me any economic support throughout college.  And I, you know, and I alwa- and I developed an attitude was, my college education is going to benefit me, so why should they pay for it anyway.  So I had to figure out--I mean that's how I thought everybody did it.  I didn't know that people paid your tuition for you or your parents did that.  'Cause it just was not afforded to me.  So I was--I worked in the library, I worked--like I said, I just had always--I always had a job throughout college, all the time.  I mean it was part time and I had some financial aid from school, but I still had to have pocket money and you know, to buy your clothes.  And my, my mother having struggled with the fact that I was so independent, so she would insist in the summer to take me shopping, at least buy me clothes to go back to school with.  I'd say, "Oh no you don't have to do that, these clothes are good enough, I don't need--don't need any clothes," but--and I guess that's how they supported me.  But everything else I, I pretty much paid for.
Story_ID: 611358
Speaker 1: It was an interesting story about your work, you know, actually working as a teacher 'cause you taught for two years and you were also saying that teaching then exempted you from being drafted?
Speaker 2: It was--it was--it was an interesting time because I was very involved with the African American students.  The black movement was going on.
Speaker 1: You mean at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At St. Ignatius [St. Ignatius College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] once I got out of college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Now you got to remember these black students are the egghead kids, so they--they're coming out from Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] and these middle class neighborhoods, and some of them come from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], so there was a--Ignatius there was a, a good cross segment of the--of our community, the socioeconomic strata.  And a lot of the parents at Ignatius did not like me.  'Cause you know, you identify with the students, I mean I'm twenty-two, you know what I mean.  And a lot of these kids are, they're juniors and seniors in high school and what these stude- these students are very much getting caught up in the--in the--in the black movement.  They're growing--they're growing big naturals.  I'm sure they're having a little friction at home.  There were a couple of students at Igna- excuse me, at Ignatius that were involved with the Black Panther society [Black Panther Party].  And so there's a push on at Ignatius at the time to form a black student union.  And so we finally got the okay from the administration to do that.  And we formed a--what we called, it was the Black Organization of Students and I was the moderator for that organization.  And that was a tough time for me because we were trying to do things that were relevant to our community but then you had these two students that were in the Black Panther Party and they really wanted to take on a very militant approach to the organization.  So it was a rough time for me trying to keep that in balance.  And then, I was--I was--had a reputation that I taught U.S. history, 'cause I minored in history in college, so I, I, I was--I had a reputation of being a very good teacher and so my goal at the time, I was really enjoying that time was to become a high school principal.  I said okay this it is, this is where I belong, high school principal is, is what I'm gonna do.  And so you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was the principal at the time there?
Speaker 2: At Ignatius?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was a gentleman by the name of Frank Raispis.  And he still teaches there, is probably in his early eighties, but one of these classic teachers.  Teaches--you know, he taught Latin and became a very good friend, a friend to this day as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 611359
Speaker 1: So the, at Ignatius [St. Ignatius College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] because it was a college prep, it was the creme de la creme of the Catholic schools, probably the creme de la creme--creme de la creme high school, I was pushed to go on and go to graduate school.  I mean you know, if you were a teacher there it was expected you would go on and get a master's degree.  So I decided okay, I'll enroll in Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And I enrolled in Loyola and I took some courses in African American history and literature, but also I started taking some graduate courses in education.  And I really found the courses un-stimulating.  I mean, you know, I was getting A's doing nothing, you know what I mean.  I mean I was showing up, I was taking notes, they'd ask me to write a paper, I'd write a paper, and I was just--I was doing very well.  But it--I was putting forth no effort.  I mean, you know, I though, I just, I just knew that graduate school was supposed to be challenging.  And this was just not challenging.  The only courses I was--I was enjoying my African American literature course, you know, I mean those were courses I'm not supposed to be taking anyway, but I'm, I'm taking them because, you know, that, that--that's the time.  And I was sitting in the lunchroom at Ignatius talking to another teacher.  He was asking me how grad school was going.  I said, you know--it was in the spring, I said I didn't go this semester.  I said 'cause I gotta figure out what I'm gonna do.  I said because the, the grad courses, they're just not working for me.  I'm doing very well in them, but I'm just--it's just--you know, I'm, I'm not feeling them, I'm not getting anything out of it.  And, and this teacher's name is Bruce Callow, said to me "Well have you ever considered law school?"  I said, "Law school?" I mean that was just--that was foreign to me, just foreign.  Bruce Callow was going to DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] in the evening and DePaul at the time had no students of color in the day school and they had one or two in the evening program.  Bruce Callow was active in student government and at the time there were--there was a couple young white hippie professors teaching in the law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois].  And this is--you have to go back historically, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been assassinated, Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] is now the president.  Lyndon Johnson, you know, the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] had been passed and a part of his legislation he is going to create the Great Society.  That--that was--that was what he was noted for.  So all this money was flowing in for education of, of, of black students and DePaul received--the law school received a sizable grant but they could not find any students to, to go to law school.  And Bruce Callow was involved in student government, he--and I guess he became involved in this issue and I did not know this, Bruce Callow submitted my name to this professor at DePaul.  This is a true story.
Story_ID: 611360
Speaker 1: Professor called me and said that my name had been given to him by Bruce Callow and--as, as a possible candidate for the law school program and would I at least come down and talk to him about it.  So I said, "Well okay," I talked to Bruce.  He said, "Yeah I just gave your name 'cause they're, they're looking for, for black students to go to law school." So I made a date to meet this--this professor at--on a Friday afternoon, I didn't go.  I went out with my friends.  I went--I went drinking and went to a party that night.  I did not go.  I said I don't wanna go to law school, I know I don't wanna--if anything I know what I don't wanna do and I don't--law school is just not on my radar, I'm not doing that.  So I didn't go.  This teacher called me back.  This professor said, "We probably got our dates mixed up.  But I had Friday, why don't we reschedule."  So I said, "Okay."  So we rescheduled for the following Tuesday.  And time I got out of class, I said, "Damn, I got--," you know, so I went--I went.  And we talked.  He talked about the program, blah, blah.  I still wasn't buying into it.  What law school, tell me about law school, I just wasn't feeling it.  So he asked me, he said, "Well at least will you fill out this form and at least let me get your transcript from undergraduate school."  Well I had good grades in undergraduate school [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  So he got my transcript and he would not let me go once he got my transcript.  So eventually what they ended up doing, he said there's a summer program here at DePaul [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] for students of color, Africa--black students at the time.  It's in the summer, would you at least go to the program, we'll pay for everything, we'll buy your books, will do this, will do this, will do this, they gave you a stipend, why not.  You know what I mean.  And so I went to--I went and participated in the summer program and I just became friends with all the black students in the program, I really liked them a lot.  And I did well in the course.  And so that was the beginning of my law school career.  I mean it just--and then I got called in to--at the end of my freshman year, I got called in and they said, "You haven't taken the LSAT.  Would--you have to go take this exam."  I said you--me supposed to do it.  So I completed a year of law school before I took the, the, the law school exam.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Shakes head).
Speaker 2: They di- okay, so, so through the summer program you got into law school then?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, through the summer program.
Speaker 2: So, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the requirement was if you did well in the summer program, you'd be admitted in--into law school.  So I did very well in the summer program and that's how I got admitted into law school.
Speaker 2: So how many of the--of the group during the summer got admitted in?
Speaker 1: I would say about 75 percent of them and I would say about 50 percent eventually graduated.
Speaker 2: So now what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is--this is 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy [1970].  It's 1970.  And I once again--
Speaker 2: Okay. Are you sure not '71 [1971]?
Speaker 1: No, 'cause I got out of high school [De La Salle Institute, Chicago, Illinois], I graduated in 1969, I taught for a year [at St. Ignatius College Prep, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: A year, okay.
Speaker 1: --and then I went to that summer program in the summer of 1970 and then I started law school in the summer--in the--in the--formally in the fall of 197- 1970.  And I was in the evening program, because once again, I was worried about econom- economics and also is that the Vietnam War was going on.  And teachers still had their deferments.  So my class was mainly made up of men who were teachers staying out of the war.  So what we did is that we took late afternoon and evening classes, and we taught, at least you had to teach at least twelve credit hours to keep your deferment.  And we were the last class to get that deferment.
Story_ID: 611361
Speaker 1: So you taught the whole time you were in law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois], no?
Speaker 2: Just about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I taught until I got the--I taught until I was a junior in law school.  To--got to my junior year and then I was in a four-year program 'cause I went at night.  And then I don't know how--there, there was a student--one of my students, his father knew, he was a, a white kid that liked me a lot, his father was a lawyer and was telling me, "If you're gonna practice law you need--you, you, you gotta start getting some exposure to, to, to a law firm," or whatever.  And so he was instrumental in me getting a job at Chicago Title.  And so I left teaching to see what the, the business world would be like.  'Cause I was doing--I was doing okay in law school, and so I knew that, well--what, you know, what was I gonna do with this law degree.  My parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] had no clue what I was doing.  I mean all they knew was that I was working, going to law school and I was always busy, I was always studying, I was hanging out with most of the law students all the time.  You, you know how you are at law school, you just become part of that, you know, that--that--that survival, you know.  I had a new group of friends and it was--it was--it was a hard time in my life because law school was so intense and I was working during the day, so I was--I was--I mean in the evening when I got home, on the weekends I was just studying all the time.
Speaker 1: So now, so you're still--you're staying at home?
Speaker 2: No, I--I had moved out, you know.  I move--a year at home after you've been away you can--and plus it was just expected, you just don't go home and live, you know.
Speaker 1: So let me--who were some of the friends that you met in law school?
Speaker 2: Oh, Francine Soliunas [Francine Stewart Soliunas], Jimmy Couch [ph.], Von Barber [ph.], Jim Hibbler [William J. Hibbler] who is now a federal district court judge, god, so many, a couple of them are judges now, Ber- Bertina Lampkin [Bertina E. Lampkin].  I just met a lot--a lot of nice folks that we just became friends.  And also what was interesting is that we started to meet stu- I started to meet students at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], I used to study at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] all the time, so I met students at U of C.  I met Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams] who was at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame Law School, South Bend, Indiana] at the time, you know, because the students, you know, you have--BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)] was starting and so we'd go to our little our little BALSA conventions and get involved.  So I mean, it was just a different--I mean all of a sudden I just got exposed to a world that was just unknown to me.  You know, I had never heard about law firms, I never--I didn't know--I didn't know Sidley Austin [Sidley Austin LLP] existed, I didn't know Mayer, Brown and Platt [Mayer Brown LLP] existed, I mean, but now I was just starting to get exposure.  And I, I, I was doing fairly well in law school.  And so--
Speaker 1: Now what courses did you gravitate to?
Speaker 2: In law school I prob- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how was your first year--the first year you took, like how was the four years versus the, you know, the three years?
Speaker 2: It was hard, it was very, very hard.  I, I, I--I've--I could've completed law school in three and a half years, but it required me going to summer session.  And in the summer, I just had to take a break.  I just--I, I, I, I don't think I went to summer school one time when I was in law school.  So I just took the summers off.  And a lot of students were, were doubling up in the summer and going, you know, taking summer classes.  But I just didn't do that.  So I, I, I completed the four-year program.  And the courses that I gravitated to in law school, I just took the guide, you know, they, they give you a program book, you know, you have a catalog and this is what you need to graduate, so I was worried about filling requirements.  Courses that I enjoyed in law school, I enjoyed law school from the beginning.  I enjoyed torts, I enjoyed contracts, I just--I just enjoyed the, the new learning experience of it all.  It was very hard for me.  You know, what law school's like, it's vocabulary that was unbeknownst to you.  I mean you would--you would read the material, then you'd go to 'Black's Law Dictionary,' you still didn't understand it, you know what I mean.  But I--but I took a couple of real estate courses and I enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 611362
Speaker 1: Person that was instrumental to me in leaving teaching and going into the business world asked me the same thing.  And I said, "I've taken a couple real estate courses as electives and I enjoyed that." He said, "Why don't you try to get a job, you know, at Chicago Title?"  He knew someone so he was instrumental to me and I got--instrumental in facilitating a meeting and I got hired by Chicago Title.  And so that's where I developed my real estate background and that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal (laughter).
Speaker 2: So you met Earl Neal when?
Speaker 1: I met Earl Neal probably in the early '70s [1970s] and he was just a practicing lawyer coming through the title company and I would do his title work for him and we--we developed a friendship at the time.  I didn't--I didn't, you know--Earl Neal then was not the Earl Neal that--that we knew.  But he was still, you know, he--he was a politician.  He was working with Cecil Partee [Cecil A. Partee], they were ward committeemen down on 58th [Street] and Drexel [Avenue]--I mean 58th and Michigan [Avenue].  So I was just, just starting to get exposed.  I mean, I was--that was just the whole thing and--and it's, it's a--just a new world for me.  It was--it was unbelievable.  So after I--I got out of law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] I, I, I continued to work at Chicago Title and then I--I went to--I think there was--there was a firm called [Tucker, Watson, Butler and Todd, Chicago, Illinois], it was Jerome Butler, it was Bob Tucker [Robert L. Tucker], it was Tom Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd]--
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: You know, so you got--you started--
Speaker 2: So that's where you got hired?
Speaker 1: That--that's, that's where I went to work.  And then Jerome Butler--
Speaker 2: Now that's 19--you--1975 maybe?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, '75 [1975], '76 [1976], right.
Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 611363
Speaker 1: You worked there how long?  So there were four, four partners or do you?
Speaker 2: Oh god Julie [Julieanna Richardson], I--there was Bob Tucker [Robert L. Tucker], there was Tom Todd [HistoryMaker Thomas N. Todd], there was Jerome Butler, there was a white lawyer--
Speaker 1: You have to go back.  It's all right.
Speaker 2: --there wa- okay, I'm sorry.  Do you edit this?
Speaker 1: No, but that's okay, go on.  Jerome, Tom Todd, Bob Tucker, that's okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let me ask--
Speaker 2: --Watson.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was their practice [Tucker, Watson, Butler and Todd, Chicago, Illinois] like?  Were they--and who, who were the black firms rising at the time, were you aware of that?
Speaker 2: I really was not aware of it.  Now you gotta remember, this is--this is what I'd do remember.  Black law firms, at the time, they really weren't firms.  They were just private practitioners that pulled together in a firm name that shared the expenses, this at a time when black lawyers are just starting to move off 55th Street and they're coming downtown.  The first building that--that--that rented to blacks was, I think was at, 188 West Randolph [Street].  And then there was another building that rented to blacks, I think it was at 77 West Washington [Street]--no it was a little--it was a little further west.  So you know, there're really no firms.  Now the one firm that, there was one firm at the time and I, I don't--I'm trying to remember--
Speaker 1: You--you sure there wasn't like Lafo- Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious], wasn't she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna get there--I'm gonna get there, 'cause I worked there [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh you did, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: What about Bob Ming [William Robert Ming, Jr.]. Was Ming (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No McCoy, Ming and Black [Chicago, Illinois].  There was a firm McCoy, Ming and Black.  They were--they were still around.  Bob Ming had just recently got convicted of tax evasion.
Speaker 1: So that was the time?
Speaker 2: That was the time--that was the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, so that was tragic, right.
Speaker 2: That was very, very tragic and it was--it was very interesting, they were just--there was some great legal minds at the time.  It was just--I, I did not know it, but there were.  Bob Tucker was a tremendous legal mind.  Gene Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham], I mean I met Gene Pincham, and I was just awed by him.  There was James Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery].  And I was starting to meet these lawyers, you know, and you know a kid from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] who grew up like I grew up, it was just--it was just unbelievable.  So I'm really trying to find my way at the time.
Story_ID: 611364
Speaker 1: And then with the Tucker firm [Tucker, Watson, Butler and Todd, Chicago, Illinois], Jerome Butler got into a tiff with one of the partners, so I left with him to go start up a small firm.  That didn't work out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, now what year was that though?
Speaker 1: It was probably in 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].  So it, it worked out for a short period of time.  My first landlord was Jim Hill [HistoryMaker James Hill, Jr.], Jim Hill was our landlord.  Jim Hill was the Hill, Taylor [Hill, Taylor and Company, Chicago, Illinois].  He was my landlord, right across the hall.
Speaker 2: So you're saying you and, and Tuck [Robert L. Tucker]- was it Tu- ?
Speaker 1: Me--me--I left--
Speaker 2: And you went with?
Speaker 1: --Jerome Butler (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Butler, okay went with Jerome.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we rented some space (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So was it Butler--
Speaker 1: It was just Butler and Carney.  And we rented some space from Jim Hill.  And we ha- we had a little practice.  Jerome had a--had a tremendous legal mind, had developed some inroads into the black professional community, was struggling a little bit in terms of dev- developing clients, but for some reason I always had the knack to develop clients.  Developed a lot of real estate clients just along the way.  And Jerome was a--was a--was, was very, very smart, was a very--I mean, I didn't know how to practice law.  Jerome gave me the, the foundation of how to practice law, he really did.  I mean he, he had a great mind.
Speaker 2: So did you ever, like, come across Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis] at that time--who were your clients?  You know, your real estate clients?
Speaker 1: My clients were just very small people.  I was--I--I'd--
Speaker 2: Individuals buying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) individuals buying.  You know, I started off with people buying houses and I graduated people buying larger apartment buildings.  I just--I just really had a knack for it and developed a little reputation.  Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] heard, heard, heard about our little firm and so Jewel Lafontant sent Julian Wilkins over to recruit us to join her law firm [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 611365
Speaker 1: So I went over and that's how we--we went over and the firm became Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler [Chicago, Illinois].  So I worked for that firm.
Speaker 2: So that's 19--what 197--
Speaker 1: Oh that's, that's late--that's, that's late 1970s.  Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] had just moved into the building at 69 West Washington [Street] which was a huge coup for her because the landlord did not know that the firm was going to be predominantly African American.  Because I, I--as just I understand it I heard Jewel and Julian [Julian Wilkins] talk, that it was a Jewish lawyer that negotiated the lease for them and I know there was a straw party involved, but, but Jewel was really the, the beneficiary, she was the tenant beneficiary.  And Jewel Lafontant was becoming very prominent herself.  She was into the Republican Party.  She was, you know I don't know all of her history, but, but she was--she was starting to get recruited on corporate boards and she had a very active divorce practice.  I mean, you know, for the--for the African American families that were having marital problems, they all wanted Jewel, Jewel Lafontant as the lawyer.  And she had a--she had a fairly good reputation.
Speaker 2: So how old were you there then at Lafon- ?
Speaker 1: I was at Lafontant probably, ooh this is late '70s [1970s] to the early '80s [1980s].  And I worked very closely with, with Julian Wilkins.  Julian Wilkins was starting to have some health problems.
Speaker 2: But, could can I--is this--okay, Julian--wait (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's David's [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins] dad.
Speaker 2: That's David's, okay, so had he been at Jenner and Block at that point?
Speaker 1: I can tell you the whole story--I can tell you the whole story (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, please, okay.
Speaker 1: Julian Wilkins when to Jenner and Block right at the end of my tenure at the title company.  I--I got done in law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois], had the bar behind me and I was learning.  I was--a lot of the black lawyers they would--you know, they were doing all the prac- there were--there were [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, I was doing title work for a couple other, Bob Tucker [Robert L. Tucker], 'cause they, they were doing real estate work.  And so I started to know the black lawyers.  And Jul- the big gossip on the block at the time was Julian Wilkins had become a partner at Jenner and Block.  And I met Julian Wilkins because he too was doing real estate and when he was at Jenner and Block I would do--help him with his title work at, at the title company.  So when I went out and he was there, and when I went out oh fo- I met--I was--I was working with Earl Neal as well, but there were rumors starting to circulate that he was havi- he wasn't happy at Jenner and Block, although they made him a partner, they really--they were not very kind to him, they were not.  I mean they were sending him over to monitor the court call and then when a case was to come up, he was to call the lawyer that was to handle the case.  And Julian had some very--you know, Julian was very instrumental in setting up Seaway National Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois].  So you, Seaway was a client and I guess they were just clients at the time that--that they were not respected by Jenner at all.  So Julian left Jenner and Block just very, very suddenly and set up his own shop at 77 West Washington.  And that's, that's in the Methodist building [First United Methodist Church of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And then he joined Jewel.  So it would--became--Jewel Lafontant, Wilkins and--
Speaker 2: Butler [Jerome Butler]?
Speaker 1: No before Butler there was a white lawyer, Malkin [Earle A. Malkin].  Lafontant, Wilkins and Malkin [Stradford, LaFontant, Fisher, and Malkin, Chicago, Illinois].  And then when Jerome came over, Jerome--they changed the firm to Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler.  Malkin still stayed there, but it--you know, he was just a divorce lawyer, he--you know, it wasn't a big deal for him.  And so, I--I've heard the stories about him at Jenn- with Julian at Jenner and Block.  But Julian was tremendous lawyer, just a--just a tremendous mind.
Story_ID: 611366
Speaker 1: Through Julian [Julian Wilkins], I learned the history of, of many of the black civil rights lawyers look, you know, I can't think of Ming's [William Robert Ming, Jr.] first name--
Speaker 2: Bob.
Speaker 1: Bob, Bob Ming--
Speaker 2: Bob Ming.
Speaker 1: Yeah, McCoy, Ming and Black [Chicago, Illinois].  And I--and I can't think of Black's [Walter K. Black] first name but I met him because he was also doing a lot of real estate work.  I met him at the title company quite a bit.  So there was--there was my exposure.  And through Julian, Julian was very active in a number of--he was a younger lawyer but he was very active with Ming, Bob Ming who is very, very close to Thurgood Marshall.  And Julian wo- told me stories that he was on the think tank with Thurgood Marshall when he argued Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  A lot of the, the foundation to get ready for that--for that famous case was right here in the--in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  Then a group of them went to--went to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]  And a lot of them came from New York [New York] because it was the--I think they were involved--I don't know--I don't know if the legal defense firm [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] was, was formed at that time, but it was a similar organization that Thurgood worked for at that time.  But Julian said and--and Bob Ming was one of the leaders of the team for that Brown v. the Board of Education.  And Julian told me a story that when Thurgood argued that case, when he came back to the group, he said there was not one case that those [U.S.] Supreme Court justices--the Supreme Court justices asked him that he was not prepared for in his think tank.  They were just--they were just incredible, incredible minds.
Story_ID: 611367
Speaker 1: At the time I'm working for Lafontant [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois], I met John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.], he's a teenager at Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].  I met David Wilkins [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins], I met his brothers [Stephen Wilkins and Timothy Wilkins], they were all--come up because Julian was there and Jewel [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] was there, so they were all--they were all friends.  So that's another exposure that I'm getting and I'm starting to do work for Jewel Lafontant in her divorce work that was real estate spin off.  So I was starting to do some of her real estate work and some other cases that she was letting me handle.  Julian [Julian Wilkins] became ill and nobody knew it at the time.  But as you look back on it, he had a brain tumor that was developing and his behavior was erratic.  And one of his big clients was the--was the AKA Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  And so I was doing Jul- you know, I was helping Julian review contracts interacted with the AKAs.  The AKAs were a big client of the firm because they had the boule, I mean they, they had all kind of legal issues all the time.  And the AKAs, the--their headquarters was on 53rd [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue].  Well Julian got--they were having their big convention, the boule, Julian gets sick and Julian takes a leave from the firm.  And so the AKAs they're about to go crazy 'cause they had, you know, they had these copyright contracts, they had all these contracts.  So the president of the AKAs called me up, it was--oh I can't think of Ba- she's a Ph.D., Barbara [Barbara Kinard Phillips] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's what--
Speaker 1: --I can't--I can't--I'll think of her--
Speaker 2: Larze- [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson], d--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no, no, I can't think of her name--
Speaker 2: We should know, we should know.
Speaker 1: Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant], I really--shame on me, I can't think of her name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're interviewing all the AKA presidents and so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh she was--she was a--a tremendous president.  And she called me and asked me could I just, you know, get them to the boule and then they would--they would probably have to go to another firm.  So I took over all of Julian's work while he was on a leave and I did such a good job that I kept the AKA as a client.  So that's--that's how I started to develop, I started developing the--the AKAs and the president at the time, they wanted--they were outgrowing, they really should not have--been--had their headquarters at 53rd and Greenwood 'cause it was in a three--flat building.  There was--it was all--all kind of code violations.  I mean and--and zoning issues.  But nobody said anything 'cause they were--you know, the AKA is very respectable.  But you know when they had meetings of course the driveways will be, you know, a lot of cars and there was--there was always a issue with parking.  So the AKAs needed a new headquarters.  And so oh I can't think of her name, I can see her face in front of me.  Called me and said, "Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney] we gotta find some property in Chicago [Illinois].  You gotta help us find a site."  And so I was very active in finding them the site of where they're located now at 55th [Street] and--56th [Street] and Stony Island Avenue.  And I'm just a young lawyer, I find out about this property and talked to the broker, it's vacant and I got a client that wants to buy this property.  And it's part of urban renewal Chicago.  I don't know anything about the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I don't know that much about Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], but I navigated my--I navigated my way by just reading the--the ICLE books [International Center for Leadership in Education books] and going to the community meetings and being an advocate for the AKAs to get this property until I ran into the University of Chicago.  I mean you just don't go and buy property at Hyde Park north of fifty--south of 55th Street between Stony Island and just think you're gonna buy it without approval from the university.  So I had to go meet with the president-
Story_ID: 611368
Speaker 1: --Now 'cause you know, I'm getting invo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is--
Speaker 1: I'm getting involved with Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious], I'm getting involved with Julian Wilkins, I'm getting involved with [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, I'm getting involved with, you know, Cecil Partee [Cecil A. Partee].  I know Gene Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham], you know.  So I never went the white law firm route, because I knew I had gone to night school [through DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois], I knew that, you know, I wasn't from one of the big schools and it--but--plus it was nothing I really wanted to do, you know what I mean.  So my whole career was with the--with the--with minority lawyers who were very bright, very smart and I just got tremendous exposure, you know, representing AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and I would go to the boule and I would--I had great times at the boule.  Doing--doing all their work.  And then in this whole property thing I--I--I got a reputation.  I had to meet Earl--go meet Earl Neal.  I really got to know him during the AKA trying to acquire that land (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because he was (unclear) and he--
Speaker 1: He was representing the city and he helped me, he gave me some guidance on what to do and what's really funny, once I acquired the land--I had to go in and meet Jane Byrne, so I took--I took--
Speaker 2: So this is--wait Jane Byrne--
Speaker 1: Jane Byrne's the mayor.  Jane met--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, but, but--wait--I'm--when were you with Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'll tell you--I'll tell you.
Speaker 2: Okay, but, wait, no, no, no.  When did you leave--
Speaker 1: I left Jewel Lafontant 1983 and I started Carney and Brothers in 1983.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So at the time, so you start working with AKA in nineteen si- like maybe se- (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Late 1980, 1981, 1980.  'Cause I--'cause I was--Jerome Butler and I, we rented space from Jim Taylor [sic. HistoryMaker James Hill, Jr.] for about six months.  Then Jewel wanted to grow our firm [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois], she had heard about us.  And Jerome had a good reputation.  He was--he was a really smart corporate lawyer, but just going out and marketing and getting new business was not his strong point.  But in terms of legal ability, he was very, very strong.  I mean he really gave me the foundation of how to practice law.
Speaker 2: So the AKA, so that wasn't--was that--was that--so you worked through how many presidents then?
Speaker 1: I worked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause if you, you--we can't remember their names.
Speaker 1: I do, I know all the presidents.  I'm gonna think of Barbara's [Barbara Kinard Phillips] last name in a minute.  Barbara, then it was Faye Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant], after Faye Bryant it was a woman named Janice [sic. Janet Jones Ballard] out of Baltimore [Maryland], and then after Janice I think--you're--really, you know, you work through presidents and after Janice it was--she's out of Flint, Michigan, I can't think of her name.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're gonna be interviewing her though, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, yeah.  I just--I just can't think of their names.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you--so the, the whole thing with them moving to the, you know, getting the land, you say you're negotiating with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  You learn, you know a lot there or you--do you--what do you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, you know, you know, Julie [Julieanna Richardson], all I do is pick up the ICLE book [International Center for Leadership in Education book] and I just said, you know I found out, I did a title search, I find out who owned the land, the land was owned by the City of Chicago [Illinois].  It was urban renewal property, it was governed by act, I read the act in terms of how they gonna dispose of the land.  Then there was the ICLE book that told you about urban renewal property.  I had the good sense to go talk to Earl Neal about it and I just started on my way by myself.  And I just fig- I mean I figured it out.  Remember, remember I said my favorite quote is, ski the mountain in front of you.  I always just dealt with what was right in front of me.
Story_ID: 611369
Speaker 1: And there were some obstacles in the way because, you know, the--before the city was going to grant you that land, the aldermen had to buy off on it and I didn't--I didn't know how Chicago [Illinois] operated in terms of aldermen, but the alderman at the time was Larry Bloom and I got to know him.  And then before he would opine on it, he had public hearings.  I had to go testify at the public hearings and tell everything we're gonna do with it.  And I knew to--I knew how to prep the client, get them ready for the hearings and then the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] they had interest in the land, and so I had to, you know, outperform them in terms of our use of the land.  I had to come up with a zoning--yeah--no, the property was zoned for institutional use, so I made the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] squeeze in under--under the current zoning, so I didn't have to apply for a zoning change 'cause they tried to stop me on that.  And then I had to go visit the president of the Univ- the University of Chicago.  I met with the president of the University of Chicago about what we were gonna do with the land and--and his chief administrative person, but I was able to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now who was president at the time?
Speaker 1: Oh god--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's okay, that's okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: I mean I should've probably wrote memoirs of this, but I'm just a lawyer doing my job for my client.  But I knew to sell the AKAs and the AKAs had a stellar list of all the Ph.D.'s and Loraine Green [Loraine Richardson Green] was in it and Carey Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston], I mean there were big--Carey Preston was a big name in Chicago.  And she was involved, and Loraine Green, her husband was probably one of the first African American judges.  So I had a whole litany of who the AKAs were.  I had to sell them these, these women, and they know they're big stuff, the AKAs in terms of their pedigree and educational credentials.  And I sold all that.  And the university bought into it.  So finally the last place I had to go was to arrange a meeting to get the mayor to approve it, to get Jane Byrne to sign in--off on it.  So Jane Byrne was coming up towards election time.  She was trying to make inroads into the African American community so she wanted to have some good African Americans on her slate.  So I took her in to meet the AKAs.  She liked the women and she said, "I want these women to have that land."  And that's how it happened.
Speaker 2: Wow, okay.  So now 'cause Jane Byrne, the top black per- person in her administration was really Lenore Cartwright, right?
Speaker 1: As I remember, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay that's right, okay.
Story_ID: 611370
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now how do you go from Lafontant--to Wilkins and Butler [Lafontant, Wilkins and Butler, Chicago, Illinois], to Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], and where does brothers come into it?
Speaker 2: Okay.  When I--are we on film now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh okay (laughter).  Were we on film all that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah we were, but that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When--when I--Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] wanted--it was really a firm where you shared space, it's really what it was.  Yeah, that's how black lawyers practiced.  And I was doing very well on my own.  And Jewel wanted to really form a firm, and I didn't wanna--I didn't wanna do that.  I just didn't like the economics that they were proposing, you know, in terms of the work I was doing and my clients would become part of the firm.  I said, "No my clients are my clients, I developed these clients," you know, I had AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] then, and you know, they said, "Wherever you go, we go."  And so it was just a typical bartering at the time.  And so I left with Jerome Butler to form a once again, form Butler and Carney.  And I really had a good--had, had really good clients at the time.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your clients (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) AKAs, I was starting to do work for Seaway National Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois].  I really developed a very significant real estate practice.  I had picked up a couple savings and loans that I was doing--starting to do a little foreclosure work for, started to do a little real estate work.  So I was developing a nice little client.  You know, I was working really tough, but the, the clients are really starting to come.  So I, you know, I didn't want my clients to become clients of her firm and you know, it was just probably more ego, probably would've been to my benefit as I look back, but I didn't wanna do it.  So either you join the firm or you had to leave.  And so Jerome and I talked about it and we decided that we're gonna leave and form our own firm.  And so there was some space in the building with Tom Boodell [Thomas J. Boodell, Jr.], his--he had a firm and they had some space that they were not using on like the sixth floor.  So we red- rented a suite of offices there and we started to grow the firm.  And what happened was, Jerome Butler, his brother-in-law is Alan Brothers [Alan W. Brothers], so they were related.  Jerome was married to Alan's sister.  And so Alan was leaving Montgomery Ward and he wanted to come back into private practice, so he became part of the firm.  And then right after we started the fi- growing the firm, Jerome became involved in the family-owned business that, you know, was Butler's restaurant.  And so he left the practice of law to go ru- to be involved in his family business and Alan Brothers and I were the survivors.  So, therefore, it became Carney and Brothers.  And so we really--really started to develop the practice.  Alan was a tremendous litigator and I had the skill set of developing business.  And Alan said, "You just get the business and we'll handle it."  So we hired a couple lawyers and I was just very good at--at--at securing business.
Story_ID: 611371
Speaker 1: What happened at the time, is that Jane Byrne, historically, Jane Byrne is no longer the mayor, Harold Washington is now the mayor.  So there's a whole new dynamic in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  And so all the--the black lawyers, Ron Samuels [Ronald S. Samuels], Garland Watt, who were very good lawyers, Mitchell, Mitchell--
Speaker 2: Ware, Ware [Mitchell Ware]?
Speaker 1: --Ware, they--Harold Washington is the mayor and they finally are gonna get their chance to get city business.  And Harold did not disappoint them.  I mean they really--they really grew, they, they--I mean they just started to come into their own with the Harold Washington admini- administration.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's Jones, where it was Jones, Ware and Grenard [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jones, Ware and Grenard.  There was--Ron Samuels had a firm and I was the young kid, thirty-something and everybody looked at me and coming up to the trough and kicked me away, "You haven't paid your dues, you know, (laughter) you just--you just get away."  So, you know, I was not getting any city business whatsoever.  I wasn't getting any because I, you know, Harold was helping his contemporaries and that's what he should've done, you know, when I look back on it.  Those were--Mitchell Ware, they all struggled together.  Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Neal] was the king of the mountain, you know.  So what I decided to do, I said, you know, "Alan [Alan W. Brothers] why don't we go after corporate business?"  And for some reason Julie [Julieanna Richardson], someone mentioned to me that General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] was looking for minority counsel--minority lawyers in Chicago to handle warranty work.  I sent a cold letter to the general counsel at General Motors and got a call back from a lawyer.  They said they got our letter, they heard about our firm [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], would we come to Detroit [Michigan] and meet with them.  We, Alan and I, got dressed up and we went to Detroit.  And they liked us and they started--General Motors started giving us all of their warranty work in the Cook County [Illinois] metropolitan area.  At the same time, a number of my buddies, and this is the advantage to going to law school at a school like DePaul [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois] in the evening, because a lot of my classmates were now out of school, working for a number of banks, that was the industry and they were starting to send their, their legal work to me.  These are guys I developed relationships with in law school.  So we started doing foreclosure work in real estate for a number of lenders.  We got work coming in from General Motors.  Now we're doing this very quietly because Mitchell Ware, Garland Watt, they're, they're--they are busy at the city.  They're getting so much work they don't know what to do.  And so we're just going down this corporate route.
Story_ID: 611372
Speaker 1: And so all of a sudden, the ABA [American Bar Association] decides to--that, you know, I started going to ABA conventions right when I got out of law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois].  Now I don't know what made me go to an AK--A--ABA convention, but I knew it was all lily white, but I started going and I started going and it was in the '80s [1980s] I started learning about technology and computers.  And I was probably one of the first black lawyers to have a computer, you know 'cause RadioShack had this desktop computer.  So I bought a couple of their computers and I put my billing system on the computer and I, you know, I was really kind of ahead of my time, but I was just, I was gonna build this, you know, my dream, I was gonna build this mega--this mega black law firm.  That's--that--that was my dream and that was what I was going to do.  So I was on my way to--to do that.  Now I lost my train of thought.  I was saying--where was I?
Speaker 2: You said you went to the ABA con- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I went to the ABA meetings and that's where I learned about technology.  And so, you know, so and then I became involved in the ABA.  I became involved with a couple committees.  At the time, the ABA--a classmate, Rachel Patrick, who is probably still with the ABA, she decided to get minority lawyers more involved.  She felt it was travesty that, you know, there were just no black lawyers, no representation whatsoever.  So Rachel pretty much developed--data--dedicated her legal career to helping black lawyers get involved and to, to become involved in- or--and integrate the ABA.  So the ABA decided to form this--they formed a commission called Minorities in the Profession [Minorities in the Profession Committee].  And so what they, they decided to do, they were to work with minority firms.  Now prior to becoming involved in the--in the ABA by going to the ABA meetings, I started to meet other lawyers, minority lawyers that had firm, Otis McGee [Otis McGee, Jr.], he had--it was a firm in San Francisco [California].  There was a--a firm in Detroit [Michigan].  There was Bo- Bob Archie [Robert L. Archie, Jr.] of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I started--there were a number of minorities doing public finance, doing a little corporate work, doing litigation.  There were minority firms, you know.  There was Fletcher Wiley [HistoryMaker Fletcher "Flash" Wiley] out in Boston [Massachusetts].  So we fo- formed this organization called the American Consortium of Lawyers [sic. American Lawyers Consortium, Inc.].  And these were law firms around the country and we would meet quarterly and we would talk about our issues in terms of how to build a practice and what issues that we were having with our law firms and so it was like a think tank, and we would borrow collectively from each other and we would refer clients back and forth to each other.  So I'm starting to pick up work through that--through that little network of--of, of consortium of lawyers.  Meanwhile, everybody in Chicago [Illinois] they're still over with Harold Washington.  I'm still trying to get a public finance deal and it's not happening.  And so with the ABA, Rachel Patrick formed this organization called Minorities in the Profession.  And so what they said, you know we're gonna commit ourselves to helping minority law firms grow and get corporate work.  So they formed this consortium made up of five general counsels, one is from Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc.], one's from General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], one's from Ford [Ford Motor Company], one from Travelers Insurance [The Travelers Indemnity Company], and I don't remember the other--there were a couple--oh Clorox [Clorox Company], 'cause Jim Cole [James O. Cole] was at Clorox and so they form this collation.  They said now we're gonna select some minority law firms.  So they had to go around the country and select firms.  Well, General Motors said, "We have a relationship with Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd.] in Chicago, we'll come into program provided they come with us."  That's how we got into the program, 'cause it was a very select program.  And Manny Sanchez [Manuel Sanchez] go- got into the program.  So there were about twenty law firms from around the country that got involved with this co- consortium.  And Julie [Julieanna Richardson], they were giving us work left and right.  It was unbelievable.  I gre- I really grew Carney and Brothers at that time, and it was through the ABA and that demonstration program.
Speaker 2: So what--what year was this though?
Speaker 1: This is probably 1985.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's during the Harold Washington years.  Harold Washington became mayor in 1983, it's '85 [1985], I'm not getting any work from the city.  I, I got one bond deal so I'm starting to learn public finance just a little bit.  But you know, nobody's--nobody is paying attention to us.  And then all of a sudden, Harold Washington passes away.  And the dynamics start to change a little bit.  So the work starts to dry up, and all of a sudden everybody looks at around and hears about this AKA--I mean this ABA demonstration program.  And everybody starts raising holy hell because everybody starts looking at my firm.  I probably have fifteen lawyers, I'm not getting very little work from the city.  I'm getting a little work from the city, but most of my work is private sector clients.
Story_ID: 611373
Speaker 1: And you were blowing up, I'm telling you, you were like the model for, for a minority law firm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was--and that--and that's how I grew it.  I grew it with the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]--I meant excuse me, the ABA [American Bar Association], I still had the AKAs as a client.  I still had Seaway National Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois] as a client.  I mean it's just through these contacts that I've made along the way.  And for some reason I had the knack to be able to attract business and keep business.  I knew--I knew how to sell.  We picked up Metropolitan Life Insurance [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company] in New York [New York].  I got on a plane and went out to New York, made a pitch on our firm and bought ba- brought back the business.  I mean I just--I just had this knack in order to sell.  And so that's how I grew Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois].  When Daley [Richard M. Daley] became mayor, he liked our firm, so we picked up more business from--from--through the Daley administration.
Speaker 1: So during the Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] years you didn't really do any more city business?
Speaker 2: You know, I started to do more city business at the end.  Especially after Harold Washington and then you know you have to transition to Gene Sawyer and, and Rich Daley came in.  And so Rich Daley really picked up the Harold Washington executive order and so he was really trying to use, you know, increase minority business.  And so we were, of course it was [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, it was our firm and I think there was probably Garland Watt too, he was very much involved.  And so we, we started picking up more city business and we're really becoming very good in the public finance area.
Story_ID: 611374
Speaker 1: How are you becoming good in the public finance area, what allowed you to do that since you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, wh- what happened was, I started to do the work, but you know, I'm running the firm, I'm going out and getting business, I can't do all the work.  So I hired a--a lawyer, I found a lawyer at Bell, Boyd [Bell, Boyd and Lloyd] by the name of Deniece Jordan-Walker who was a phenomenal lawyer.  I hired Jim Bebley [James L. Bebley] away from the city and he became involved--I wa- I was starting--I was starting to learn that there were a number of minority lawyers at these large law firms that were not happy.  So I started recruiting them away.  I couldn't pay them the money, but they were happy to get away and they were happy to have responsibility and good--and great work.  And so we just started to grow and develop, and that's how I became involved in public finance.  And my public finance, I got my first deal and I didn't--I did not have a clue.  So I went down and I was supposed to come to the pr- first meeting.  I went and met with Maria Saldana, I met with Roxanne Ward, I met with Corliss Stone-Littles and they taught me public finance probably in the course of probably five days.  So I was prepared to go to my first meeting.  And that's how I picked up--I understood the whole issue of debt and public finance.  So I was able to go and I picked up on it real quickly so I started to, you know, do public finance deals.  I started as underwriters, counsel and then the big thing was to get into the red book.  And when Deniece Jordan-Walker joined the firm, she had really great experience in being a bond lawyer, you know, in terms of rendering what they call, you had to render a tax opinion and she had the expertise and so with that, we were able to get into the red book as a--as a qualified bond lawyer to render tax opinions.  So it just kind of all came together.
Speaker 1: So what deals were you working on though, what were they?
Speaker 2: Oh my God, I worked on many, many, many--I mean water deals.  I worked on a lot of many board of education deals.  I worked on a number of deals at the airport, quite a few deals at the airport, especially when the airport was building what they call cargo facilities and they go--they were called special use facilities.  So I got--I learned the whole airport industry really from Corliss Stone-Littles 'cause she was a tremendous public finance lawyer that was very much involved in the--in the airport industry.  So that's how I picked up on that.  So I've had a lot of great, I mean I just ha- you know, my experience has always been with minority lawyers and, and minority lawyers have been very supportive of me, they're very supportive of the firm and developed a lot of friendships along the way.  And so that's how the firm--
Speaker 1: So how much--how much were your billings on an annual basis at your?
Speaker 2: At Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] we're probably doing a couple million.
Speaker 1: Which was a big deal for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a bi- it was a huge deal it was a huge deal.
Speaker 1: --for a law firm, because people didn't make, you know, minority firms didn't make like.
Speaker 2: Right, right, huge deal.  Right I mean I was paying lawyers sixty, sixty-five thousand dollars a year, you know.  It was--it was a big deal.  I was--I was sacrificing my own personal life to keep it going, but it was--it was--it just took a lot to keep, keep it all going.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 611375
Speaker 1: This whole thing, you're talking about the practice, but you also are sort of emerging as, when you're doing public work like that you have to almost enter the civic arena, too, I'm sure you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: And so you're--and so that's, that's also occupying a lot of your time, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I'm going to a lot of fundraisers.  I'm out socially all the time.  I'm just--my political mentor was [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal.  It just, I mean, I didn't know--I, I couldn't--I--he helped me navigate the landscape in terms of the importance of alderman, the importance of, of supporting the, the mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] and you know, getting involved in fundraising events for various aldermen and you know, he just--how to navigate it and navigate it very smoothly.  So I learned--I learned a tremendous life--a lot from Earl Neal.
Story_ID: 611376
Speaker 1: You ran Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] until when?
Speaker 2: Probably I ran Carney and Brothers until 1997.  And the--what happened at Carney and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's fourteen years.
Speaker 2: Fourteen years.
Speaker 1: So that's a lo- I mean you have become a Chicago [Illinois] institution?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  It's really funny, all the minority firms that I started with in terms of the American Consortium of Lawyers [sic. American Lawyers Consortium, Inc.], all of the firms have dissolved, all of them.
Speaker 1: All of them?  Every single one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Every single one of them.
Speaker 1: No matter where they were in the country?
Speaker 2: No matter where they were in the country.  And what--and see--
Speaker 1: Well talk about--before you get to that, why don't you talk about what, what happened why you did that?
Speaker 2: Oh be- be--
Speaker 1: I mean why--you, you actually--your leav- you decided you wanted to get out?
Speaker 2: Because the, the consumer of legal services had become very sophisticated.  And when I say that, corporations, the whole law field was changing tremendously.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were being--we were being--fo- I, I can give you an example.  We were doing work for Amtrak and doing tremendous work for Amtrak.  But the fee structure was very, very low.  And so, you know, corporations were, there was commodity legal work and they were just giving us the commodity work at very low rates.  And we were trying to develop a transactional practice and it just wasn't working.  You know, 'cause we--I wanted to get out of public finance and do more banking work because--and represent those types of clients.
Speaker 1: Now why did you wanna do that, Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney]?
Speaker 2: Because I felt I wanted to be a full-service firm.  I wanted to have--I was a trans- I developed into a transactional lawyer, wanted to develop that business, that's how I felt you can grow the firm.  And then also, we had the litigation also on the--on the other side.  And what was, was that the transactional deals don't close and you have to carry them.  Then you're draining the litigation side of the practice, and so it was just, it was just too much to keep carrying and worrying about payroll every month and all those issues.  It just got to be a tremendous burden and the--all the litigation work that we once had was just starting to dissipate because the country's changing.  I mean everything is changing, I mean, you know, in terms of the, the legal dynamics.  We're in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years.  The savings and loans issue had had created the RTC [Resolution Trust Corporation] and a lot of my business came from savings and loans.  So it's just the whole dynamics started to change completely.  And so, it just got to a point where it just wasn't economically beneficial to do it.
Story_ID: 611377
Speaker 1: Now did the, the finance, the, the public finance work, did that get too political, did you find or that wasn't a factor?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you know, in the--a lot of people like during the Harold Wa- after even, around the Harold Washington years, you had Maynard Jackson, I mean there were a lot of, there was a lot of--happening in that arena right?
Speaker 2: Harold Washington opened up public finance I think for African American lawyers.  Maynard Jackson opened it up--opened public finance up for, for black lawyers in, in Atlanta [Georgia].  And that's how black lawyers became exposed to the whole issue of public finance.  There were a couple lawyers in the large law firms, Roxanne Ward, Corliss Stone-Littles.  They were in the public--I mean public finance was a big practice area.  It's a very, very profitable area for years.  It was a well-kept secret.  And these lawyers were able to pick it up.  Corliss was at Isham, Lincoln and Beale [Chicago, Illinois].  Roxanne was at--
Speaker 1: Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP]?
Speaker 2: She was at Mayer, Brown [Mayer, Brown and Platt; Mayer Brown LLP], then she went over to Skadden.  Maria Saldana ended up at Skadden.  I mean they were--they were very, very good public finance lawyers.  And so, I mean like I mentioned before, they gave me the skill set.  I mean they really explained the deals and how they work.  But it was very, very profitable.  But it's, it's just funny, you know, with the Harold Washington executive order and the consumer of legal services becoming very sophisticated, the fees really started to diminish.  I mean, it used to be sometimes you'd make two dollars a bond.  I mean, some of the deals are closed and your fee would be two hundred thousand dollars.  Those are great fees at the time--I mean even in the--in the--in the late--early--late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], I mean some of the bond deals we were doing was a hundred thousand dollars.  But after, you know, you got minority counsel, you got this, the consumer is becoming very sophisticated, what went from a hundred and fifty thousand dollar fee became a thirty thousand dollar fee.  But your writ didn't stop, it kept going up, you know.  People were demanding more in terms of salary.  It's just the economics of the law had really changed.  And I think now for a minority firm to survive, you have to be a boutique, you cannot be a full-service law firm.  You, you just cannot.
Speaker 1: Right.  But see at the time that you're, you know, that Minorities in the--in the--Minorities in--
Speaker 2: Minorities in the Profession [Minorities in the Profession Committee].
Speaker 1: --the Profession, there was--and what, what Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] represented was the potential for--I mean that--not just the potential that you could have a full-service law firm, you know, and that it could operate and not like you were talking about before, you know, where you have, you know, individual practitioners.  But it was really a law firm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, we really--we had a real law firm.  And I was committed to building a real law firm.  But also what I've learned since Carney and Brothers dissolved and I've, you know, become a partner in a majority firm, I've learned that you--the only way you can grow a minority--you can't grow a firm from within.  You cannot do it, you'll die trying.  What you have--and the way these firms grown like, Perkins [Perkins Coie LLP] right now, started off with two lawyers, we're seventy-five.  You gotta pick up pockets of lawyers that have practice groups.  You gotta bring somebody over that has five, and this--and you know, a practice group that's very profitable.  And then you pick off somebody else that has another five.  I mean, that's how you do it.  And they--then they grow their practice area.  You can't grow it from within.
Speaker 1: So you were trying to grow and, and feeling you were suffocating 'cause it was you, one person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Let me ask this question.  So was the decision to leave, was that a difficult decision?
Speaker 2: Oh it was very hard.  I--part of it was my health too.  I had had, you know, some serious health challenges.
Story_ID: 611378
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--you remember I had the--I had a tumor on the brain.
Speaker 1: Which is int- you know, because Julian Wilkins, you were say--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) I, I was--one day I was at Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] and I was losing my, you know, you just know something's not right and I started to lose, you know, I was driving with my family, we were driving back from Minnesota.  And I kind of had a couple car accidents and--and my--my wife [DarDina Ashton Carney] would say, "Didn't you see that car over there?"  I said, "Oh I'll adjust my mirror on the outside," you know.  So we finally got here, but I was just, I was just coming some close calls just driving.  So I said, you know, I better go get my glasses adjusted.  And so I was sitting in my office one evening and I notice that when I look, I, I was--part of my eye was gray, I was just seeing gray.  And I wa- I knew something was, was not right.  So I went immediately and called my optometrist and said you know, I gotta come in and see you, something--something's happening with my vision.  So, my optometrist, Alan Karikomi, started flashing lights in my eyes and I--and I--a lot of things I couldn't see and my eye couldn't reflect the light.  So he sent me over to an ophthalmologist.  And the ophthalmologist tested my vision, he couldn't find anything.  So I said okay, so I went home.  And I was sitting in the living room and the gray just kept getting larger and lar- and I would do like this (gesture) and I couldn't see, all I could see was gray.
Story_ID: 611379
Speaker 1: So you were saying you saw gray.
Speaker 2: Yes, and what happened was, is that I--I panicked a little bit and I called Maurice Rabb [HistoryMaker Dr. Maurice F. Rabb].  And I said, "Maurice," I just happened to catch him at Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  I said, "Maurice, something is happening to my vision, I think I'm losing my vision.  I need to have my eyes tested."  He said, "You're losing your vision?"  I said, "Yes."  I described to him what was going on.  And Maurice Rabb said, "Okay, I'm going over to teach a class at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], meet me over there."  So I got in my car and I met home over at the University of Illinois.  And he assigned me to this group of students to work with me.  And so they worked with me.  I probably got there at about--at 4:30, they worked with me until about 8:00.  And then they all went over and they huddled into a little meeting and then they came back to me.  I said, "Okay what are they gonna tell me."  They said, "We think we've identified the problem."  He said, "There's a tumor growing behind your optic nerve."  I said, "There's a tumor in my brain growing behind my optic nerve."  And I just had a meltdown.  I didn't have time for this.  I mean, it was just not part of the deal.  So they said, "But to be sure we wanna take a MRI."  I said, "Well, at least I gotta call my family, tell them what's going on."  They said don't--, "Don't call your family yet, let's--let's be sure."  Well I got on the phone, I called my wife and I called, "Yeah."  I said, "You know, you gotta come down here, you know what I mean, I don't know what's going on here."  And so DarDina [DarDina Ashton Carney] came on down and they told her what's happening.  And so I said, "I gotta take a MRI," I mean.  So you know, MRI machines were--they were the new thing and they got this big machine and you gotta go in this tube.  I just sat down in a chair and said, "Okay."  I'll get in this tube and they were laughing, and they said, "He's scared."  I said, "Yes I am scared."  So they gave me a little sedation.  I went in and came out, and they gave me the film and said, "Yeah you have a tumor growing and it's pressing on the optic nerve and you gotta get this tumor out, out right away."  So I--they--I said, "Well where do I go next?"  They said, "Well we're gonna send you to our, our surgeon here, our ophthalmologist here."  So he told me, he said, "Well we'd like to--"; can we stop for a second--are we back on.  We have to take a rerun back to AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and the name I couldn't remember Barbara, was Barbara Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips], because I owe my legal career to, to Dr. Phillips.  She was just absolutely fabulous.  She was the one that, you know, when Julian Wilkins took it over, she, she brought me in.  To go back to the--with, with the--
Speaker 1: Machine.
Speaker 2: With the machine.  I took the MRI and you know, they, they told me I had the tumor and then I sat, I sat down with the surgeon at the University of Illinois.  He said, "Well, it'll be a two-part operation.  We'll have to do a lob- ," whatever they do to take, take this part of the brain out and then do something and then we'll get it on the other side because it's on both sides.  So you know, we'll have--it'll be a two-part surgery.  So I said, you know, this--this is where your legal mind takes over.  You say, "Okay, you--and I'm very thankful you've identified the fact that I now have a tumor and it's reflected on these films.  Now I have to find somebody to take it out, right, right?"  They said, "Yes."  So okay, okay, so that's where I am.  To find somebody to take it out, okay.  You've given me your theory of how you're gonna do it.  I said, "I--I just need to get a second opinion on this."
Story_ID: 611380
Speaker 1: So I called my buddy, Dr.--Dr. Hobbs [John Hobbs] who was over at Rush [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and he arranged a meeting with me with a Charlie D'Angelo [Charles Michael D'Angelo] at Rush.  And he was the big neurosurgeon, brain neurosurgeon.  So he put my film up.  He said, "Yes you got a tumor."  He said, "Yes you've gotta get that tumor out right away."  But he said, you know, "The way we do it is that we go up under no--under the gum and we have little cameras on the machine that reflect on our computer and we take it out and just in one surgery so you'll have no incisions on your head or anything."  So at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] they were doing it the old school way and--and at Rush they had a new technology.  And so I did a little research on Dr. D'Angelo and he was the best.  He assured me that the tumor was, was benign.  It was not malignant.  He said he's never seen these tumors where they are, he said very, very rarely are they cancerous.  He said, "I can't promise you that until we get it out and send it to the lab."  But he said, "In my experience," you know, they have not been.  So they gave me some, you know, I held on to that there's a possibility it will not be cancerous.  And so the surgery, that was on a Thursday and I was scheduled to have this surgery--he wanted me to come in on the weekend.  I said you know, I mean, "I gotta--I gotta talk to my family, talk to my law par- I mean there's just too much I gotta do."  He said, "Tuesday, at the latest."  He scheduled it for Tuesday.  He said, "If your vision comes any--gets any worse you call me on Saturday and we'll do it over the weekend."  So it didn't get any worse and I stayed in contact with him.  And so I went on in on a--on a Tuesday and had the surgery.  And luckily it was not malignant.  So I had the tumor taken out.  It took me a long time to recover with that.
Speaker 2: How long?
Speaker 1: Oh probably six to eight weeks.  I didn't really go back to work formally until after the first of the year--no it was in October, I think I went back to work in November.  But I got an infection and I developed--
Speaker 2: The fir- the second time I thought you had an infection?
Speaker 1: Got an infection the first time.
Speaker 2: You did?
Speaker 1: The first time I got an infection and developed into bacterial meningitis.  And I had meningitis.  It was over the holidays and I--I couldn't walk.  And it was--it was total serendipity that DarDina [DarDina Ashton Carney], it was on--it was Christmas Eve, she'd gone out.  We always had a family gathering.  She'd gone out to do some last minute Christmas shopping.  I was lying up in bed, I was just--I just couldn't move.  I just told her I just wasn't feeling well.  My mother-in-law [Dardina Ashton] came over and my mother-in-law, they were trying to get me to eat.  And they were calling the doctors and the doctors told them to give me this, give me that.  And so I walked downstairs, I could barely walk.  And so my mother-in-law called [HistoryMaker] Peter Bynoe.  She said, "Peter, Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney] is not doing well, can you come over and take him to the hospital."  So Peter came over--Peter Bynoe came over.  He called my buddy [HistoryMaker] Grayson Mitchell, and they could--I could barely walk.  So they took me over.  I said, "Oh just take me to, to a store," and--no Peter picked me up, he took me to go pick up Grayson.  I said, "Please just give me some water, I need some water."  So they tal- bought me a big thing of water.  They took me over to Rush, and they did all kinds of exams on me and they couldn't find anything.  And there was this young intern, he said, "One thing I wanna do, let's do a spinal tap."  And they did a spinal tap, and that's when they discovered the meningitis.  They said--they told me your white blood--this is the lawyer in me: "Your white blood cell count is up very, very high.  So you have an infection."  I said, "Well it's up very high, that's what's it's supposed to do, right?"  I mean the blood cells are attacking the infection.  They said, "Let us be the doctor.  This is abnormal."  And so they did the test and they said, "You have meningitis, you're not going anywhere."  And so I spent Christmas Eve, I mean I owe my life to Grayson and Peter, they took me in.  I mean, six hours later I would've been gone.  They told me that, I would've been gone.  And also to this young internist, because he was the one, he was the one--he was a young doctor who suggested that they do the spinal tap.  So it came up I had--I had meningitis.  And so I spent the next day on every type of antibiotic that was known to man 'cause they had to fight the infection 'cause it had really taken over quite a bit of my body.  And so over Christmas, so I spent Christmas Eve, my daughter is three, in the intensive care with this nurse.  I remember talking to her all night.  Husband was a fireman and she was working the midnight shift.  We were talking about Christmas, loaded up with all these things all in my veins.  And so that's how I spent the next week at Rush.
Story_ID: 611381
Speaker 1: And then I came home and I had this home care near--home care nursing, and DarDina [DarDina Ashton Carney] had to keep, you know, all this stuff you have to do.  And finally, they got the infection under control.  And I was--I remember I kept going back and they kept saying no you need more of the--we gotta feed you the injection intravenously.  So I had to get up at four in the morning and you know, put the stuff in my veins and clear it up.  And so finally I went to the doctor, and I'm in the infectious disease department, you know, 'cause this is--this is a disease, I mean it's an infection.  So this--the doctor told me, he said, "We got it under control you won't have to take it anymore."  I just broke down and cried and hugged the doctor.  And so I took, you know, oral medication.  And so this really started the demise of Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], my health and my blood pressure was up.  And I got a--doctor sat me down, he said, "If you don't slow your life down, you're not gonna be here."  And Dardina said, "You know, you're gonna be here for our kids.  So whatever you have to do, you do it."  And so that's when I came into our law partners, "I can't do this anymore."
Speaker 2: Now how old were your daughters at the time?
Speaker 1: Five and three.  I just said--I said, "I can't do this anymore.  I just can't, it's not worth my health."  And so that's when we decided to--
Speaker 2: How long after you had the sur- you know, came back did you make that decision?
Speaker 1: Probably right away.  A little long--no right, right away.  I just came to the decision, my blood pressure was up.  I was--I was just--my behavior was erratic because my blood pressure was up.  I just came off of the surgery, the meningitis, I just sa- you know, the doctor sat me down, my internist, he said, "You are on your way to killing yourself if you don't change your beh- you're--you're habits."  So that's when I decided.  I said, "You know, this firm is very important to me, but I can't die over it.  So I've gotta withdraw from the partnership and I gotta go, I don't know what I'm gonna do, but I gotta go do something else."  And so I said, "Whatever it takes, whatever we got to do, I'll do it, but I, I can't give my life for this."  And so that's when we decided to--at least when I withdrew they decided to just--that's what--I just withdrew from the firm, but it got all over the legal community that we were dissolving and everything, you know, but I guess my leaving the firm was really a dissolution 'cause I was the main rainmaker.  And so I just decided, you know, that I didn't know what I was gonna do.  But I knew I had to make a decision not to do that anymore.  That was the decision I made.  It was--it was pretty--really driven by health at the time.
Story_ID: 611382
Speaker 1: Before we leave this, your brain tumor came back, right?  How many years did it--
Speaker 2: It happened in 1994--ninety--no 1997, probably five years later, five years later it came back again.
Speaker 1: Same, was this--
Speaker 2: Same, same tumor.  I was--and it grows pretty rapidly 'cause I was taking my MRIs and I--and I missed an appointment to take an MRI, I said, "Well I'll go take it later.  I'm feeling fine," and I was--I was at my office I was at Wildman, Harrold [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois] and I, I--I'd come to my office on a Sunday night 'cause I had a meeting on Monday to pick up the documents, and it happened within a sliv- sliver of a second, my vision twitched and I knew, I knew immediately that the tumor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was back.
Speaker 2: --the tumor was back.  I just knew it.  I mean, you know, you just know something.  So I came home and, and I told my wife [DarDina Ashton Carney].  I said, "I think I need to go in and have my eyes checked."  I said, you know, "Everything is fine now."  She said, "Well just go in and have it checked, you just never know, don't play around with this."  So I called Charlie D'Angelo [Charles Michael D'Angelo], my neurosurgeon.  He came in, he gave me a test--no, he was--his--his--it was a Richard Byrne [Richard W. Byrne], that was a guy who studied under him.  And he did an MRI, he said, "Yeah we gotta get this tumor out right aw- this tumor is growing, it's growing rapidly, we gotta get it out."  So, I had the tumor re- you know to go through it a second time was just unbelievable, but a couple other friends who had the tumors, they'd gone through it a second time as well.  So I really powwowed with them 'cause I was just nervous.  And so I had the tumor taken out a second time.  And this was when, in the hospital I, I developed--I caught staph--staph infection.  You know, and that almost killed me again.  So the surgeries go fine, it's just the, the infections you get after the surgery because you know, you're in a delicate part of your brain and that's, you know, I don't know how the infection gets up there, but the second time I had staph.  And I went through the same thing all over again with all these tubes and everything running in you to, to get rid of the infection.
Speaker 1: So do they know the cause of the tumor?  Did the doctors ever say why or?
Speaker 2: They don't know--they don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No cause.
Speaker 2: It's a--it's a--they call it like a crabgrass tumor.  And right now they have found a medication that it's under control, the tumor is not growing now.  You know, and of course I check it religiously you know.  And, you know, I do a lot of visual field tests.  And so I have go in in February--January, February every year and get a MRI, so I have a MRI scheduled.  But the tumor is watched very aggressively.  Just not gonna wo- and I'd have to do this a third time.  I mean, I've been just very, very blessed that I--that I, you know, you know, two people that I owe, you know, are [HistoryMaker] Peter Bynoe and [HistoryMaker] Grayson Mitchell, then Maurice Rabb [HistoryMaker Dr. Maurice F. Rabb]--Maurice Rabb.  And you just--you just--I--I'll never forget it.  It was Maurice Rabb that took the time.  Once again, a black physician.
Speaker 1: Black people, really.
Speaker 2: Right.  That--that's the world I knew (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: That's the world I knew.
Speaker 1: So let me ask, so when you left [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], you know, your partners were not happy with you even though--they, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were--they were not happy.  And they were not happy because I was the primary rainmaker.  Our firm had debt, firm had, you know, I mean when something like this happens and the primary rainmaker leaves it's tough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: But it was either that or my health, so.  I mean it wasn't a choice to me.
Story_ID: 611383
Speaker 1: How did you end up going to Wildman, Harrold and Dixon [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: When I decided to leave, the word got out I was leaving.  And these white firm--I had no idea what I was gonna do.  I mean I just announced that I was leav- I just--I made a decision about my health.  And I said, okay I gotta figure out what I'm gonna do next.  And these white firms came after me.  And all I knew--and then you know, when it boiled down I said all I gotta do is practice law.  And I knew that I needed to get into an environment where I didn't have to worry about payroll, I didn't have to worry about any of that issues.  And I said if all I have to do is develop business, bring in business and just practice, I can do that.  And so I went to Wildman [Max Wildman] and got him--became involved in their corporate group and started to head up their government affairs practice group.  And that's pretty mu- pretty much what I did.  And I developed a very nice practice at Wildman.
Speaker 1: But let's look at this.  You had never been, you know, a--a--first of all a corp- you had developed your own firm, that's different than being in a white corporate law firm.  So what--how was that transition?  And what--we're talking about 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety=seven [1997].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], you join Wildman?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], 1998. Right.  What happened was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how many black partners did they have?
Speaker 2: There were none--there were none.
Speaker 1: And where--Wildman, was it a Chicago-based [Chicago, Illinois] firm?
Speaker 2: It was Chicago-based.  I went to Wildman.  Wildman was not one of the big firms.  I knew I couldn't go to a Jenner [Jenner and Block].  I knew--so I need--I needed to go to a middle-tier firm.
Speaker 1: So how many lawyers?
Speaker 2: There were about 175-80 lawyers, all white.  They had a litigation footprint in the marketplace, but it was really trying to gro- grow its corporate practice.  And Wildman had some pressure on him.  One of their big clients was threating to leave unless they got some diversity in their firm.  So, you know, they were really chasing me.  I fo- I, I, you know, you figured it all out after a while.
Speaker 1: So who was--who was the client?
Speaker 2: I think the client was DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company].  They had a huge diversity initiative.  So, when I went to Wildman it was--it was a new experience.  Now you have to remember, my whole career had been with minority lawyers.  That's all I knew.  I had been in the Cook County Bar [Cook County Bar Association], National Bar [National Bar Association], you know, that--that was my world.  And so when I went to Wildman and we're negotiating, it was always on the top floor of, of the firm.  And so the first day came for me to go over.  And Julie [Julieanna Richardson], I walked in to this sea of whiteness.  I went in my office and I closed the door.  I said what have I done, what have I, I can't do this, I just can't do this, I can't do this.  I mean I can--I just can't do it.  You know, and my assistant at the time decided to stay.  She didn't particularly wanna do it.  And I said okay, so--
Speaker 1: She came over from Carney and Br- [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Well she came over eventually.  She came over with me.  But so, I think I, I did one secretary from or assistant from Wildman--Carney and Brothers came over with me.  But it was so hard, it was just--I, I was not, it was a world that I, you know.  You know how you make a decision for your family that this is the best thing to do.  But I really had a lot of doubts when I got there in terms of how I was gonna survive in this firm.  And there were some clients that agreed to come with me, they came with me.  And so, you know, I said, "Okay," after an hour of just staring out the window in my office, I came out of my office and said, "Okay, I'm here, I gotta do something."
Story_ID: 611384
Speaker 1: So I just started the process of opening up files and slowly got to know people.  They weren't very friendly, you know, 'cause I was new to them and they were new to me.  There was a--another black lawyer that I recruited over to the firm, and so he was, you know, you know we developed a, a relationship.
Speaker 2: Who was that?
Speaker 1: Steph Allison [Stephen A. Allison].  And then Fred Bates [Frederick H. Bates] was there, Fred Bates was there as well.  And I did very well at Wildman [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois].  You know, after a while I, I got to know the lawyers and I picked up some key clients.  Clients that--that would not send me the type of work that I had at Carney--at Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois].  But because I was with a larger firm, they had a larger platform.  They, you know, were willing to, to try the firm.  And the firm had some very good lawyers.  And so I was just able to grow some significant business.  But once again, a lot of my business--had I not gone the road of Carney and Brothers, I could not have done Wildman, Harrold.
Speaker 2: And survived?
Speaker 1: And survived.  Because all my clients came from African Americans.
Speaker 2: All of them?
Speaker 1: All--just about all of them.  A huge client that I brought in was PrimeCo [PrimeCo Personal Communications, L.P.].  The general counsel was Dana Rice [Dana D. Rice].  Dana Rice sent me some significant work.  She sent me a--she sent me--PrimeCo got sued on a couple class actions.  She said she knew Wildman had a litigation firm, she said, "Can you handle class actions?"  And that jet started me.  So my, my big work came from Dana Rice.  Also, there was--the--Joyce, she ran for the senate against Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Oh Joyce Washington?
Speaker 1: Joyce Washington was at Columbia Healthcare [Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation; Hospital Corporation of America].  She was--she was a big--she was a big executive vice president.  Columbia was trying to get into the Chicago [Illinois] marketplace--no, they were try--they, they had come into the Chicago marketplace and they wanted to get out 'cause they were for a for profit and they came here into a not for profit world with Northwestern [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], Rush [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and University of Chicago [University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], that wasn't working.  So for profit health just did not take off.  So they purchased all these hospitals and they were looking to get out.  So I got all that work to represent Columbia Healthcare in terms of selling off their hospital interests in Chicago.  So once again, it's the road that, you know, I had, you know, there were key people in key positions in Corporate America that knew me that I had a relationship with that sent work to me while I was at Wildman.  So I developed a nice practice at Wildman.  You know, I started doing some public finance there.  They had a couple pub- public finance lawyers.  So the business started--really started to develop very nicely.  So then I got used to it, but I never, you know, I never--I never--the firm was not my socialization.  My socialization was still the African American community, that's where all my friends were, that's where all my contacts were.  So I never forgot one moment that I was black in this white firm.  And I didn't go--and at Wildman, I was still my own, you know, I was a lawyer, I had the support of the big firm and the, the staff people were very, very nice, very friendly once I got to know them.  I developed some great friendships there, but I was still an island, I was still my own profit center.  Nobody referred me working the firm.  I had to generate work for other lawyers, but it was the road of Carney and Brothers that--that--that equipped me with the--with the tool set to get to do--to do Wildman.
Speaker 2: And to be able to survive there?
Speaker 1: And able to survive and survive, okay.
Story_ID: 611385
Speaker 1: So you were there until what year then?
Speaker 2: I was--I was at Wildman [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois] from 1997, probably until two--I left Wildman in 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, so three years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you decide to--
Speaker 2: To leave Wildman?  Wildman--Wildman's footprint in the marketplace was litigation.  And they were trying to build a corporate practice.  And the--they had some very smart lawyers there, but they really couldn't grow in the corporate practice.  And so what happened was, I was head of the government affairs group.  And so when, when all Altheimer and Gray [Chicago, Illinois] dissolved, I picked up some of their lawyers and brought them over to Alt- from Altheimer and brought them over to Wildman.  And we were developing a strong private equity practice.  We needed some--we needed some--Wildman was a litigation firm and Wildman couldn't service our clients.  I mean they just couldn't service our clients the way they needed to be serviced.  Not taking anything away from Wildman, but it's a litigation firm.  So we got recruited away by Perkins [Perkins Coie LLP] to come over 'cause they wanted a government affairs practice group, they wanted a, a corporate practice group.  So, you know, that was a good fit there.  So I came over to Perkins and it's, it's really been a good--a very good fit for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Perkins is based where?
Speaker 2: Perkins, it's based in Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--so the culture, isn't it a different culture?
Speaker 2: It's a whole different culture.  It's a culture unbeknownst to Chicago [Illinois].  It's, it's a little bit more laid back, you know, it's California, it's West Coast.  Perkins has a tremendous reputation west of the Mississippi.  I mean the firm has about twelve offices, a number of them in California, Washington State, Denver [Colorado], and then you know, they wanted to move west.  Well what brought Perkins to Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) East.
Speaker 2: Excuse me, east.  What brought Perkins to Chicago was Boeing [The Boeing Company].  Boeing is, I mean, they, they incorporated Boeing.  And so Boeing has been one of the clients of the firm.  Well when Boeing opened up its Chicago office, they followed their client.  And so that's how Perkins got here to Chicago.  And I, you know, being an entrepreneur, I have to be with a firm that's growing.  I cannot go to a Sidley [Sidley Austin LLP, Chicago, Illinois] or a Jenner and Block and service institutional clients.  I'm a lawyer that likes to eat what you kill.  I love developing business.  I love developing relationships with clients.  I love getting a team of lawyers and managing a team of lawyers through a project.  That's what I do, you know what I mean.  I--I'm not one that--I got, you know, that's my leadership skills.  I like--I like to get business and I like to lead deals.  And so Perkins has allowed me that opportunity, Wildman allowed me that opportunity, and that was the skill set I developed at Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: So both of them are about the same si- size, no (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Perkins is about 650 lawyers.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know, I thought- is there seventy-five here?
Speaker 2: Chic- yes, seventy-five in Chic- in the Chicago office--
Speaker 1: Seventy-five here, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But there's a D.C. office [Washington, D.C.], I mean they're about the biggest well--majority of the lawyers are in Seattle.
Story_ID: 611386
Speaker 1: So let me, 'cause I wanna go to some civic things, you know, the police board [Chicago Police Board].  But let me ask you, what have you learned since 1997 about the practice of law that you did not know at the, you know, upon leaving Carney and Brothers [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: One thing I did, Carney and Brothers was all Afri- Carney and Brothers was an all-African American firm.  I think you need a more div- I mean you need--you really need a diverse.  If you--if you go to market diversity, you gotta do diversity.  I think that was an issue that I learned.  I also learned that you really have to have a niche practice in the marketplace if you're gonna be a small firm or develop a practice.  That we, we were generalists.  I think that I re- I really did not understand the business of law.  I thought I understood it, but I really didn't understand the business of practicing law.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: It's, you know, it's just I didn't--I didn't understand how to grow a firm in terms of, you know, you really have to go after pockets of lawyers, whether they're diverse or not.  Tha- that's one issue.  The--and just the business of law in terms of the, the realization.  You know, we were getting business our, our rents are the same as everybody else downtown, but we can, you know, this firm is charging 350, we're only getting 150.  So I, I did--I, I felt as long as I got the business, you know, you could make it all work, but your expenses eat it up because your realization is so low.  So I would really watch realization much differently then I watched it at Carney and Brothers.  At Carney and Brothers the emphasis was getting the business, and that's really not what the practice of--I mean it's getting the business, but you gotta have a good realization to support your profit center.  And that was--that was--that was something I learned.  At Carney and Brothers I still practiced, I was still a--practicing law so I still kept up that skill set.  But I was too much a generalist.  I was going after, you know, I was helping the litigation side get business, I was helping the transactional side get business.  I was doing the public finance side and you gotta leave the litigation to the litigation partner.  You gotta leave the corporate to have a good team of corporate lawyers and that's what they have to go out and develop.  One person can't go out and get all the business and that's what we--that was the model at Carney and Brothers.  One person go out and get the business and everybody else do the work.  Well you got too many people holding on to you and you can't grow a firm that way.  So I--so I did learn that.  At Carney and Brothers we, we had very, very good lawyers, but we were not very good businesspeople in terms of--we just--we just didn't know the--the, the law--the law firm business here in the service industry.  We didn't fully understand or comprehend all the nuances to the, the business of servicing your client.  And really the financial models that you have to--you can't--you cannot deviate for--from certain financial models, you just cannot.
Story_ID: 611387
Speaker 1: Let me ask you how your practice is, is changing, you know, now here?  Is it the same as it was at Wildman [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Probably, my practice is a little different here [Perkins Coie LLP].  My practice is, is more business law, you know, minorities, successful minority companies, a lot of corporate work, a lot like Ariel's [Ariel Investments, Chicago, Illinois], I do work for Ariel and they're a very sophisticated client.  I do work for Boeing [The Boeing Company], Richardson [Texas] so that, you know, that--that dynamic has changed.  I'm really doing some intricate financing for some of my clients, and so having the lawyers with the skill set to do that sophisticated kind--sophisticated work is very, very helpful.  I still lead and manage the deals because the client, I--I am--I view myself as an advisor to my clients.  Lawyers are really viewed now as technicians.  So you can really get a technical team, but you really have to be an advisor to your client in order to accomplish the legal objective.  Another practice that I'm developing, I'm starting to be, you know, be--this, this comes from my public finance days of, of working with--doing public deals on, on--in the aviation industry.  A lot of my--I'm doing business in terms of representing concessionaires out at the airports.  And what I'm really doing now is developing this corporate work of putting DBEs, Disadvantaged Business Enterprises, with majority companies and doing the joint venture agreements and really bringing strong DBET, Disadvantaged Business Enterprise teams, of businesses to the table that they can really grow their business out at the airport in the travel industry.  It's a--it's a tremendous opportunity.  It takes a--it takes a strong financial commitment and also a lot of sophistication because you really have to understand the aviation industry.  But I've been pretty successful in that in putting the great--putting good teams together.  So, you know, not only do you get the legal work, but also you get the satisfaction that you're helping some minority business--businesses grow.
Story_ID: 611388
Speaker 1: So in many ways, you are still very active in the black community?  I mean it's, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --this is the whole thing that--that's the community that, you know, started you off, you know, that's the community that is still sustaining you, you know.  What do you like--oh okay I don't know if I should--well, let's talk about your civic involvement and how that has worked vis-a-vis, you know, your legal practice?  Because what was your first appointment was it with the public?
Speaker 2: I was on the Plan Commission [City of Chicago Plan Commission].  I was on the Plan Commission probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plan Commission. Now who was that--who was head of the Department of Planning [City of Chicago Department of Planning and Development] when you were on the Plan Commission?
Speaker 2: Well, I got appointed to the Plan Commission by Rich Daley [Richard M. Daley].  The head of the Plan Commission at that--at that time I think was [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett.  Yeah, Valerie Jarrett was, was head of the Plan Commission when I came on.  And so I was on the Plan Commission for a number of years.  And then--
Speaker 1: How could that supplement what you had learned at the foot of [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal?
Speaker 2: It all came together--it all came together.  It, it--because the Plan Commission before that it was the--it was--it was--they called it urban renewal.  They had a urban--a board for urban renewal that kind of evolved into the Plan Commission.  But it was all, you know, I--through Earl Neal, I learned the whole issue of land use planning, zoning and how important zone, you know, the whole--the issues of zoning of communities and how the city is zoned and with the Plan Commission that's what we got to deal with de- developers and make sure they're compliant with the zoning issues, make sure they're compliant with the Lakefront Protection Ordinance.  We had the, the Plan Commission would do all the work, but we had to approve all the deals.  So through the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] project, I got it, I figured it out, I mean it all came together for me.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you started there, did you enjoy being on the Plan Commission?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved being on the Plan Commission because you, you knew all the big projects that were going--taking placing in the city.
Speaker 1: And that you--you served on there from what year to what year?
Speaker 2: On the Plan Commission I probably served on the Plan Commission probably from 1990 until about 1995.  Or probably even a little sooner than that because probably late '80s [1980s], because the way I remember is that Harold Washington passed away in 1987, we had a time of Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], then Rich Daley became mayor.  So I probably started on the Plan Commission about 1989.
Story_ID: 611389
Speaker 1: Were you serving on the police board [Chicago Police Board] while Al Maule [Albert C. Maule] was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did--explain to me, you know, because when Al died--he died in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [sic. 1995], I think it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen ninety-three [1993].  Okay, so you were still serving on the Plan Commission [City of Chicago Plan Commission].
Speaker 2: I--after Al Maule passed away, I got a call from Roger Kiley [Roger J. Kiley, Jr.]  who was the mayor's [Richard M. Daley] chief of staff that he wanted to come over and have a meeting with me.  And you know, we set the meeting for a day.  So you spent two days, "Now why does he wanna meet with me?" I'm also calling Earl [HistoryMaker Earl Neal], you know, blah, blah, blah.  You know, you know, I'm calling Earl trying to figure out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the agenda?
Speaker 2: --what--what's the agenda.  Nobody knows the agenda, nobody knows the agenda.
Speaker 1: Did Earl know the agenda?
Speaker 2: No, Earl didn't know, Earl didn't know the agenda.  I said, "Earl it's not about legal work because if it were about legal work," the general dep- the corporation counsel at that time was Susan Sher.  So I said, "This, this is not about legal work."  So I, you know, I'm walking over there to, to the office and it hit me like a bolt of lightning, this is about the police board.  As soon as I got in there, that's what it was about.  I mean it's just, you know, how you, you just have a--it just came together for me that this was, you know, that this could be--the police board had been mentioned--my name had been passed around even before Al Maule and then Al Maule was, was appointed chairman.  And then--it just--it just hit me, I bet this is about the police board, 'cause you know, and when I walked in, that is what it was about, police board.  And I had no, you know, I did not know what the agenda was until I was--and I walked over there, you know, your mind is just--your mind is playing games with you.  And so they wanted me to step in and take over as president since, since Al Maule had passed away.  And I was very good friends with Al Maule, so it was kind of like an honor to, you know--I asked Roger, I said, "Now you've had the best, you've had Al Maule as your president, now you're talking about me, you know, I, I got some big shoes to fill, you know.  So keep a low expectation level (laughter) 'til I figure this out."  And so I, I stepped into fill the expired term of Al Maule and then I got reappointed.
Speaker 1: So Al Maule was actually the first black ch- per- right, don't you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Al Maule was the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah I mean, I can't imagine so you--yeah--
Speaker 2: Right, right, fir- right, right.
Speaker 1: --I can't imagine.
Speaker 2: Now Harold Washington--the, the police board actually started back in the early '60s [1960s], but I don't think Al Maule was the first black--
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: No.  And I should really know the answer to this.  There was a minister on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], I cannot think of her name.  She passed away, I think she was president of the police board.  Because remember, the presidents are appointed by the mayor and Harold Washington was the mayor that a--was
Speaker 1: Appointed?
Speaker 2: Appointed, yeah.  'Cause Ellen Douglas was on the police board at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was she--oh wait a minute--
Speaker 2: Under Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: So you don't mean in the '60s [1960s], you're talking about--
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Under, under--okay under Harold Washington, okay.  Well I know he--now he appointed Rice [HistoryMaker Fred Rice, Jr.] as the police commissioner [sic. police superintendent].
Speaker 2: Yeah the commissioner, but I--but I think there was a minister on the West Side that was also president under Harold Washington (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, I see, okay well that could make se--okay--makes sense.  So what, what has been because--
Speaker 2: Willie Wyatt [sic.].  Willie Wyatt. Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Oh Willie Wyatt, okay, Reverend Willie--Addie Wyatt [HistoryMaker Reverend Addie Wyatt].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Addie Wyatt, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Reverend Addie Wyatt, okay.
Story_ID: 611390
Speaker 1: --Okay, so let's--because we don't have that much time, let me just ask one more thing about--so what was--what was one of the most significant cases or where it was a difficult call for you.
Speaker 2: LaTanya Haggerty was probably my most difficult case, and that was the case where the police officer, it was a female police officer fatally shot a citizen on 64th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive].  And what happened was, that the officer mistakenly thought that the citizen, she was in a car, her cell phone was a gun.  And she reached to pick up her cell phone and the officer fired the shot that fatally--oh it was fatal.  And so there was a big outcry in the community at that time.  And there were four police officers involved.  The case, and it really wasn't so much the shot at 64th and King Drive that, that caused the case to explode, it was really the chase.  And the chase really--the chase really started on 95th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  And the big issue was is that, you know, the police officers in terms of chasing--the police officers were told to stop the chase and they continued to go on, adrenaline got going.  LaTanya Haggerty was with her boyfriend [Raymond Smith] and he is being chased by the police and so the police tried to set up a barricade from him at 95th and Cottage Grove, he gets around the barricade and he's going east--he scri- he turns around, around the barricade and starts going west.  And the police officers get out and start firing their guns at the car.  Now there--you know, women are getting off from work, they're gettin- the kids are getting out of school at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], I mean there's just a lot of issues here and a lot of issues around police officers when they discharge their weapons.  There're rules that you really have to adhere to.  And there were a number of rules that were violated.  So that's really the crux of the case and that's-and, but then, you know, they got involved in the chase and the chase took them through a number of districts and they started off on 95th and Cottage Grove and they ended up on 64th and King Drive--65th [Street] and King Drive.  And then there was a fatal shot that killed this particular citizen.  And so there was just a lot of media coverage as you remember and the police of--the police officers were disciplined for police misconduct and we fired three of the officers and then of course a big civil lawsuit developed after that.  And the lead attorneys on the civil lawsuit were Johnnie Cochran and James Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery].  And so you, you know, the, the family they brought in the big guns.  And there was a huge--the city settled the case.
Speaker 1: Oh at, at what level?
Speaker 2: Eighteen million dollars.
Speaker 1: Now, did you feel compromised at all during that case at all (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So have you felt compromised at all or a sense, you know, 'cause maybe in the early days maybe black people, you know, to try and weigh and balance or that the police had always been so racially--you know, this is a city that had been so racially divided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Well, you know the police board [Chicago Police Board], all we do is hear cases of misconduct that are--that are brought via the superintendent.  So really don't get, you know, we, we have a public meeting.  We have--we meet in executive session every third Thursday and we have cases that we are to review and discuss.  And the hearing officer is there.  So we entertain those cases.  Then we have a public meeting.  But we don't decide policy or principles or anything of that nature.
Story_ID: 611391
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start out and we're just gonna re-slate the interview.  So I'm gonna have you state your name, I need to have you state your name, your date of birth, today's date, our location, occupation, and that's it?
Speaker 2: Okay, all right so you want me to state my name.  My name is Demetrius, you want my middle name?  Demetrius Edward Carney [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney].
Speaker 1: Spell Demetrius?
Speaker 2: D-E-M-E-T-R-I-U-S, Edward Carney, C-A-R-N-E-Y.  Birthdate April 29th, 1947.  What were the other questions?
Speaker 1: T- let's see--
Speaker 2: Occupation, I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: Right, and tod- did we get today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April the 17th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Occupation is an attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said that, okay.  I think we got it.  And our location, it's-we're at the offices of The History--
Speaker 2: Yeah, offices of The HistoryMakers in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 611392
Speaker 1: We were talking about your work on the police board [Chicago Police Board] and the LaTanya Haggerty case.
Speaker 2: Oh my god (laughter), lord (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well we were talking about, you working--really being appointed to the Plan Commission [City of Chicago Plan Commission] and the work, continued the work from Al Maule [Albert C. Maule].  I'm just saying it's been a long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Long time, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Myself, I'm shocked.
Speaker 2: Right, when did Al Maule pass away, probably--
Speaker 1: No, no, but this was--he had died, you had said that he had died in 2005.  So you were talk, talking current day.  You were even talking about you had also reviewed the fact that you are--your work--you have been working increasingly with airport concessionaires, and even based on the conversation we had the other day, you know, that seems that that practice has, you know, thrived that we have to look where, have a little the four-year period (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah.  The last time we talked I see Richard Daley [Richard M. Daley] was the mayor--
Speaker 1: He was the mayor.
Speaker 2: --and president of the police board and I was reappointed in that position by Rahm Emanuel.  So I'm still serving as president of the police board.  Conducted the superintendent search for Garry McCarthy, who I think has done--is doing an outstanding job.  He has challenges, but this is Chicago [Illinois].  And from there, let's see I think, I--I was still at the same law firm, it was Perkins Coie LLP.
Speaker 1: And you were even talking about or I remember, I don't know if this was on camera, but you know, the difference between the firms.  You know, you had between Wildman, Harrold and Dixon [Wildman, Harrold, Allen and Dixon LLP, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Right, my--the--I--I had my own firm [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois] and when that dissolved I went over to Wildman, Harrold and stayed there for about five years.  And then when Altheimer and Gray [Chicago, Illinois] imploded, some of the lawyers from Altheimer came over to Wildman, some went to Perkins Coie.  'Cause Perkins is a--is a firm that's originally out of Seattle [Washington] and it is the incorporator and a servicer of Boeing [The Boeing Company].  So when Boeing relocated its corporate offices here, naturally, you know, Perkins decided to follow because they wanted to protect their turf with Boeing.  And so some of the Altheimer boys went to--went to Perkins.  And very--became very good friends with them while they were at Wildman, they were dissatisfied because Wildman didn't have the bench to service their clients.  So I left with, with those lawyers and went over to Perkins.  So that's how I ended up there.  And so it's, it's been a good fit.
Speaker 1: So can we talk about the last four years.  I mean the nature--let--let's start with the police board, because that has been your civic, you know, activity.  We definitely didn't have a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] back when we--
Speaker 2: Yeah right (laughter), that's true, that's true.  As a matter of fact, didn't even think, didn't even imagine it (laughter).  Never crossed my mind.  So I've been on the police board since 1995.  It has been a growing experience for me.  I've go--worked very hard to transform the board, it's really now, and I have to say it, a very professional board, very independent.  We handle high-profile cases of misconduct against police officers and we also do the sup- when there is a vacancy in the office of superintendent, we conduct that search.  And so I, I, I think I've done four or five superintendent searches for the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: How long--how long have you been search--serving in that position (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have been serving since 1995.  So 1995 to--
Speaker 1: From Al Maule's--
Speaker 2: Al--Al Maule, yeah, yeah I succeed right after Al Maule.
Speaker 1: So that's going--that's--that's a long time ago.
Speaker 2: That's a long time, that's a long time.
Speaker 1: Seven--seventeen years.
Speaker 2: I don't think it's been that long.
Speaker 1: Well, not 2005--
Speaker 2: Did Al pass in 2005?
Speaker 1: No 1990--well you've been serving since 1995, so to 2005 would be ten years and ten plus this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess so, my good Lord.
Speaker 1: Right, I'm sorry, seventeen years.
Speaker 2: Right, right, so I finished the term.  I finished the term of Al Maule and I was reappointed by Daley I think three times and now I've been appointed by this particular mayor and you serve a five year term.
Story_ID: 611393
Speaker 1: What has been your biggest challenge, you think, while you were at the police board [Chicago Police Board] and I wanna ask about that and then I wanna ask about one incident that I, you know, but what do you think your biggest challenge has been?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge on the police board is to handling cases of misconduct, making sure that it's fair and indepen- you do a very fair job in terms of hearing the case, reviewing the case.  But when you have controversial cases that become very media intense, so you really have to become sensitive to the media because there are some--there are times when, you know, if you don't act in a very--you have to have logistics to what you're doing.  I mean you can implode the city [Chicago, Illinois], you know, when there's really a racial issue because of misconduct.  So you have to really make sure that you're analyzing the situation, that you stay out in front of the media.  That you know how to keep the city calm until you get through a particular issue.  The LaTanya Haggerty case is a--is a--probably a very famous case.  You know, where a young woman was slain by a police officer, I mean it gained international news.  So you have to be very careful there in terms of how you handle that case to make sure that it was--you know, that--that you protect the rights of the police officer, you have to weigh it against the right of the community to know and so the police officers are protected by the collective bargaining unit and you have to just--the, the process has to be very fair.  But at, at the end of the day, you have to make sure that justice was served, that it's, it's fair.  That--in that particular case we fired the police officer.  She was--she was a good police officer, but you know, the interest of the public, you know, was also a concern here.  So, I, I felt very--I felt very comfortable with our decision, but I had empathy for the police officer, that was just one act under extreme pressure that she, I don't think that police officer knew the power of the gun, she had a 8--8mm Magnum and she didn't realize how sensitive it was.  And she touched that trigger and boom, that woman is dead.  And so you know, it's, you know, have to remember when you're dealing with police officers you're also talking about careers, you--we end careers and that's something you have to take very, very seriously, you know.  The public has outcry, but also, you know, you're talking about someone's career, so.  It's a--it's a balancing act.
Speaker 1: Now Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], what would you, has there been any time in the last or the last seventeen years that you have maybe had issues with distancing yourself, you know, from the subject matter at hand or was that never a problem for you?
Speaker 2: That has never been a, a, a--'cause I, I--it's, it's my nature to take it on--take it head on and deal with it.  I may procrastinate a little bit until I get a feel for where I'm going, but generally I, I just take it head on.  So I have not had an issue where I had to step back or distance myself from the board or been a little bit nervous about being president of the police board.  It--it's just my nature to confront it and deal with it.
Story_ID: 611394
Speaker 1: You know, we both had someone we had known for a long time, who, you know, we--you know, I don't know--I woke up to the news to hear that--of Mike Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.], you know, killing himself.  And so I'm just saying in that, that wasn't--that was more of the coroner's office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was more of the coroner's office.
Speaker 1: Oh so that's not the same thing, but.
Speaker 2: Yeah, No that's not same, it's just a whole different.  I mean I was--oh my god, we won't talk about that, Michael Scott one of my closest dearest friends, and that was a very troublesome time.  Yeah it was for all of us--for all of us.
Speaker 1: So, so let's go to--the--le- let's talk about what you feel has been the change since we last got together in terms of the civic world.  I mean we have a new president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], we have a new--
Speaker 2: Mayor [Rahm Emanuel] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) mayor, you know, you had spoken very passionately about your inter- interview about Harold Washington and his campaign.  So I'm really--the last part of our interview and what I'm really trying to get to are some reflections.  So I'd like for you to, you know, talk about just maybe how you've changed or if you look back over, you know, even since the time of Harold's election, you know, what you see.  Because you--you talked about black business.  You talked about even the fight, you know, of lawyers that were older, you know, with the young, the young upstarts that you were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was one of them one time--at one time.  Now I'm one of the older lawyers (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's true.
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: But I would just--I would like to just have you sort of comment on that.  Because this is like, I mean when Harold Washington got elected we couldn't, even that was unbelievable?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  The fun--the fun we had.  I think right now in my career I'm coming to--I don't--I don't wanna say the end of my career, but you know go in law firms, you go in senior status.  I'll probably never retire, but I'll--I'll, you know, cut back a little bit.  I think as I reflec- reflect probably what I'm, as I said in my career, what are the things that I have done that I am most proud of.  Probably number one is the leg- the whole legislation in the smoking ban with the American Cancer Society and smoking in restu- in restaurants.  I know you know that I led that whole legislation in that--in that whole effort and I was very, very, very proud of that.  Proud of my time on the police board [Chicago Police Board].  I think we've taken a board that was just very political and we kind of evolved, it's now very professional.  We, we, we, we have a--have a staff.  We take our role very seriously and so I--that's a big accomplishment to, to go through that evolutionary process.  And probably where I think I fit right now, is that I, I really feel I have a job to mentor younger lawyers.  I think that in a firm to--especially lawyers of color to mentor to, to, to pass on the torch as you say.  To let them know your experiences to work with them.  I feel it's just a sense of responsibility.  I think that's my one giveback.  I have to giveba- I mean I've been very blessed in the career of law, I just--I, I mean it's just--I was a rolling stone to, to kind of evolve to where I am today.  And so I have a sense of giving back.  And so I work with younger lawyers who I--it's really funny, they--you know, I--they come to me for advice, but I have to go to them when I need to know how to work the computer, you know what I mean (laughter), because they are so fast and so quick.
Story_ID: 611395
Speaker 1: I work well with, with, with lawyers--I think, there's a younger lawyer in my firm [Perkins Coie LLP] right now who's a partner by the name of Joseph McCoy [Joseph Q. McCoy].  And it's with Joseph with his tenacity that I developed this whole new practice area of airport concessions.  And that's kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about that?
Speaker 1: Well, wha- what happened when we had the market crash, you know, I've been a finance lawyer by training and so all my work went away.
Speaker 2: And what year was that?
Speaker 1: That was right after--when the stock market crashed, right after Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--this was when Obama was elected in what are we--in 2008, right in 2000, you know, that whole turmoil.  And so there was just no work.  And so I said I'm--I had to really quickly reinvent myself and I was representing two airport concessionaires and dealing with a number of their issues.  And some- somewhere along the line I had an epiphany.  You know, I could turn this into a practice area.  And so what I had to do, listen to the younger lawyers, I had to redo my resume, I had to write some articles.  I had to go with--get involved in some ind- industry trade associations and go around the country speaking, which I did do, and which I really enjoyed.  And so it kind of evolved and I just started picking up clients along the way.  And so we now have four to five in our practice group and we do work all around the country.  As a matter of fact, on Sunday I'm leaving for Oslo [Norway] because I--one of my clients lives in Germany and so they are a host of a big airport concession conference in Oslo.  So we're gonna go there through the invitation of the client.  And then the client is based in Hamburg, Germany.  So we'll go back--we service this client.  It's involved in the duty free industry and so we just--that's why I was going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  The super bowl of duty free was in--at LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California].  They had a RFP [request for proposals] out for duty free concessionaires.  And you had all the top concessionaires from around the world competing.  So I had this one particular client that I was working with to compete in LAX.  And so now I'm going back over to visit with the client in their home just to talk more strategies to see if we--if there's--I really wanna take this practice global, get a global practice.  I really enjoy it so much.  And so I'm really exploring ways, trying to figure that out.
Speaker 2: That's fascinating.  That almost seems like a blessing in disguise in some respects.  I mean the downturn?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the downturn.
Speaker 2: The downturn (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now it does.  I didn't at the time, but it is.
Speaker 2: Now it does, but I mean the only reason I say that, so what how, how does this--how were you to take your years of experience and apply it to this.  You had started, you had som- you had airport concession clients when, when we last interviewed?
Speaker 1: Right, I, I, I--there was some issues of a--I had one client trying to sell all of his interest around the country and had a number of issues in Chicago [Illinois].  So I represented this particular client in selling his business.  Most people don't know there are just four basic businesses in the airport.  There's duty free, there's news and gifts, there's food or retail--food and beverage and specialty retail.  That's all it is.  And, and it's really interesting, here in the U.S. the big one is food and beverage 'cause we like to eat.  But in Europe and Asia, it's specialty retail, they like to shop, you know.  And so I've just learned.  And what happens is that, you know, people think airports just fall off the sky, we get off the plane, we grab our bags, we run out or we're running for the plane.  We stop to get something to eat.  I mean it's a billion dollar industry, you know, because of, of the traffic that you have.  People gotta eat, people like to shop, you know, duty free as people leaving the country they need to shop.  You've got the Asian--the Asian population that comes over here or the Europeans because the, the value of the dollar they do a lot of shopping and don't have to pay a duty on it.  And so that's why you have such high-end shopping at duty free airports--I mean the duty free markets in the airports.
Speaker 2: So how--so have you gotten into all four areas?
Speaker 1: I've--yeah, I'm in--in all four areas.
Story_ID: 611396
Speaker 1: Okay, what have you found the most productive?
Speaker 2: You mean in terms of the airport?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Probably duty free, working with duty free clients because it gives you international exposure.  You know in pricing.  You learn the whole import, export business.  You it's--you learn customs, you know, duty free comes really in the ho- the, the customs border and protection [U.S. Customs and Border Protection] now comes under Homeland Security [U.S. Department of Homeland Security].  So because of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] it's completely different.  So lot--tons of security issues, you know.  It's--it's just a simple issue of representing a concessionaire whether you wanna be on the land side or the air side.  When you hear those terms, land side means pre-security, air side means post-security.  And most concession operations of course wanna be post-security.  So it's just--it's--what it--I, I--you know I used to do airport financing, that's how I learned about airports and profit centers.  The concessions are a huge profit center for--yeah and people don't know this.  You think, you know, when you--the money from the concession goes to the city.  No, it--all money that is spent on the airport campus stays on the airport campus and the profits at the end of the day go back to the airlines to help them retire their debt on the bonds.  And so I--it's just been a tremendous learning experience.  I'm constantly learning.  I'm constantly being challenged.  So that is why I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Okay, how many African American lawyers are you finding in that arena with you?
Speaker 2: We're [Perkins Coie LLP] the only ones.  Matter of fact, we're one of the--we're probably two firms in the country that are doing--that are involved in airport concessions.  People now Google us to--to find an airport concession lawyer.
Speaker 1: But there--those aren't--I asked African Americans, you're talking probably African American and a majority firm.  Are you saying there're two law firms with African Americans (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, African Americans, I'm the only one.  I--I'm the only one who is doing airport concession practice.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--
Speaker 2: Wha- what it really is in the practice of law, you can be a finance, you can be a real estate, but now in this market you have to find a niche.  And so what you have to do now is, is follow an industry and what I am now is an advisor to my clients.  I'm, I'm not--I'm a lawyer of course, but now because I understand the industry, I understand the business, I can advise my client on all the issues.  And there's so many federal regulation issues in operating in the U.S. and so I'm an advisor to the client in an industry.  And that's what I enjoy.  I--I enjoy the business side.
Speaker 1: So what of your--the things that you had done up to this point most prepared you to do the work you're doing besides just--
Speaker 2: Just, being a transactional lawyer, you know.  You know, airport is just nothing but huge shopping center when you think about it.  I mean you're renting--all the concessionaires are renting space from the--from the--from the re- from the mall operator which is the city or whoever is operating the mall.  So, being a finance and real estate lawyer it just all--it just all came together for me.  And so it's, it's just worked out very well.  I picked--I--I've figure it out.  Now you know you--airports it's local government, so you always got local politics involved and I like that.  You know, I, I like the whole political nature of it so I'm doing government relations, I'm doing real estate, I'm doing finance, and I'm putting the transaction corp- putting the transaction together.  So it--it's a lot of disciplines and it's just fun.  I mean, you know you're, you're helping the client navigate its way through the political maze and you know, how to respond to the RFP [request for proposals], all the issues and then there're a lot of legal issues that are involved as well.  So it's fun.
Speaker 1: You know, Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], as you're talking I see a little smile come on your face like you lit up.  Like you really are enjoying this?
Speaker 2: I found my niche, I found my ni- I have fin- all this time, you know, finally at this age, I'm gonna be sixty-five, I found my niche of where I wanna retire in terms of the practice of law.  I really, really enjoy this and I'm really starting to get international exposure and that just--that just thrills me to be able to do this on an international level.  I mean, you know, I, I couldn't have written a better script.
Speaker 1: That's right. Wow.
Speaker 2: So I'm not bored being a lawyer.  I, I--I'm enjoying what I'm doing.
Story_ID: 611397
Speaker 1: We were talking about young people, you know, coming through and you enter--you know, wanting to mentor young lawyers.  I, I wanna ask because so much has changed and so much hasn't in the area of law.  There're people that, as my--like myself who have advised young people not to go into law, that it's not the best, you know, that the model has to change.  I went to a National Bar Association conference, NBLSA [National Black Law Students Association] that they call it now and there were, I think, six hundred or five hundred women and one hundred men, and that was frightening to me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: So, I wanna ask you, because law was not what you, you started out in teaching?
Speaker 2: Right.  I wa- I, I was gonna be a high school principal, and that was my goal.  You know, you know, come out of a black family, right.  Graduated from college [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], you know, became a teacher, my parents [Jessie Cane Carney and James Carney] were so proud and you know, I was gonna become a principal of the high school.  And I took a couple education courses that I did not like the courses at all, I did not think they were challenging.  And so, did--I told you this story didn't I, I told you the story of how I went to law school [DePaul University College of Law, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It's, it's--you want me to repeat it again?
Speaker 1: No, you don't need to.
Speaker 2: No, I don't need to, okay.
Speaker 1: But I, I wanted to have you review in a way the, the career, I mean the legal career you've had, even your happiest here, you know.  But more also what has changed and what hasn't as it relates to black lawyers?
Speaker 2: I think wha- what I have learned along the way and when I had my own firm [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], I was gonna create this mega firm.  That was my goal.  I was gonna be the first one that was gonna produce this hundred-lawyer firm.  And what I found out it's a--it's an impossibility.  It--there's no way that you can build a firm from within and by working with majority firms or the way they grow, is that they go get partners come in from other firms and they bring clients and they bring other lawyers with them, and it's just a mushroom.  And we as African American lawyers, we are not afforded that opportunity.  And plus the consumer of legal services hav- has become very co- very sophisticated as to pricing.  And so it's, it's a pricing war.  You notice that most of your minority firms now are becoming smaller, they're not growing because of the whole pricing issue.  You now have the growth of the mega firms because they can service cross disciplines, they can service coast-to-coast, and they can service internationally.  The minority firms have to be a niche player and have to develop a reputation as a niche player.  I, I--I'm very saddened, in--in my career when I started there was Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and I worked with Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious].  I worked with Independence Bank, I worked for John, I did work for Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company, Chicago, Illinois].  I represented Seaway [Seaway National Bank; Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], I represented Alpha Kappa Alp- AKAs, Alpha Kappa Alpha national sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  I mean I've just had, I've had a wonderful, wonderful experience.  And my whole career has been working in, was working in a minority law firm with just some very talented lawyers.  It was a well-kept secret, we had--we had great clients.  I mean I was the workhorse, got, you know, I--I'm doing the work, but you know it was just the exposure.  It was--I never had a boring day, you know, because of just the exposure.  You know, work--get to work with Julian--Julian Wilkins, David Wilkins' [HistoryMaker David B. Wilkins] dad, and David and I have talked about that.  I worked very closely with his dad.  I worked very closely with Jewel Lafontant.  I, I worked very closely with [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal.  I mean, some of the great minds.  I mean, I've--I've had an opportunity and it's just--it's unheard of, you know.  I still remember when I first started practicing the old firm of McCoy, Ming and Black [Chicago, Illinois].  And there was just--I mean, they--those guys were with Thurgood Marshall when he argued Brown vs the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  I mean, you know, they was--they were coming to the end of their careers, but I got to--I got to meet them.  And I mean, it's just--it's been unbelievable.
Story_ID: 611398
Speaker 1: But you're sitting here telling me and you've had these experiences then when it was McCoy, Ming and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) McCoy, Ming and Black [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: --Black, that was--they were--you're the--their version of what you became.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And now you're sitting and telling me that--that there is--
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's, it's the di--
Speaker 2: We're dissipating.  It's, it's, it's almost a dissolution of the African American law firm.  It's just--whe- when I was a young lawyer and I had my firm [Carney and Brothers, Ltd., Chicago, Illinois], I was a member of a consortium.  And these were African American law firms around the country, Flash Wiley [HistoryMaker Fletcher "Flash" Wiley] had his firm.  I saw Flash Wiley a few minutes ago up on, on, on the digital screen.  I said oh you know, met him, Otis McGee [Otis McGee, Jr.], Bob Archie [Robert L. Archie, Jr.], we were very close.  We all had our firms and none of us exist anymore, none of us exist anymore.
Speaker 1: So wha- what hopes and concerns do you have about the black lawyer?
Speaker 2: I, I--I'm, I'm very saddened and I don't have an answer for you.  You know, I, I don't have answer.
Speaker 1: But, but, but I have to press you on this because you said that your focus is on mentoring young lawyers, where, where you mentioned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I, I, I am mentoring young lawyers--
Speaker 1: But not black, not necessarily--
Speaker 2: No, they're all African American lawyers in terms of survival in a majority law firm [Perkins Coie LLP].  I'm doing well in a majority law firm and I give a lot of lawyers--a lot of lawyers of color work, that's what I do.  And that--that's--is my responsibility.
Speaker 1: And it's absolutely critical too?
Speaker 2: It's, it's so critical.  That and they feel very proud, you know, that I'm there, Joseph McCoy [Joseph Q. McCoy] is there and we recruit, very much involved in recruiting, mentoring, teaching them how to have--it's--in the practice of law, it's all about self-confidence, you know what I mean.  That's really what it's all about.  And so to build up their self-confidence that you're a good lawyer, that you can do this.  That if you wanna take it to the next level you can, but there're other options out there as well.  It's just from the beginning stage teaching them to think and write like a lawyer.
Story_ID: 611399
Speaker 1: So if you were starting again today, what--if you were starting again today as a young lawyer, what areas would you pursue Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], because--I mean this is all really sort of about legacy, you know, in some respects?  So what would--what would you--what would you pursue?
Speaker 2: If I were starting out today, that--that's, that's a very good question.  Now I'm looking back, you know, in terms of, you know, the whole airport concession piece, I wish I'd discovered it earlier.  If I'd discovered it earlier I wouldn't be practicing law, I'd be a--I'd be an operator (laughter) in an airport 'cause I, I really enjoy the industry.  But really I, I think that if I do it all over again, I don't know if I would--I don't know if I'd practice.  I'm not sure I would do it.  The experiences I've had have been--if the experience, if young lawyers can have the same experience that I had or similar experiences or similar experience, I would highly encourage it.  But I don't think those experiences are out there anymore.  I mean, the, the great names are kind of fading away.  You know, the last of the great lawyers, in my mind, Jim Montgomery [HistoryMaker James D. Montgomery], you know, you had Gene Pincham [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham], you had [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, you had Jewel Lafontant [HistoryMaker Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious].  I mean, you know, we don't have, our generation we just don't have that.  You know, have their own firms, have their own clients and that--that saddens me.  And so I--I'm really praying for Vic Henderson [Victor P. Henderson] and Sam Adam [Sam Adam, Jr.], they've created a--a--a firm [Henderson Parks, LLC, Chicago, Illinois] to be on the plaintiff's side in terms of bringing justice, I think that's important.  I'd probably do--I'd probably do more on the plaintiff's side.  I'd probably become an advocate of the small guy, you know.  Probably, probably--yeah, that's probably what I would do.  But--I, I would be an advocate of the small guy in terms of bringing justice.  Now that--that's a great sense of accomplishment.  I like that.
Story_ID: 611400
Speaker 1: So Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney], that sort of leads me into--so what would you come back as then, if you hadn't--what haven't--I mean you're enjo- this may be a hard questions 'cause you're enjoying yourself so much, but let's say hypothetically you aren't and you decided not law, what would you come back as?
Speaker 2: I think I would probably be--be a TV anchor or reporter, I kind of like that.  That's probably how I would come back.  Pe- people always tell me am I the Allstate man [Allstate Corporation], you know, the--the guy in the Allstate commercial.  You don't know how many people ask me, tell me that I sound like him, said I missed my calling (laughter).  He has my job, you know what I mean (laughter).  That's what I would do.
Speaker 1: That's Dennis--Dennis (laughter) Haysbert.
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: His name is Dennis Haysbert, I (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh really, really, okay, he has my job.
Speaker 1: No, no, he--I--you have--you have a resonant voice--
Story_ID: 611401
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for the black community now?
Speaker 2: Being on the police board [Chicago Police Board] and watching misconduct and crime very closely, this--I grew up on 88th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and that was Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] at the time.  And it was a wonderful place to grow up.  We don't have any sense of community of--I go back to the old neighborhood and I see a lot of the people, they're very elderly, they're afraid to come out.  The gangs have taken over.  I'm concerned people should not have to live in fear.  People should be able to walk their dogs.  A lady is eighty-five years old and still has an active life should be able to park her car and get out of her car and walk to her house without fear.  That concerns me.  This whole issue of gangs, whole issue of violence.  And I gotta make a contribution here and the way I'm gonna make that contribution is through mentoring.  I'm starting to get involved with Urban Prep Academy [Urban Prep Academies, Chicago, Illinois] in just terms of mentoring, and when I say mentoring I'm not only mentoring lawyers, but I'm also mentoring high school students.  You know, I'm telling a lot of young black males about Urban Prep Academy and it's important.  I really admire the Kappa League [Kappa Leadership Institute], that's an organization of guys from Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.] they'd formed this organization where they go out and get a lot of young men that are in sophomores, juniors and seniors and they prep them for the AC- ACT test.  They take them around to colleges, they kind of mentor them.  I think that's gonna have to be my contribution, to save as many young black males as I can save.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that is your solution, but tell me what the hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: Hopes--
Speaker 1: For the black community?
Speaker 2: The hope is to have a sense of community, that's the hope.  And you know, what--what I take, you know, when I'm at a police board meeting and we go to the public meeting, I'll have citizens that come out--I had a group come out from the Austin [Chicago, Illinois] community, and these are the people that purchased their homes and they tell me about the gangs and the--the loitering around their--their houses.  I get--I get the superintendent there, I get the command staff, I get people involved.  And I say to these people, if you don't get a result, you come back to this meeting and let me know.  You know, I want our community, I want African Americans to have a sense of community.  A sense where they can live comfortably.  A sense where they can know their neighbor.  A sense of living without fear.
Speaker 1: So your concerns?
Speaker 2: My con- that's my concern.
Speaker 1: That they--that people will continue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That people can live, they can live without fear.  I, I mentored a young man--
Speaker 1: That's your hope.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's my hope.
Speaker 1: That's your hope, that's not your con- so your concern is that things won't change, they'll get worse, is that what you're saying?
Speaker 2: My concern is that--yes, things, possibly things could get worse.  My concern is that people will constantly have to live in fear.  My hope is to be able to aliv- alleviate some of that fear.
Story_ID: 611402
Speaker 1: The other question is, you know, Chicago [Illinois], you're--this is the place you grew up.  So obviously a town, you know, it gave birth to you, you've excelled here.  And when you look at the, the history, which this project is about, where do you see our generation in it, it's legacy, what--I mean, 'cause you've spent time talking about the, you know, the Earl Neals [HistoryMaker Earl Neal] and the Eugene Pinchams [HistoryMaker R. Eugene Pincham], they were the generation, you know, above us.  So what do you see--what do you see when people will look back at us, what do you think they will say?
Speaker 2: We dropped the ball.  We didn't take the risks.  We didn't create the businesses.  Mainly because, I guess maybe our opportunities are better we didn't have to.  I miss the Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company, Chicago, Illinois], I miss the Seaway Banks [Seaway National Bank; Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], I miss the Independence Bank [Independence Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I miss Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.].  I miss all of those businesses.  I mean, along the way all the African American businesses I've represented in my career they've probably all--they've gone, either they're no longer around, I don't know why.  But I've--I feel through the community I grew as a lawyer.  I don't know if that experience is gonna--that experience is gone.  And I don't know, you know.  I look at Johnson Products and he took his company public and he sold it, that's what you're supposed to do.  You know, that's just the way, you know.  Al Boutte [HistoryMaker Alvin J. Boutte, Sr.] sold Independence Bank, 'cause nothing lasts forever.  But unfortunately there wasn't a generation behind that could say let me buy the stock and keep it going and take it to the next level.  I think the generation before us didn't do succession planning on that level.  I worry about Seaway Bank, I know a lot of those guys.  They're very elderly.  What's gonna happen when--when their--you know, when their time has come to an end, what's gonna happen to Seaway Bank.  There is no conscious succession planning.  So that's what I'm doing as a lawyer, I'm mentoring so that there will always be partners in firms.  You know, I--I-- I say to the Joseph McCoys [Joseph Q. McCoy] and the other partners, you know, you can't do good until you do well.  So you know to be able to do--once you do well and you have to create a road map for those lawyers to do well, then they can do good and bring on those behind you.
Story_ID: 611403
Speaker 1: You were talking about the McCoys [Joseph Q. McCoy] and how you're, you know, you're trying to explain to them--oh how bring it--
Speaker 2: It's--it's just--it's--it's--you know, I was asked recently by MLER, Minority, ML- Legal Education Resources [Minority Legal Education Resources, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], that was an organization that was started by Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams] and we started thirty-five years ago.  They're having their thirty-fifth anniversary and that was the organization that Ann came up with to help minority students pass the bar.  It is self-perpetuating, you know.  How do we get more organizations or, or, or business to be self-perpetuating.  You know, even if you sell a business to go back out and invest and create more opportunities, 'cause I think we learn from each other.  At least that--that's my feel.
Story_ID: 611404
Speaker 1: Do you think that there--that society is post racial then, do you think--do you believe that?
Speaker 2: That it's what?
Speaker 1: Post racial?
Speaker 2: Post racial, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know, the election of Barack [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], the result, that society was post racial, so race didn't really matter (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh because of Barack?  No I don't believe that.  No, no.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I just had to say it.
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: You haven't heard that term?
Speaker 2: No I haven't heard.
Speaker 1: That was a big term, yeah, but you know, race didn't really matter.
Speaker 2: Well I mean I've heard that, you know, what I mean.  But because of Bara--yeah right.
Speaker 1: But it's called post racial.
Speaker 2: But I don't believe Barack has solved our problems, no that race no longer matters.  In America, everything is tilted to race.  And what I'm finding is with my European clients, it's a different relationship.  And I was telling someone, even with my client from Hamburg [Germany], I met them in the U.S.  Once we met, I met at a trade conference, they--they stay in touch.  It just so happened my daughter was studying in Prague [Czech Republic].  I, I, I, I contacted the client and I said I'm gonna be over, I'd like to come visit you, come visit a couple of your airports.  And I have to say that it was a great reception and--and they were looking at, I mean they did a lot of research on me, on my background, and you know, they retained me.  And I, I was at the point, now I understand why Richard Wright and Josephine Baker, why they all went to Paris [France], I get that now.  I so get it, you know.  It's a different, it's just different with Europeans.  At least my experience has been.  It's just, you know, I don't think we'll ever overcome the sin of slavery.  I think it will be with us for generations to generations to generations.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty powerful statement.  You know, and, and what struck me really in what you were just saying, you know, was that sort of the international almost frees you from, you know, this city [Chicago, Illinois] is still very racial.
Speaker 2: I know, I know, I know.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it sort of frees you from that?
Speaker 2: Right.  I--it gives me exposure to another level.  And that's--that's where I wanna go.  I wanna go on an international level and I wanna discover how I ta- how I take this practice and you know, make it a global practice and create opportunity.
Story_ID: 611405
Speaker 1: So what do you think, do you ever think back about the times of Harold Washington and how that could--may have been different 'cause, you know, his, his, his dying left a vacuum.  Do you ever think that about?
Speaker 2: They often say that, you know, we had Harold and then we had Rich Daley [Richard M. Daley].  And Rich Daley created, you know, the whole, you know, makeover of Chicago [Illinois].  But many people don't know that the infrastructure was put there by Harold.  But I often wonder if Corporate America would've supported Harold the way they supported Rich Daley, I'm not so sure.  I'm not so sure.  Harold, as I look back, was an old-time politician.  He understood daily politics and I think that's finally coming to the end of its time.  We have a government that's, you know, that's supposedly moving to ma--you know, it's transparent, it's being transparent.  It won't be the old boss--political boss.  Harold was a political boss, (laughter) he really was, you know.  And it shows you that race mattered.  When I was a very young lawyer at the time and I--I had the time of my life during the Harold Washington era.  It was a time I was just very proud of my activities and being involved, and just--what would've happened if Harold had lived.  I don't know Julie [Julieanna Richardson], you know, I don't know.  I think we would've had--we, we--as a people we develop a sense of self, a sense of dignity and I think that's--we, we went up the hill and now we, we, we--we've slid back down, we don't have that anymore.  And sometimes yeah you see a beautiful city [Chicago, Illinois] and all these flower pots and everything, but I think the dignity of a people is more important.
Story_ID: 611406
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family, I mean your children.  Because if you would give their names and--and how--I want you to know what your hopes and concerns and wishes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I have two daughters, I have a daughter that's gonna graduate from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in a couple weeks.  That's the second one, she's finished and the other one graduated two years ago from Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  She's probably cut from your cloth (laughter).
Speaker 1: Meaning creative for girls that don't understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very, very creative and just working in New York [New York] for a magazine production company, and it's like she's died and gone to heaven.  My--in raising my kids I always told them to follow your passion.  I'm a big believer in that.  If you follow your passion, if you can figure out your passion, you'll be successful.  Like you follow your passion, you know what I mean.  That is so important.  And so that's what I hope--the hope I have for my--for my daughters is that you--my oldest daughter has found her niche and she is evolving very nicely in New York.  My youngest daughter, I think she's getting there.  All I want them to do is--what I want from them is to follow their passion and be happy.  That's, that's all I want.
Speaker 1: And then Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney]--
Speaker 2: Oh and what, what also I said to my, my, my--this is interesting, I said to my oldest daughter.  In her industry, she's always the only black woman.  She's twenty-three years old doing some production sets.  She has done the cover layout of Newsweek magazine.  We know you have fashion week, you got this week, and she's getting exposure that's just unbelievable.  And I told her, I said, you know, you have a great resume.  I wo- won't tell you how much it cost, but you have a great resume.  I said and what you owe me, is that you have to make sure you bring some other African American young lady along and you mentor her.  And I said you now--and I want you to focus on Eunice Johnson.  You now understand why she created the--the whole Ebony Fashion Fair, fashion show because black women were excluded from fashion and that's why it was so successful.  I say you, you, you have broken through a barrier, but you have got to pull somebody else along.  That's your responsibility.  I ne- that's all, it's a responsibility, she has to do it, she gets it.
Speaker 1: And so what do you see as their future, I mean because, you know, on one hand you paint the--you know, like even the fact that she is breaking barriers, you know, at this age when we were breaking barriers and more barriers (laughter) you know, at some point are we gonna be--stop breaking barriers (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But I mean I, what are your hopes for them and their future and the world that they will experience?
Speaker 2: Julie [Julieanna Richardson], you know, in--in some ways I'm excited because I, I love this whole world of technology and I get jealous of all--I watch my oldest daughter and, and, and the work that she's involved in and her creativity and this whole media and what they're doing.  And it's only gonna keep getting better and better, and it's gonna get just crazy and out of control, you know, I think, you know.  Just like going from the dial--the dial phone to the touch phone, you know.  But I also worry.  I worry about like you mentioned, this should not be a concern, but you know you mentioned so few African American men in school.  You know, will they have a chance to marry, will they have a chance to have a family.  I, I--I'm hoping that they will.  I worry about that.  I worry about just the, the, the whole climate change.  I just--I wonder will they eventually be able to settle down and not live in fear you know, have a nice sense of community.  So they'll be happy, you know.  But the world around them sometimes, you know, creates obstacles and they'll have to navigate.
Story_ID: 611407
Speaker 1: You know, Demetrius [HistoryMaker Demetrius Carney] you've been--you had two tumor--tumors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've, I've had tw- I've had two brain surgeries.
Speaker 1: And one would say that God's been, hand has pulled you through twice.
Speaker 2: Yeah He has, He has, yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you think back about through your life, why do you think that happened?  I mean you're here now.  You know a lot of people, they, they don't make it?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean, through the grace of God the first time there was a [HistoryMaker] Peter Bynoe and a [HistoryMaker] Grayson Mitchell that took me, well that was the second time, to the hospital.
Speaker 1: I thought--
Speaker 2: And got me there.  I mean it's just fortuitous that they were just there.  And I--every--I know it's Christmas Eve, every Christmas Eve I sent them an email like, you know, "Thanks guys (laughter), I don't forget."  I don't know Julie [Julieanna Richardson].  It--it's just--it tears me up to even think about it, that I survived it both times.  I don't know, I don't know.  It's just--I don't--I don't know the lesson in it.  I know the fear of it (laughter), you know.  But I guess it was just meant to be.  I don't talk about it much, you know, I don't because it was so frightening.  I--I know I lived through it and I put all my friends through it and my friends were very supportive and I--and I got through it.  You know, with not only the brain tumor but all the infection afterwards, you know.  It's not the surgery that kills you, it's the infections you get--the infection you get in the hospital that almost took me out of here.  And you know, my neurosurgeon [Charles Michael D'Angelo], I love the guy, you know.  I--I told him last, I you know, I see him once a year.  I said, "If you move your practice to the North Pole I'm following you (laughter)," you know.  I have that much confidence in the guy.  And I guess it was just meant to be, I don't know, I don't know.  It's a tough part of my life.
Speaker 1: And you're here now.
Speaker 2: I'm here.
Speaker 1: You're here.
Story_ID: 611408
Speaker 1: And then so, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That I mentored.  That legacy to be my involvement with the police board [Chicago Police Board] and how I was sensitive to the community and how I wanted to eliminate fear for African Americans to live in their community by dealing with the top brass of the police department [Chicago Police Department] to respond to the community as to their issues.  And that I reached back and I pulled some other people through.  That's what I want my legacy to be.
Speaker 1: And what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That hopefully he lived his life with passion, and he was--he was decent, a decent man.
Speaker 1: You are that (laughter). Okay, we're done, we're done.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
