Story_ID: 48204
Speaker 1: This is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And we're joined by Larry Crowe also, who is an observer.  And so, I'd like to have you state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Mary Schmidt Campbell.  M-A-R-Y, S-C-H-M-I-D-T, Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And I want you to give today's date and the location.
Speaker 2: Today is March 1, 2002.  We're located at the Tisch School of the Arts, at 721 Broadway, in New York City [New York], up on the 12th floor.
Speaker 1: And I want you to give your birthdate and your profession.
Speaker 2: I was born October 21, 1947.  And I'm Dean of the Tisch School of the Arts.
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself, though?  Would you describe yourself as an educator, an academician, or all that?
Speaker 2: Not academician, because that's--this is really my first time ever being in the academy.  I would say an educator, arts administrator, and art historian.  Those are the three categories, I guess.
Story_ID: 48205
Speaker 1: Okay.  I ask five questions, and they're not very long, and they're all People Magazine-ish.  But we'll get started.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Gosh, I don't have a favorite food.  I like different foods at different times.  I mean, I like sushi sometimes.  Sometimes I like pasta--it depends on my mood.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Again, sort of like, how do I want to feel today?  Do I feel stark and black, or do I want to feel a little soft?  I like to sort of invent myself with my colors.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like autumn and spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like either the ocean, right by the ocean, or up on the ski slope.
Speaker 1: You and your husband are avid skiers, aren't you? Okay.
Speaker 2: We are.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have... think I have one.
Story_ID: 48206
Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your parents.  And I think I'm going to start with your mother, Elaine Schmidt.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about her and her background.
Speaker 2: My mother's from Amelia, Virginia, which is a little rural town not too far from Richmond.  When she was growing up, she had an aunt and uncle who came down to Virginia.  They were childless, and they wanted to select--she had two sisters and a brother, so there were four of them.  And they wanted a child they could take back up north with them, and they selected her.  So, she grew in New Jersey.  And they had some funds, and so they gave her a little endowment, or dowry, so to speak.  So, although she's from the South, and she definitely has very strong southern roots, she also had a great deal of her childhood that she spent, I guess from age seven on, in New Jersey.  She, like her sisters, was very beautiful, very sort of fragile looking.  And I think at that time, for African American women, that was a, that was a real premium.  That was sort of a way that you could--with your education and your looks, take a step forward in life.  And what I always found very interesting is that she didn't subscribe to what I would call some of the popular or stereotypical myths about making it.  That is, she didn't want to marry necessarily into a family that had a name, or to people who were sort of current in high society.  She was looking for someone--she always said who was going to smart, hardworking and devoted to his family.  Those were her criteria.  They were sort of very firm criteria.  And that's what attracted her, she said, to my father [Harvey Schmidt].
Speaker 1: Did she share anything else about her growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Well, her father [Watsey Harris] was a tobacco farmer, and her mother [Mary Harris] was an extremely hard worker.  I can remember my grandmother.  My grandmother died when I was very young.  But I can remember her, you know, putting the logs in the stove to make the food.  And just when the farmers came in from the field, you know, around mid-day, having to feed all of the people who had been working in the fields, and getting this huge meal out on the table.  Everything was done by hand.  If they were fixing a chicken, the chicken was plucked, and plucking the feathers of the chicken and, you know, cooking everything from scratch, picking the tomatoes out of the garden in order to prepare them.  And everything was done from the resources you had right there.  And I remember, I remember her always referring back to that part of her childhood.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about much of growing up in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: That she was doted on.  That she was like a little China doll, that everybody thought she was so precious and lovely.  I mean, she had a very privileged--according to her telling--a very privileged upbringing.
Story_ID: 48207
Speaker 1: Now, your father.
Speaker 2: Harvey, Harvey Schmidt.
Speaker 1: Harvey Schmidt.  What about his growing up?
Speaker 2: My father was born in Denmark, South Carolina.  But when--at the age of three, he moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; his parents [Elizabeth Schmidt and Edward Schmidt] brought him to Philadelphia.  So, he basically spent virtually all of his life up north.  So, they migrated, they migrated very early as a family.  He was born in 1914, so it must have been around 1917 that they migrated to Philadelphia.  His family always tells the story of how he knew, at the age of five, that he was like a little prince, and conducted himself that way.  He said that he would come to the table and announce to his parents--he also had, he had two sisters and a brother.  He would come to the table and announce to his parents, "I think we should all go to Atlantic City."  And my grandmother would say, "We don't have a dime.  You know, how are we going to go to Atlantic City?"  He said--and his sisters would laugh at him.  And they would just laugh and laugh and laugh.  And he would get so furious that he would pound his fist on the table, until all the china was hopping around.  And my grandmother said had that been any other of her children, my grandfather would have given him a good whack.  She said all my grandfather did was reach across the table and say, "Now, Harvey, Harvey, calm down."  (Laughter).  He said for some reason, his parents chose him very early on as being sort of like a... I don't know.  He had kind of like a special privilege in this household.  He was much shorter than his brother.  His brother was over six feet tall; his brother was a great athlete, he was a wonderful baseball player.  And my father was, I don't know, about 5'9 maybe.  And, you know, he was a good athlete, but he wasn't like my uncle.  So, he decided very early on that what he was going to get, he was going to get from up here.  And he graduated from West Philadelphia High School and went to Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania].  Got a job in the post office, which was a great job in those days, and decided to go to law school at night, and went to Temple Law School [now the Temple University Beasley School of Law in Philadelphia].  And he says now--I mean he says, When I was growing up he told me that he didn't tell my mother, but he quit his job at the post office so he could study full time for the bar.  He said it was only after he passed the bar that he told my mother that he had done this.  (Laughter).  But he was also a risk-taker.  He understood that, you know, judiciously, every now and then, you had to push the edge.  So, I always found that, I always found my father and his life very heroic.
Story_ID: 48208
Speaker 1: Dr. Campbell, how did your parents [Elaine Schmidt and Harvey Schmidt] meet?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Your mother was in New Jersey.  Did she--
Speaker 2: She went to school in Virginia.  She went to--this is terrible.  I don't remember the name of the school that she went to.  But she was in school with the woman who became my aunt, who married my father's brother.  And they were dating.  And she said, "You know, Eddie has a brother, and I'd like you to meet him."  And so, she introduced them to--she introduced my mother to my father, and they started dating.
Speaker 1: So, they met actually in Virginia?  Or did they--?
Speaker 2: They met--because my uncle was dating my, what would become his future wife.  So, he brought my father with him to meet this young lady, who turned out to be my mother.
Speaker 1: Now, you--give me your siblings' names, and where you sit in the whole--
Speaker 2: My oldest sister is Barbara, Barbara Schmidt Vance.  I was next, and then my brother is Harvey Schmidt as well.
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did your parents-- did they come...?  I mean, I know your father was from Philadelphia.  Is that--?
Speaker 2: They married in Virginia.  He came to Amelia, and they got married in Virginia, and he took her back to Philadelphia with him.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about her--?  Oh, she was from-- she had already been raised.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when--tell us--
Speaker 2: And by the way, when he took her up, they moved next door to his brother and his brother's wife, who introduced them.  So, they sort of had a nice little family package right there.  I grew up living next door to them.
Speaker 1: So, it was like a little compound.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, definitely.  (Laughter).  And it only grew over the years.
Speaker 1: That's good, that's nice, though.  You know, people are wanting to come together right now like that.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Story_ID: 48209
Speaker 1: So, tell me what your earliest memory of growing up would be, that you can think of.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what--my mother [Elaine Schmidt] and father [Harvey Schmidt] were like this rock to us.  They were like this immovable rock.  I mean, they were always there, always together.  And it was clear to me that he was absolutely head over heels in love with her, and that she thought that he was the sun, the moon, the earth, you know, etc.  She just thought he could do no wrong whatsoever.  My aunt used to say, "You can say anything bad about anybody, but don't say a word about Harvey to Elaine."  And so, that, that, I realize now as an adult looking back to that.  That gave me his wonderful kind of nice comfortable sense of, you know, the world being okay, even when a lot of things were happening outside that were in turmoil or in upheaval.  And, you know, my earliest recollection always were scenes around the dinner table, the whole family.  My house was like Grand Central Station--the whole family coming over on Sundays, going to visit my grandparents, Elizabeth Schmidt and Edward Schmidt; trips to Virginia.  He'd pile us in the car and we'd go down to Virginia, to Amelia, to visit my maternal grandparents [Watsey Harris and Marry Harris].  Most of what I remember are family scenes.
Story_ID: 48210
Speaker 1: And was your--tell me about family life, though.  What was it, what was it like?  I mean, I know you said your house was like Grand Central Station.  But what was family life like?
Speaker 2: My father [Harvey Schmidt] was a real character.  And by that, I mean he had a very, very clear sense of the way things should be.  He had a very clear sense of the way the house should be organized, of your manners at the table, of the way you were supposed to speak to him, to each other.  If I was on the telephone, you know, chewing the fat with my friends, you know, he would correct me.  I mean, there was--everything had a kind of an appropriateness and a decorum about it.  He was also incredibly demanding, on me in particular.  And not as much on my sister or my brother, but on me academically.  If it had an assignment to do, or I had to give a speech, I had to stand in front of him in the morning and I had to give that speech two, three, four, or five times, until it was exactly right.  And if I brought a report card home and it was four A's and a B, he would say, "That's very good.  Now, what about this B?"  His expectations were so, always so high for me.  And his, his partners in his law firm said that he used to take my report cards to work, and he'd put them in front of his desk.  And he had them propped up, so that you almost like couldn't see his face, because he'd have my report card with all these A's on it.  And he says his partner would say, "Oh, is that Mary's report card?"  And he would look up and say, "Oh," like, you know, "You noticed it."  (Laughter).  And right at the time, I didn't realize that he was doing this--that he was taking--because he was very demanding with me.  But I didn't realize that he was then taking it to work, to kind of show off.  But that was a source of pride for him.  But it was also--he clearly made a decision that, "Okay, I expect you to really work as hard as you possibly can, and to achieve."  So that was, that was instilled very, very early on.
Story_ID: 48211
Speaker 1: And what were you like as a young child?
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you a story, because it conveys I think what adults saw in me.  My father [Harvey Schmidt] had great, wonderful, wonderful secretaries.  They were very incredibly skilled and competent.  And they took incredibly good care of him.  And I remember going to his office once; I think was about four years old.  And the secretary has told me this story so many times that I can sort of repeat it with my eyes closed.  She said I had a little bonnet on, and a beautiful little sort of princess coat, you know, a little double-breasted coat.  And she said she looked at me, and she thought, "Oh, she's so sweet," and just put her arms around me and picked me up.  And she said she was just hugging me and hugging me.  And she said she heard this little voice say, "You can put me down now."  And she said she put me down.  (Laughter).  I've been told I've always had this incredible sense of like being very clear about my boundaries, and very clear about who can cross those boundaries and who can't.  My husband [George Schmidt] calls it "the razor," that's his term for it.  He said when people get too close, or they look as though they're transgressing, I come down with this attitude that's like a razor.  But that must have been apparent very early on.  (Laughter).  I think under it, I'm a very warm person.  But there's no question, I understand very clearly now that I do have, and can, have a sense of keeping those boundaries intact.
Speaker 1: If you had a conversation--because your father's still alive.
Speaker 2: He is.  Yes, he's 87.
Speaker 1: Have you ever had a conversation with him about what he saw in you at that time?  He--obviously, you singled it out.  But what did he see in you?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Elaine Schmidt]--he never told me, but my mother did.  My mother said that very early on, I stuttered uncontrollably.  And she took me to the doctors, and she said she was so worried.  And she said, "You know, what's wrong?  Do I have to, you know, do I have to get some special tutoring for her?"  He said, "You know, well, just get a little speech therapy."  He said, "But don't worry about it."  And he--I don't know if he told her this to make her feel better, or what.  But he said to her, "You know, she's a very talented little girl.  And she's going to be--you're going to be so proud of her."  And my mother spent so much time with me as I--when I was little--in first grade, second grade, third grade, with homework, reading to me, taking me to museums.  I mean it was--somehow she... I don't know.  She took what those doctors said as some kind of prophecy or something.  And frankly, you know, what you put in, you get back.  And over time, I clearly was, I was an achiever.  I mean, you know, talk about over-achiever, you'll find my name right there in the dictionary under that word.  I mean, I was driven.  I was driven in school--in elementary school, in junior high, in high school--just always I had to, I had this sense that I can be the best, or I can be one of the best.  There was that in me, but I certainly think that my parents instilled that as well.
Story_ID: 48212
Speaker 1: And you... when... tell me about the elementary school you went to.
Speaker 2: Henry Charles Lea School in West Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And that's where you're from, originally.  Was it West Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the community like that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting, because the Henry Charles Lea School was not the school in my neighborhood.  My parents forged somebody's address to get us--I mean it was common practice, right, to get us out of the neighborhood that we were in to go to a better school.  And we actually had to walk quite a long distance to get to the Lea School.  And it was out of our neighborhood, but it was a superb school; it was a really good school then.  And so, they were willing to go to extraordinary means in order to make sure we got a good education.  And that was just one example.
Speaker 1: You know, I want to take you back, before I go, you know, further into your schooling and your family.  But before I even ask that question, did you have a sense that you were from a privileged background?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I--there were a sequence of events in my life that made it very clear.  One is where my mother [Elaine Schmidt] took me to buy my clothes.  And we would go to places like Saks Fifth Avenue, or whatever, and I would have these, like I said, these lovely little outfits.  My uncle, who was my godfather, used to buy me these little princess dresses that laced here.  You know, you had a little bodice on them, and they tied and they flared out.  And I had these--my sister and I had these skirts that had big spiders and butterflies.  And we had gorgeous, lovely little outfits.  And so, that immediately sort of conveys to you and to the world that there's--you're a certain manner of privilege.  The second thing that happened is that my father--when I was ten years old, my father decided to run for [U.S.] Congressman.  Now, this is something that not too many black people did back in 1957.  The firm that he was in had gotten together--all the lawyers had gotten together and decided it was time for a black candidate.  And they actually kind of discussed and took a vote among themselves, who would make the best candidate, and decided it was my father... he's got a picture perfect family and...  And he engaged in what became an extremely vituperative campaign.  Robert [N.C.] Nix [Sr.] was put up against him.  When they saw that this was sort of inevitable, that he was, there was going to be a black candidate, the [Democratic] Party put Nix up against him so that there would be--if there had to be a black candidate, there would be a party-supported one.  And my father lost, lost a lot of money.  And his law firm dismantled, because they felt that he had become toxic.  And they re-assembled without him.  So, as a result of that, what I--what we personally--my family experienced--was a very dramatic loss--you know, a lot of those material goodies.  And the thing that I remember is that we stopped shopping at Saks and started shopping at Lerner's (Laughter), which was a very different experience.  And I remember the first time I put those clothes in the washing machine.  And I took them out, and I said, "This is not what I had in mind."  (Laughter).  It was very funny, because my father took us all together--took the family together and said, "The next year or two is going to be a little tough for us.  We're going to go through a rough patch."  He said, "But we're going to get out of this."  Now, in fact, it was probably the next four or five years that were rough.  But he seemed so confident about the fact that we were going to get through this, that I felt, "Okay, alright.  Well, if that's what Daddy says.  You know, he's the, he's the big cheese in the family."  During that time, my grandmother and grandfather came to live with us, so the compound got bigger.  My aunt and her daughter came to live with us.  And then I had a cousin who came to live with us.  So in order to sort of manage this time, we had a lot of people living... a lot of people going out to work, and sort of supporting the household at that time.  And we indeed got through that.
Story_ID: 48213
Speaker 1: Because at the end of that period, at the end of about four years, he [Campbell's father, Harvey Schmidt] was appointed the head of the Community Legal Services.  And now, we're really into the Civil Rights era.  I mean, '57' [1957], the Civil Rights era was just beginning.  It was right after the Montgomery boycott, etc.  But now, we're really deep into the Civil Rights Movement.  And my father made a lot of bold moves as the head of the Community Legal Services.  He sued [Frank] Rizzo--he was then the Chief of Police--for police brutality, when they--a policeman had been shot and killed.  And Rizzo went through North Philadelphia and made very black person come out of their house, and he searched them.  So, my father sued him for illegal search.  There had been another time when a lot of protesters were exiting the Board of Education, and the police became violent.  And a lot of very innocent people were clubbed and assaulted, etc. by the police, and he sued them for that.  And he won those cases.  And he became--all of a sudden instead of being this toxic presence for having, you know, dared to run as a Congressman [in 1957]--all of a sudden in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement, he now became an activist and a political hero.  And soon after that, by the time I started going to college, he was appointed a judge.  So, I watched my family's fortunes go from here to here to--back up to here.  And I said, "You know, that's life."
Story_ID: 48214
Speaker 1: Now, you said when he [Campbell's father, Harvey Schmidt] first ran for Congress, did you say you were seven?
Speaker 2: Ten.  It was in 1957--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was ten.
Speaker 1: So, you were ten, okay.  And there was no--did the family feel protected?  You didn't feel ostracized or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, please.  I'd walk down the street, and people would say to me, "Your father was a fool.  He was a goddamn fool, and..."  And I would say, "You know, you certainly don't know what you're talking about."  To me, I--he always was for me this extraordinary--mind, presence...  He, when I--when we were growing up, he said to us--I'll give you an example of some of the things he said to us that have been really remarkable.  He said to us back in the fifties, "You know, the Hispanic presence is going to be really big in this country.  I'm going to learn Spanish."  And he did, to expand the opportunities in his law practice.  We all said, "Oh, please, you've got to be kidding."  Well, now, I think he was kind of right.  I remember him bringing in vats of something he called yogurt.  And we used to laugh, "Look at this stuff.  Who's going to eat this stuff?"  And he invested in a firm, a little company called Dannon, right?  Go figure, I don't know how he knew.  When I was about to go off to college, he was studying yet another language.  It was Arabic, because he thought that the Arab world would begin to have some importance.  This man had the most incredible mind.  He could read things, he could put things together, he could just figure out things long before they happened.  When I was in high school, he gave me James Baldwin.  He said, "You read this man, he's really important."  When Malcolm X was assassinated [1965], he said to me, "We've lost one of our great leaders."  I said, "My father's lost his mind for real now."  He just understood things.  He just had this incredible mind, this incredible capacity to look, to listen--to just figure it all out.  And I was--and also he was fearless.  He was so bold.  He would--if a shopkeeper tried to cheat us, and we'd come home and say "Oh, Daddy, he cheated us out of our money."  He'd walk right back up to the store with us and get our money back.  When I was trying to go to college and they told me, "Oh, here are the schools you can go to Mary Elizabeth are Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania], West Chester [University of Pennsylvania], and Howard [University].  My father said, "Yeah, but you made straight A's, and you got this on your SAT's, and this on the Merit, and this...  So, he went back up to the school.  He went up to the school with me in the summertime, because that was the only time they would give him an appointment.  And he said to the assistant principal, he said, "I want to see all of Mary's records--every report card, every test score, every statistical evidence of her work here."  So, she hauls out--from ninth, tenth and eleventh grade--and she puts it out.  And so he looks over it, and takes great care and great time.  And he has the assistant principal look at it.  He said, "Now, based on this evidence..."  He's an attorney, right?  "Based on this evidence, tell me where's she qualified to go to school?"  And the woman said, "Vassar, Barnard, Swarthmore, Mount Holyoke."  He said, "Okay, fine, that's where we're going to apply."  And that for me just sort of--whatever anybody else was saying about him, his whole presence was just so big, it overshadowed it.
Story_ID: 48215
Speaker 1: [tape starts mid-sentence] called "Club 13," and those were her, those were her real buddies, and they all stuck together.  And my father belonged to a men's club called--two men's clubs--one called "Los Hermanos," and another one called "Club 15."  And you know, back in those days, there were social clubs that really meant a lot.  These were the, these are the bases around which people got together.  They socialized, they had parties, they had events, picnics, etc.  And my parents stayed active in their social clubs during this whole time.  But there's no question that when he became, when he was appointed a judge, his circle of friends expanded immediately. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And you were--because Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]even...  What is sort of amazing... it's... you know, it was the place that the Jack and Jill was started.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And the place that the Links was started.  It was... (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, very much a place like that--yes, indeed.  Now, my sister and I very briefly remembers the Jack and Jill.  This is when we were young, before he ran.  And we hated it.  We just, it just didn't work for us.  I was in a club though, called the "Sweet Kittens."  The Sweet Kittens... that was the name of the club.  These were mostly the daughters of the women who were in Club 13.  And recently, they tried to have a Sweet Kittens reunion.  I said, "No, I don't think I can.  I don't think I'm up to that."  (Laughter).  But it was, I mean, it was, I think the intent was very well-meaning.  And that is, to provide a way for children and their families to get together and meet each other and socialize, and have a, have a, you know, a sense of community with each other.
Story_ID: 48216
Speaker 1: Now, who, where did you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: Well, the [Henry C.] Lea School went up to eighth grade.  And then in eighth grade I left and went to Girls High [now Philadelphia High School for Girls].  And Girls High, that's ninth through 12th grade.
Speaker 1: That's where you met, you met your future husband [HM George Campbell]?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was 13 years old, and I had seen him... you know, we had to take the same subway home.  And so, I'd see him on the subway.  And he just looked so cool.  He always had a toothpick in his mouth.  He had all these freckles, you know, which was really distinctive.  And he wore these shoes, these Cuban shoes that laced up in the back.  I thought that that was really cool.  And we went to a party.  My cousin and friend and I went to a party, and he was there at the party.  And he walks right up to us and says, "My name is George, what's your name?"  And we both--all three of us sat there like little dopes, and said, "My name is Sheila."  "My name's Mary."  "My name's Gail."  That's how I met him.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's cute.  Because he went to Boys--he was a--
Speaker 2: He went to Central High School.
Speaker 1: Central High School.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was right across the field from Girls High, yep.
Story_ID: 48217
Speaker 1: Now, at this point and time--well, let me go back.  You, did you show a proclivity for, you know, reading and writing at that... you know, early on?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were you doing then?
Speaker 2: I was always a good student.  From the moment I got in school, I said, "Ooh, I can, here's something I can do really well."  I wrote, and I read all the time, all the time.  The tease around my house is that "Mary's always got her head in a book."  And I did.  I would read walking down the street, or at least try.  I always had leadership positions in school.  You know, if they elected class president... and, you know, I'd get elected.  So, I loved having leadership positions.  At Girls High [now Philadelphia High School for Girls], it was great.  Because when you're at an all girls' school, all the women are expected to be the ones who are in charge.  So, you don't have any guys to compete with.  And I think if I were to have had a daughter, I'd probably would send my daughter to an all girls' school for that reason.
Story_ID: 48218
Speaker 1: And did you know early on what you wanted to be?  Did you have certain dreams or aspirations early on about what you wanted?
Speaker 2: Well, my father wanted me to be a lawyer.  So, I thought that sounded pretty good.  You know, I knew I wanted to have some kind of professional life.  But honestly beyond teacher, doctor, and lawyer, I didn't really know many other professions.  Those were the professions that were kind of available.  So, you know, lawyer sounded good to me.  And when I went to college, I majored in political science for about five minutes, and realized that this really wasn't what I wanted to do.  And when I was in college, I had an art history professor that really awakened me to sort of the breadth and depth of cultural issues, and particularly through painting and sculpture.  But it wasn't just looking at the painting and sculpture, but it was also reading the literature and the poetry, and understanding the ideas that were current and how they all fit together.  I loved that, loved it.  And although I was an English literature major finally--that was my declared major--I knew that if I went to graduate school, I would go to graduate school in art history.
Speaker 1: So did your--did you have any introduction to the arts?  I know you said your mother took you to things.  Was, but did that start early in life, or did it really start at school?
Speaker 2: I played piano for many years.  I played the cello.  I was good enough at least to get into the All-School...All-City Orchestra.  So, I had an interest in music.  I loved to go to museums.  I could just go to the Philadelphia Museum and walk around, you know, just sort of walk up and down the halls by myself.  When I met [HM] George [Campbell], we both discovered we loved going to films, and would go to several of them in one day.  But all those things were like discoveries--you know, you've got the music.  Then you've got the museums, and then you got films, and you discovered poetry--that was another big discovery.  Oh, poetry, that's a whole other world, a whole other way of thinking about language.  And so each one of these was like a, you know, a new discovery.
Story_ID: 48219
Speaker 1: And were there other things in... at sort of your high school period... were there other things forming you at that time?  You know, or other people who were influencing you outside of your family?
Speaker 2: Well, let's start with other things.  Because the big thing was the Civil Rights Movement.  That was such an enormous thing for us.  We used to sit around the table and talk about [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and Thurgood Marshall.  I remember in fifth grade, I had a teacher.  She was the mother of Jacqueline Susann, who was the novelist.  And she was talking to us, and out of the blue, she said, "You know, there are some Negroes who have done good things."  And she says to me, "Mary, stand up and tell us some."  Why did she pick...?  So, I stood up, and I started on this list.  And after a while, she said, "Okay, okay, okay, okay.  Sit down, sit down--sit down."  I had a list that was from here to, you know, China; I had all these things.  And so, then there was a lot of discussion around our house about what Thurgood Marshall was doing, and this and that.  And, you know, so that was important.  And my father was so evidently involved in that.  When I became Cultural Affairs Commissioner, I got a letter from a woman who said, "When you were in fifth grade, I came to your school.  And I was the first black teacher there."  She said, "You may not know this, but your teacher..." her name was Mrs. Rothenberg, "...invited me to come in to see this incredible little Negro girl."  She said, "If I'm not mistaken, your father [Harvey Schmidt] ran for Congressman."  She said, "When I read that you had become Cultural Affairs Commissioner of New York City [New York], I was so proud."  She said, "My heart almost burst."  She said, "I knew you were meant to do something special."  I just thought I would just die.  I just thought--I mean, so this might, might...  What my father was doing, even though I caught hell from some people, was recognized also by other people as being really a monumental step.  And I kind of--maybe I didn't know all of the reasons why, but I knew that he was doing something that was really pretty extraordinary.  So, this whole Civil Rights Movement just was important.  And as we got older, particularly for [HM] George [Campbell] and me--and we were thinking about what we were going to do with our lives--where would he ever get the idea to become a theoretical particle physicist?  You know, I mean, all of a sudden there were possibilities that didn't exist before.  So, I think that was the single most important thing for us--that the sense of possibility that kind of opened up... "I can do anything, I can be anything.  I don't have to respect those old constraints."
Story_ID: 48220
Speaker 1: And I had a model anyway of somebody who didn't respect those old constraints.  So, in terms of other people, I'd say my sister [Barbara Vance].  Now, my sister was bold and fearless in a way that was very different from my father.  My sister--if it was a rule, my sister could figure out how to break it.  If there was a way of getting out of her punishment, because she often found herself on punishment--she was, she loved to break the rules--she could find a way to do it.  And I loved to be with my sister, because she just had a sense of adventure and risk-taking, and sort of just a love of life that I just, I wish I could have had.  And so, I figured if I stayed close to her, I could at least get some of it vicariously.  So, she was, she was an important person.  And we, I learned to be very--I learned what loyalty was.  I learned, I think, what it was to have a close relationship with someone.  I learned how to depend and trust somebody from, you know, just being with my sister.  And to this day, we're extremely, extremely close.  Although she did tell me when I was young growing up, that I was adopted.  And she said, "And if you ask Mommy and Daddy, they're not going to tell you, because they don't want to hurt your feelings."  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's cute.  She's probably thinking, "She's getting (unclear), I'll fix her."
Story_ID: 48221
Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing Swarthmore [College], though?  You know, you had told the story of your father [Harvey Schmidt] taking, you know, going to school and saying, you know, "These are her grades, you know, what school do you think she's entitled to go to?"
Speaker 2: In those days--well, first of all, I wanted a small college.  So except for, I think for the University of Pennsylvania, I applied to Vassar and to Swarthmore, and I think maybe Mount Holyoke, I'm not sure.  But in those days, Swarthmore was regarded as the absolute A, number one college, and the most difficult college to get into in the country.  And I said, "That's the one I want.  That's the one I'm going to apply for."  Also, when I went up for an interview with them, and I looked around at the campus, and I looked and I listened to them talk about what they thought about sort of the life of the mind, it all sounded very appealing to me.  And it was a Quaker college, so it had very, very strong values that were clearly articulated.  You know, you have to remember now we're moving towards the war in Vietnam--a very clear sense of the sort of right and wrong of fighting in a war.  It seemed to have a real conscience about the Civil Rights Movement, though when I got there, I wished they had more.  So, there were a lot of things about the school as I learned more about it that seemed to be a fit.  My experience when I got there was one of total culture shock.  First of all I had--the environment was small.  There were only thirteen hundred students at that time.  So I had, you know, come from a large city, a large high school--you know, just a very, very selective group.  So, I didn't, I didn't have that kind of range of people to sort of interact with.  It seemed to be, like, very sort of precious--sort of hot house flowers, and very intense, and also very--it turns out, very isolated from everything that was happening outside.  This is a very bucolic campus where, you know, the campus itself is an arboretum.  And it just seemed to be so totally divorced from what I would think of as real life.  So, I really, I really struggled with my experience.  I did well academically, but I had a hard time understanding how I fit socially.  I was also dating [HM] George [Campbell], so I was distracted.  I wasn't spending probably as much time as others were on campus.  I had a lot of reasons to come back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] often.  And finally, after my first year, I lived in Philadelphia and I commuted to campus.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got special... I actually went to the Dean of Women.  Remember those days when you had Dean of Women?  And I said that I was going to leave, I was going to transfer to Penn.  Because this little, you know, suburban experience was not for me, I wanted to be back in the city.  And the dean had a wonderful, she had a wonderful southern accent.  And she said, "Well, Mary Elizabeth, we sho' hate to lose you."  She said, "What would make you stay?"  And I said, "Well, look.  If I could live off campus..." because I knew that was impossible.  So, I said something that was going to be really impossible.  I said, "Well, if I can live off campus and commute in, then I guess I would stay."  She said, "Well then that's what we'll do."  So, I stayed.
Story_ID: 48222
Speaker 1: And how do you think that experience there [Swarthmore College] sort of formed you?  I mean, you know, in that...?  And how many blacks were there at the time you were there?
Speaker 2: Now, that's an interesting question.  Prior to our class, our class arrival, they were only accepting two or three blacks a year.  The year that I came was the year they decided in Admissions they would accept all of the qualified black people who applied.  So, there were only ten or twenty of us.  And that, for them, was a culture shock as well.  And it was my class--I graduated in 1969, but I left--my senior year I left and spent... in Syracuse [New York], because [HM] George [Campbell] had started graduate school.  In that year, the black students of course took over the administration building.  The president was upstairs waiting to meet with them.  He had a heart attack and died, and it became a big national issue.  It was on the cover of Life Magazine.  There was an article written using Swarthmore kind of as a symbol of how difficult this whole business of integration was, and how even with the best intentions, with the most liberal colleges, we're not quite prepared for the tasks that they had taken on.  So, my class became a very historic presence at Swarthmore College.  But, you know, so it was, it wasn't--as it turns out, it wasn't only my sense of individual difficulty.  It was, in fact, a very difficult challenge that the college and those of us who came were undertaking.
Speaker 1: And you, the people who were there--the blacks who were there before you--I mean, this is a huge class that's coming in, compared to what...  Was there any--?
Speaker 2: They were a very distinguished group.  I mean, there's Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot... or Lightfoot Lawrence [sic, Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot], I'm forgetting her name, the MacArthur Fellow who's at Harvard [University].  There was Fania Davis, the sister of [HM] Angela Davis.  There was [HM] Jack White, who is now a very distinguished correspondent, I think with either Time or Newsweek Magazine [sic, Time Magazine].  I mean there were only a few of them, but they were, you know, like really very carefully selected, and very accomplished young people.  And all the ones that--almost all the ones that I knew of that were there have kind of gone on to very, you know, distinguished careers.
Story_ID: 48223
Speaker 1: Now, do you--so, you're commuting... you are commuting back and forth [from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to Swarthmore College]?
Speaker 2: I'm commuting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, were you a part really of campus life at that point in your career?  Are you--?
Speaker 2: Let me give you an example of how un-apart I was.  In April of 1968, of course, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] gets assassinated.  I'm at home in Philadelphia doing an assignment, an art history assignment.  My brother-in-law has just started to do news broadcasting.  He calls me up, because he's just read over the tickertape that King's been shot, has been assassinated, and he tells me.  And so, I stop my assignment.  [HM] George [Campbell] and I rush out to a friend's house, and all of our friends start to gather.  And we stayed up all night long talking about this.  People are in the streets weeping.  It's just--you know, it's a huge event in Philadelphia, right?  The next morning, I get up to go to school.  And I come outside--I lived at 40th and Spring Garden Street.  And I walk out to catch the bus to go out to Swarthmore, and there are police tanks in the street.  You know, [Chief of Police Frank] Rizzo had bought these urban, what he called these urban tanks, and he had police tanks in the street.  And there were men--there were police on the roofs of the stores with machine guns drawn, standing there.  You know, and I was shaking, I was absolutely terrified.  And it was, it was just so eerie.  It was like a, looked like a military takeover.  So I get out, I get out to Swarthmore, get there on the campus.  And of course, the campus is perfectly idyllic, every leaf in place.  People are playing Frisbee, you know.  So, I go into my class and I sit down.  My professor says, "So, turn in your assignments."  And I raised my hand.  I said, "I don't have mine."  And one of my classmates turns to me and says, "Why not?"  One of my classmates, right.  And I said, "You know, King was assassinated."  And she says, "So what?"  And it was like I could feel, I could like feel the distance kind of like going between...  It was like a Grand Canyon was opening up.  And I said, "You know..." and I didn't even get angry at her.  I said, you know, it's like she has not a clue of what this experience--what this event--has meant.  Not just for me, but for my neighborhood, my community, for the people in the, other people in this country.  I mean, we bring...  I said, this is... and I kind of marveled at that.  I said, "This is really interesting.  We're really different."  And at the time, I didn't quite know how to deal with that.  But I think that was such an important moment for me.  Not to get pissed or angry or indignant, or self-righteous about that, but to really understand that there are differences.  And so, if the distance between us is really that great, we have to make an incredible effort to cross it--you know, to get over to her side, and she to get over to mine.  I had no--and again, as I said, at that point I had no idea how you went about doing that.  But I said, "This is really real.  This is not just somebody with a bad attitude or any of that.  This is just something that is."  And so that was--and that kind of characterized a lot of my experience at Swarthmore.
Speaker 1: Now, this--what year was that?  Was that your--
Speaker 2: Sixty-Eight [1968].  That was my--
Speaker 1: Sophomore?
Speaker 2: Junior year.
Speaker 1: Junior year, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was the year I got--I got married in August of '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 48224
Speaker 1: Now, the other question I have for you--because you're studying art history [at Swarthmore College].  You've decided that this is sort of your passion, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, art history is primarily Euro-centeric, right?
Speaker 2: At that time.  Not only was it Euro-centric, but art history didn't even bother about American art.  American art wasn't even good enough to be considered, let alone African American art.  So, we had a professor who was from Great Britain who was a little bit of a quote, "radical" who at least introduced to us a lot of American artists.  But you couldn't read about them at that time in the art history text; there was very little written.  And I shouldn't say you couldn't; there was some text written, but not very much at all.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking you wanted to do, you know, with your art history background?  What were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I had no idea.  And, and, and the beauty of that for me--to going to Swarthmore--was that I had this opportunity just to jump into something because I liked it, and it was wonderful, and I can make these connections, and think about ideas.  And [HM] George [Campbell] and I would talk about them.  I would talk--you know, he knew all about what was going on in physics at that time.  And you know, we could--you know, we just enjoyed it.  And there was not--I don't think either one of us had any sense of how it could be used, or politically what it was going to do, or how it was going to change the world or anything.  But we just liked, we just enjoyed, just enjoyed sort of the, I don't know, the intellectual play of it.
Story_ID: 48225
Speaker 1: And then you move to Syracuse [New York], right?
Speaker 2: We [Mary and HM George Campbell] got married--
Speaker 1: Married.
Speaker 2: --and the next day moved to Syracuse, right.
Speaker 1: And he was in graduate school?
Speaker 2: Was in graduate school.  We got married in August, moved to Syracuse.  In September he was awarded his conscientious objector status, and in October he was drafted.  So, immediately, he had to look for a place to do his alternative service.  So, one year after we were married---actually less than one year after we were married, we were in Zambia.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk about that experience.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Because I'm thinking, you know--I mean you've had... I won't say cloistered, but you've been in one sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, cloistered.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because I'd never been out of the country.  I'd never been out of the--I'd been to Atlantic City [New Jersey] and maybe, you know, Wildwood.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 48226
Speaker 1: So what was that experience like when you--?  I mean what are, what is your family saying?
Speaker 2: Well, my family always knew that--I mean, George and I were always regarded...  I mean, we'd been together for a long time.  I met George when I was 13, and we started to date when I was 16.  So, we'd been together for a long time.  And my family always knew that we were kind of the--we had our own map of the world.  They kind of accepted that, and bought that.  You know, I mean, here's this guy who's a physics major, and an art history major. And you know, like, who knows what they are going to do with their lives, you know?  And he wants to be a conscientious objector.  You know, yeah, right, okay.  I mean it was like, so, we were like so off the charts.  People kind of, kind of, you know, sort of embraced that in a kind of quirky, kind of idiosyncratic way.  So we, we kind of thought that, well, if you're going to be drafted, why not take this opportunity and do something like really out there?  And what have we always wanted to do?  We always wanted to go to Africa, wanted to go back and find our roots.  And we had this great--we really had this, you know, very naive, innocent dream about going back to the continent and sort of, with our little dashikis and afros.  And you know, sort of finding our brothers and sisters and being sort of re-united in the world.  And then we went back.  (Laughter.)  You know, we understood, we are not Africans; we may have an African lineage and heritage.  We are definitely Americans, and our culture is very different.  So the culture shock I got, going to Swarthmore [College], I got yet another one going to Zambia.  And for me, in the two years that I spent there I developed a real sort of like fervent sense that, okay, this is not really my home.  My home is back, you know, across the ocean.  And if it is my home, when I get back, I'm going to lay claim to it, and I will truly make it my home.  I will not feel disaffected or alienated, or on the margins, or on the outskirts; this is my true home.  I thought maybe I had a home over here, but guess what?  I realize it really isn't.  That is, and if it is, then it's got to me mine for real.  And that was another one of those sort of like revelations--okay, I understand this is what I've got to do now when I get back.  And so, that, that, for me that was the most important part of that experience.
Story_ID: 48227
Speaker 1: And so knowing that, it was easy to understand how somebody like Nelson Mandela, with the incredible depth and complexity that he brought to--and the sense of vision that he brought to it--I mean he--that was nurtured by a larger community of people who had, you know, had this as well.
Speaker 2: So, you arrived in Zambia well-researched, and you know, and with great anticipation.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And as I remember [HM] George [Campbell] saying in his interview, you--he got involved with the University [Nkumbi International College]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you got also involved with the community itself, right?
Speaker 1: Well, I taught English.  And for most of my students, English was the second language.  I taught English literature, and I taught it from what they called the A levels and the O levels.  So, this was basically British literature; it was Siegfried Sassoon.  I mean, they were talking about the changing seasons.  Seasons don't change.  They were talking about the oceans.  Zambia is landlocked.  I mean, the references, the literary references, were so bizarre.  But anyway, I taught English literature.  And I also taught health to the young women there, and I ran the library.  And so, that's what put me in touch with the community.
Speaker 2: Now, why do you say, you know, that you understood that--you know, that you... that experience taught you to a great--you know, that you were definitely an American, basically.
Speaker 1: Well, the reality is that--you know, it's pretty naive to believe that you're going to come from a country with all the--that saturated in modernity, and sort of all the 20th century luxuries into the middle of the bush and believe that you're going to find something that's compatible.  First of all, there's the issue of language.  I didn't speak their language, so that was certainly a huge gap.  The traditions of the country were completely unknown to me--the way the communities worked. For example, I think the whole time we were there, in two years, maybe there was one murder.  And when there was, it was accidental, and the family of the murderer had to make reparations directly to the family of the victim.  You know, unheard of in the United States.  The whole way a community formed...  When my son [Garikai Campbell] was born, I remember one day there was knocking at my door, and about six of my female students came in.  I said, "Hi, how are you?"  They said, "We've come for the child."  "You've come for the...?  They took my son and they went out with him.  Well, he didn't belong to me, he belonged to the community.  Well, I'm here to tell you that none of my other sons in the United States have ever been treated like that.  (Laughter).  So, I mean there were so many differences between the way the culture worked there, and mine.  And I said, okay, as much as I admire this, respect this, find it interesting--I come from someplace else.  And I had to figure out a way to connect myself to my true roots.  As I said, when I was in Swarthmore [College], I was feeling a little disaffected and a little, "Ugh, you know, I can't be bothered with these people.  They just don't know what's happening."  But I had to go back and say, "Okay, well, but this is where I live.  I have to just figure this out."  And I think the experience of being outside of the country and away--getting a little perspective and a little distance--actually helped me do that.  And it didn't happen as soon as I went back.  I think over a period, a long period of time, that it's continued I think right up to this day.  You know, over time, I felt more and more that I have as much to contribute as anyone, and I'm going to find a way and make that contribution.
Story_ID: 48228
Speaker 1: And did you--your mother [Elaine Schmidt] came over, right, when you were pregnant?
Speaker 2: She came to Europe.
Speaker 1: Europe, oh, that's right, okay.
Speaker 2: She came to Europe, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad [Harvey Schmidt] sent her to London.  George's mother [Lillian Britt Campbell] came to Paris, and then from Paris we went to London, and my mother came to London.  I'll never forget.  I had my first son [Garikai Campbell] with me, and it was her second grandchild, but my first son.  And she opened the door... Now, she hasn't seen me for a year and a half.  She opens the door, and she scoops the baby up in her arms.  She says, "Oh, look at that Sweetie Pie," and she goes dancing off.  I was like, "Hi, Mom."  (Laughter).  And, but you could see--this is what... she was so, just so thrilled that basically I think just to see the baby is fine and healthy.  And that means that we are too, and you know...  That, it was, she just felt... you could see she just felt so completed in that, embracing him.
Story_ID: 48229
Speaker 1: Were there things about the culture [in Zambia] that you really could not stand?  I mean, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean there was the treatment of women.  I mean, you know, there were--we would go to, you know, a little village gathering.  And the men would all be sort of sitting around having a smoke and drinking Chibuku, I think it was, or beer.  And the women would be out, you know, doing... with a baby on the back and one baby in the stomach.  And they'd be out, you know, doing the farming. And I'd say, "What is wrong with this picture?"  And the expectations of women--that they would assume so much of the manual labor and the service--really was very startling.  And the fact that the opportunities for women were so limited was also very startling.  And that was something I found very hard to swallow the whole time I was there.
Speaker 1: And [HM] George [Campbell]--it didn't cause any issues with your marriage, or anything like that?  There are no discussions or--
Speaker 2: Not there.  See, we lived on a compound.  We lived on a school whose faculty was almost overwhelmingly American.  So, a lot of the sort of culture of that school just brought all of its... you know, was brought over from the United States.
Story_ID: 48230
Speaker 1: Now, so, and your tour of duty is up, and you're back.  And so, do you go back?
Speaker 2: We go back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], collect our things, and go back to Syracuse [New York]; get a place, a new place in Syracuse.  And I'm now in graduate school.  I'm enrolled--I actually got accepted into graduate school.  But when [HM] George [Campbell] got drafted, the department agreed to defer my acceptance until I got back--my acceptance, and the most important thing, my assistanceship.  So, I come back, and I have an assistanceship to get a Master's degree in art history at Syracuse [University].  And George goes back.  So I think you were, he was--they were required by law, if you were drafted, to reserve his place in graduate school.
Speaker 1: So, he's, is he working...?  He's working on his Master's, or his Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: He's working on his Ph. D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's in a Ph.D. program, and I'm in a Master's program.
Speaker 1: In a Master's program.  Okay, you're both at Syracuse.  And what are your thoughts then about what you want to do?  And how have you guys changed, sort of?  Because you've been, you've had this sort of experience, and you're--
Speaker 2: Well, now we're parents.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You're parents, that's right, that's right.  I forgot, that's right.  That's right, that's right... that is right.
Speaker 2: And that was the biggest change.  I mean, that was a huge change.  Here we've been together from the age of 16 to the time we got married at 20.  And then I guess I was almost 22 when Garikai was born.  So, we had almost five, six years to... now all of a sudden, there's somebody else in the room.  And I feel the biggest adjustment was in coming from a very intense relationship that we had between the two of us, to making, you know, sort of now shifting roles and becoming parents, and then accommodating the role of parents to the life of impoverished graduate students.  (Laughter).  And that was, that was a real challenge, because we were poor.  I mean we were seriously, seriously poor.  And, but again, we had this sense of adventure about it.  George had this coffee table that he made, and some other furniture that he made. And I'm telling you, it really looked like he made it.  And we had, you know, a couch I think we had bought from a secondhand shop.  And, you know, but we were delighted, that was fine.  We had, our book shelves were made out of bricks, you know, and planks of wood.  You know how you put wood down and put the bricks...?  (Laughter.)  So, we had, I mean we had very--we were very resourceful in how we were able to put together things for our lives.  Our bed--I remember we didn't have a real headboard, or bedroom set.  We had, you know how you buy the metal frame?  We had a metal frame with a mattress (Laughter) and the box springs on it; that was our bed.  But, you know, we made do; it was fine.  It was just fine.
Story_ID: 48231
Speaker 1: And then when it's time--do you finish Syracuse [University] around the same time this is going on?
Speaker 2: What happens, he [HM George Campbell] finishes--let's see, where are we?  In '73' [1973], I got my Master's degree, and then I enrolled in the Ph.D. program.  And he finishes in '77' [1977].  And he gets his Ph.D., and fortunately we both got jobs.  I got a job as director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, and he got a job at Bell Laboratories.  So, I haven't finished my Ph.D. yet.  So in '77' [1977], I go off to work, he gets a job.  But in the meantime, in '76' [1976], my second son [Sekou Campbell] is born.  So, we have now have two children, and we finally have a job.  So, we--he and my two sons go to New Brunswick, New Jersey.  We kind of literally put our finger on a map, and found a place that was mutually inconvenient.  You know, he had to commute to Bell Labs, and I had to commute to New York.  So, we just--New Brunswick was exactly in the middle of those two spots.  So, he goes to New Brunswick and he finds this incredible Georgian house that is falling apart.  And so, we buy it.  And New Brunswick is the pits.  New Brunswick looks like it's about to fall off the edge of the earth.  I mean it's just--it has really had it, really had it.  But we have our own house, it belongs to us.  And George used to go to work every day.  He used to commute out to Holmdel, New Jersey; come home, take his clothes off immediately, put his work clothes on, and start renovating that house.  He re-did the floors, he did the shutters; he built the little cases for the radiator.  He painted the outside; he... just unbelievable.  He spruced that house up.  Over time, eventually we were able to hire some real workmen.  And they actually put some aluminum siding up and finished off the house really nicely with some landscaping and stuff, and just transformed this house into just the most beautiful, charming, place you could ever imagine.  And it really was--I must say for ten years we lived there in New Jersey.  And it was so special, because there was so much sweat equity that we both put into it.  But it was just, it was just really very, very special.
Speaker 1: So, you lived there the whole time you worked with the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 48232
Speaker 1: Now talk about what, what--at what time you're coming at the Studio Museum?  It's relatively still--
Speaker 2: It's on the, it's in the loft over Kentucky Fried Chicken and the liquor store--not on 125th Street, but on 5th Avenue, right off of 125th Street.  Given its location, it still had acquired quite an interesting reputation for doing really groundbreaking work, and really being the single most important place in the country that you could come and see African, African-American, and frankly, art of the Diaspora.  There had been some really wonderful shows that had been curated and done there.  It had a very vibrant Artist in Residency Program, and it had a program in the schools.  And earlier on, it had a very distinguished film program.  [HM] Julie Dash got her training as a filmmaker at the Studio Museum.  But that had long... that had gone since I... by the time I arrived, that was gone.  But when I arrived, financially, it was truly on its last legs.  The museum was--about half the funding came from the city, and half the funding came from the state, and about--I don't know, five percent, ten percent, from private sources which is--you know, you're dead in the water if you're dependent on government funding like that.  And, it had a deficit.  So, we were kind of living hand to mouth--no private, you know, foundation or corporation.  We really wanted to give very much to the museum.  There was no gift shop to speak of, there's no permanent collection.  And people were, you know, someone told me--a foundation person told me much later--people had pretty much written the museum off.  That's--hey, I was 29 years old, this is my first job; I said this was great.  (Laughter).  What did I know?  But I thought, I thought this was just the best opportunity I possibly could have.
Story_ID: 48233
Speaker 1: How did you hear about the job?
Speaker 2: When I was at Syracuse [University in Syracuse, New York]--and this kind of goes--you asked me a question earlier about my interest in art history, and what did I think I was going to do with it?  When I was in Syracuse, I had a professor who showed me a catalog of the works of Romare Bearden, and I thought I had opened a jewel box.  I went to see the show; I came to New York, and the show had traveled to the Studio Museum in Harlem.  And I walked in, and I fell in love.  I mean, just deeply, madly in love with this man's work.  It was so amazing.  I mean the craft of it, the imagery, the allusions that he made... literary and art historical allusions.  I said, "This is it.  I'm going to make African-American art my specialty."  I did a, we were doing a lecture on Jacob Lawrence; I did some more work on Bearden; I taught a course in African American art.  I did my, both my M.A. thesis and my Ph.D. thesis on Bearden.  So, I just--and then, of course, met Bearden... met Bearden.  I curated a show of his work at the Everson Museum [of Art] in Syracuse, New York.  And about a year after that show, Bearden called me up on the phone; it was in February of 1977.  He said, "Mary, I got just the job for you."  I said, "What?"  He said, "The Studio Museum is looking for an executive director, and you'd be great at that."  So, I went up and interviewed.  And the story is now that he was my most avid champion and advocate for the position.  And so, they appointed me executive director.  And I had had some curatorial experience at the Everson Museum; I had been a curator.  So I knew how a show went up, I knew how to run a register, I knew what a proprietor did.  I did--I knew how to make loans.  And this would be the basics of museum work.  But I didn't have a clue about budgets or finances, or any business--you know, the business side of running... or management, or managing people, or human relations, or personnel policies, or whatever.  But [HM] George [Campbell] was at Bell Labs, where they consciously chose people who they thought were going to be managers, and they trained them.  So, he was always going to seminars and lectures, and coming home with notebooks and...  And I, we would read them together.  And so, whatever course he was taking on how to manage, or how to administer, or how to... I was taking it too.  When he went to Yale School of Management and they invited the spouses up, I went for two or three days at the spouse... I went to classes with him... read all the materials.  I, I was going to know as much about managing as he did.  And it was kind of like we were both students of that together.  And that's literally how I learned administration, management, and finances, and all that stuff along the way.
Story_ID: 48234
Speaker 1: Now, also the whole process of really building an organization...  I mean, what shape was the board in at that point?  Or was it--?
Speaker 2: The board was going to be in very bad shape, because a bunch of them wanted to fire me after about two or three years.  And they should have.  I mean, I didn't know what in the world I was doing, I really didn't.  But I had--there were a core of people who thought that, you know, I had promise, (Laughter) and that, you know, with a little guidance I could get it.  And so, the board actually broke in two, and a whole bunch of people resigned from the board.  And someone very wise, Charles Shorter, whose father grew up next door to my father, and whose family I had known forever...  But now Charlie was here in New York [New York City, New York]; Charlie was on the board of the museum, and he gave me tremendous guidance, because he was a management consultant.  He gave me tremendous guidance on structuring a board of trustees, structuring a management--building a management structure, institution building.  That's what he did.  That's what he consulted people--he consulted on those issues.  And he gave me a lot of good tips on building, re-building that board.  And we put together a really spectacular--very focused board, in which we tried to make sure that everybody who joined had a very specific role or contribution to make to some aspect of the museum. Somebody sat on the finance committee, or this person sat on the collections committee, or this person sat on the personnel committee, or this person...  And those committees had very real roles in helping develop policy and governing structures, or financial constraints, or financial oversight, or whatever.  And so, that's infrastructure work.  I had a lot of help in doing that.  But then financially, I had a real stroke of luck.  I had applied to the Ford Foundation for money.  And they said "No, go away.  You don't qualify, we have nothing to give you.  Don't bother to..."  But they took so long to say no.  And I'll never forget, I showed [HM] George [Campbell] the letter.  I said, "George, look.  Isn't this a wonderful rejection letter?"  He said, "Mary, I don't know how you do it.  But if you can get excited over a rejection letter, I don't know."  I said, "Yeah, but you know, he could have just said no.  But he said..."  So, I called this guy who said no.  I think his name was Dick Shepard at Ford.  And I started talking to him, and so we talked.  And he had just lost his wife.  And he said, "Oh, you know, my wife's name was Mary."  I said, "Ohhh."  So, we talked a little more, and he learned that I went to Swarthmore [College].  He said, "You know, my wife went to Swarthmore."  I said, "Okay."  So, we talked a little more, and somehow it came out that I played the cello.  He said, "You know, my wife played the cello."  He said, "Do you want to meet?"  So, I met with this guy, and he said, "You know, we really can't give you any money."  But he said, "I'll tell you what I'm going to do.  I'm going to give you some good advice."  He gave--through the Ford Foundation, they contributed an architect, an engineer, a financial planning consultant.  There was one other person.  Oh, an attorney.  The attorney was Reginald Lewis.  Reginald Lewis came in one day, and he looked at...  You know, I sort of said, "Here are my dreams..."  I'm sitting here in this half bankrupt, you know, museum over a liquor store and a Kentucky Fried Chicken.  And I'm saying "Here are my dreams.  I want to buy a permanent building, and I want to have a permanent collection of building... you know, we want to do... you know, we want to be able to finance and sustain ourselves."  He says, "Here's what you do."  He said, "The Department of Housing and Urban Development has urban development action grants."  He said, "They are kind of, something that the [President Richard] Nixon administration had put together."  He said, "If you can find somebody to give you a building that you can appraise at a certain value--that counts as a private investment.  That private investment will qualify you for a federal loan, long-term loan.  The payout is 30 years at 3 percent interest."
Story_ID: 48235
Speaker 1: So, I took this idea back to the Ford Foundation.  And their consultant said to me, "You know, if you do that, Mary, we can get you a program related investment from Ford Foundation.  And that together will give you enough money.  If you can get the donation of a building, that will give you enough money to renovate the building, make it a museum, and get this whole thing started."  And over the next two or three years, that's exactly what we did.  We got the New York Bank for Savings to donate a building.  We went down to Washington and got the grant from HUD.  The grant from HUD gave us the--was what sparked the Ford Foundation to give us the program related investment.  And those things then made us viable to private donors.  Mrs. Astor, Chase Bank, Barclay Welfare Foundation, etc., Philip Morris started donating money to us.  And I remember someone came in one day; I can't remember who it was.  But someone came in one day, and they saw me with all these federal application papers piled up.  And said--because a federal grant like that is like endless, piled up all around.  And I'm working on this and I'm working on this.  And they said, "Mary, do you see any light at the end of the tunnel?"  I said, "You know, I'm just beginning to see just a little crack."  She said, "I sure hope you do."  She said, "Because you sure are working awfully hard on this."  And I remember looking up and being kind of surprised.  Because I was like--to me it's like, if this is what you have to do, this is what you have to do.  And to me it was like, I would do whatever it takes for this place to be successful, for this place to make it.  And it was kind of like, why would you do otherwise?  But we put all that stuff together.  And the thing that I've learned from that that was really important, is that there were a lot of people, like Reginald Lewis, like these financial analysts, like these architects, who were kind of like willing to give you advice.  And if you could sort of like take it from them, people are willing to help you.  I mean, it was interesting to me.  Being at the Studio Museum, it was one of the places where I kind of reached out to a lot of different people at different times during the time I was there.  And people would give you, would really help you, and sit down and give you advice if you were kind of willing to listen to them and they could see that you were willing to, you know, sort of really, you know, take their advice.  And so we put together this architecture, and that was sort of the core of how we financed getting out of that little loft and into a building.
Speaker 2: And that took over what period of time?
Speaker 1: The building was donated in 1979.  We moved into the renovated space in '80' [1980].  I'm sorry, we moved in in '81' [1981], but it was under renovation.  We had the opening exhibit in 1982.  So, it was like a three year period, from '79' [1979] to... '79' [1979], yeah, to '82' [1982].  That was the period of time that we took.
Speaker 2: So, this really happened--so your first two years were sort of rocky.  And then you get it together, you get saved sort of?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: I get another chance. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You get another chance and then you take off with it, in a big way.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And built, and we built this board of trustees [at the Studio Museum in Harlem] that really were very serious about wanting to have something very meaningful and very lasting.  And I would say from '82' [1982] until I left in '87' [1987], those were just phenomenal years for me.  Because we had an, our architect was [J.] Max Bond who did the interior of the museum.  The contractor was Cecil Sanders from Newark [New Jersey].  So, it was very much a sense of this being a place that was built with the expertise and wisdom of African Americans.  You know, the first shows were survey shows of African American art from, you know, from the past 200 years, and a one-man show of Charles [Wilbert] White and the [James] Van Der Zee photographs.  So there was--you know, I remember when it opened, [HM] Marcia Ann Gillespie, who had been the editor of Essence and was now at Ms. [Magazine] ... she walked in and said, "Girl, this is like going to church."  (Laughter).  It was--I mean the space that Max created was so--is, even now, is so beautiful and open, and just sort of--I mean, it was just beautiful.  And over the years we, you know, we had concerts, we had discussions and forums.  I mean, it was really a place, you know, that became very much a part of the life in the city.  And that to me was like--those were some of the best times that I've spent in New York, were those years at the Studio Museum.  Those were great.
Story_ID: 48236
Speaker 1: What were some of the things, I mean, the exhibits--all those exhibits are very important exhibits.  And so, were those the things that made you most proud of what you did, or the lives you sort of, you know, touched then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I mean even the exhibits we did back at 2033 5th Avenue [New York City, New York], when we were still on 5th Avenue--doing an exhibit, trying to discover where an artist's core resided, and bringing together the works that kind of made that manifest, and then being able to write a little essay about him or her, and get that published.  Because back in those days, we used to publish books that had staples down the side.  They weren't like that hardback Harlem Renaissance book.  But that was so gratifying; that was so gratifying.  And we were very fortunate.  Even back on 5th Avenue, we got great reviews.  And the New York Times, Hilton Kramer, who is now a very conservative critic, used to come up on a regular basis and give very careful considered reviews.  So, all of this to be, you know, sort of recognized and sort of validated, and you know, circulated out there, that really made all of this work very meaningful.  And then you get to meet all of these wonderful artists.  And we, you know, my husband-[HM] George [Campbell] and I both have established such wonderful relationships with them over the years and you know, built you know, a collection.  And back in those days, you know, the value on the marketplace of African American art was nothing, compared to what it is now.  I mean, it was amazing.  We could actually afford to buy fantastic artwork back then.  But that, all of that was exciting.  My children--we used to take Garikai and Sekou at that time--to their studios, and we'd just spend, we'd spend the whole day in the studio, just, you know, thinking about buying a piece.  We'd look at it for that day, and at the end of the day if we still liked it, you know, we bought it.  So, those, those were great days.
Story_ID: 48237
Speaker 1: [HM]Jean Moutoussamy-Ashe, Arthur Ashe's widow, recently held a reception, a book signing, in celebration of Roy Decarava's book, "The Sound I Saw."  And she, it was hosted in the home of Spike and Tanya Lee.  It was co-hosted by Ed Bradley, [HM] Gordon Davis and Wynton Marsalis, who played.  This is star studded, right?  So, Roy, of course, is one of great senior veterans of the art community, and he drew out just, I think, every artist you can imagine.  And my husband and I, [HM] George [Campbell] and I, walked in and it was like being back at the Studio Museum in Harlem.  It was amazing to us.  I think we knew almost every single person in that room.  And it struck me that that was because for certainly 20, 25 years maybe, the Studio Museum was the place where artists in our community knew they could go and find other artists--other artists, other curators, writers, critics.  They could find discussions about their work, they could find other artists' work on the wall.  And it was amazing how this was a very real community, for one, and how it has sustained itself over the years.  And to see all these people back together again, it was like, it was quite magical.  And so this, you know, the museum created a real community.  It was a home, it was a place to go to.  I think that one of the--somebody recently was remarking... asked me if I agreed or disagreed with the current philosophy of the Studio Museum.  I think Thelma Golden had used the term, "post black."  I said, "You know, it doesn't matter.  It doesn't matter."  I said, "What's really important is that she has, she's keeping the discourse alive, and she's keeping that discourse at the center of everybody's conversation.  So, the museum continues to be that place where you have to go if you want to be part of that conversation."  And I said, "That's what's been important about the museum all these years."  And the way it happened when I was there 25 years ago, was very different from the way Thelma and Lowery [Stokes Sims] are conducting it now.  But what's important is that they're conducting it, and they're keeping it alive and keeping the flame really, really hot.  So, to me that was what was important.
Story_ID: 48238
Speaker 1: Can you talk about just some of the lives you touched and the people... not... the artists who were impacted by the Studio Museum [in Harlem] during that ten year period.  You know, because--
Speaker 2: Right.  You know what I think?  I think all of those artists who came to the museum are so brilliant, and so talented, and so phenomenal, that even if there were not a Studio Museum, they somehow would have managed to keep doing their work.  Maybe not with the same overall impact that the museum I think permitted the work to have.  But I can't imagine that, you know, Romare Bearden would not have emerged, or Jake [Jacob] Lawrence.  I mean, they were emerged before there was a Studio Museum.  And an artist like Mel Edwards or Betty Sorman (ph.)... they were going to find ways of getting... and Faith Ringgold, and she's a perfect example.  They would find ways to get their work out there.  What I found most valuable about the Studio Museum were two things.  Well, actually three things.  Number one, it was a place where we developed museum professionals--where curators, and designers, and proprietors, and registrars were able to come in and get a level of training and expertise, and then go out and kind of almost sort of begin to replicate themselves in other areas; that's phenomenal.  And there's a long list of men and women who came through the museum in that regard, and who have gone on to have just spectacular careers.  The other thing that we did that has been really long-lasting, is that we created a literature in black American art.  Before that--and one of the things I remember Nathan Huggins said.  He was at Harvard [University], he was one of the early heads of the Black Studies program there.  And he said one of the things that was a deficiency with black American artists was that there was no material evidence.  There were no, there were very little...  You know, the literature was very inspiring and whatever, and what little there was, was not terribly in-depth and, you know, it was very cursory.  We began to create a literature, whether it was the Harlem Renaissance book, or the Myth and Metaphor book of Bearden ['Memory and Metaphor: The Art of Romare Bearden'], or the Book of Contemporary African-American Artists, or the Wilfrado Lam book that Lowery Sims wrote in conjunction with the show that was done.  All of these, you put them together, and you put them on a shelf, and you really have the evidence.  You have the bibliographies, you have the provenance, you have where these works--the collections these works are in.  You have biographies of the artists, and it's the basis then for people to do even more scholarship, and something to build on.  So that was really significant.  And the final thing is that--is this business that I said of creating a place in our culture and in our community where we can come together and have an open, candid conversation about who we are--what are relationship is to the rest of the world, and invite the rest of the world in to be part of that.  It was sort of, it was in a way like having church, but from an intellectual point of view.  And it was better in a way than school, because you didn't have to pay to get in.  You didn't have to pay very much to be there, and to be part of that educational process.  So in a funny way I think those things--as much if not in some cases more than the artists' careers--were actually the real value.  And finally, there's a place, a permanent place.  Twenty-five years ago, Harlem was a ruin.  I mean, physically it just wasn't happening.  There were vacant lots and there were boarded up houses.  And the fact that you take one of these buildings and you reclaim it, and you take an architect like Max Bond and you have him re-envision it, and you have it there--that was something.  And all around it was all this like, whatever.  Right across the street was the State Office building, and then a little bit later there was the Apollo [Theater] that got renovated.  And by golly, you go up there now, it looks like 14th Street.  You know, all... these kind of... it took a while, but things kind of grew up around it.  But there was a kind of physical clarity and presence that that museum brought to, just to that neighborhood.  And I think that's--for our community that was so devastated at that time, I think that was as important as anything.
Story_ID: 48239
Speaker 1: So, it's 1987.  Now, do you get tapped at that point, or are you looking to sort of--?
Speaker 2: I did something bodacious.  Bess Myerson had been the Cultural Affairs Commissioner [of New York City, New York], and she was indicted.  And because she was indicted, she had to step down; she had to resign from her post.  And the position had been vacant for about nine months.  And I remember we were all standing around at the Studio Museum [in Harlem] sort of shooting the breeze.  And we said, "Well, who do you think should be the Commissioner?"  "Who do you think should be the Commissioner?"  And I remember walking into my office, closing the door, and sitting down putting my hands on the desk, and saying, "You know, I could be the Commissioner."  I picked up the phone.  [HM] David Dinkins was then the [Manhattan] Borough president.  And I talked to his chief of staff, Barbara Fife.  And I said, "You know, Barbara, I don't expect Dinkins to endorse me or be my advocate, but I am asking that he put my hat in the ring."  Because I knew that if a Borough president says to the Mayor, "I want you to consider this candidate," out of courtesy, I'd have to get an interview.  So, that's what I did.  I got the interview and, you know, I go in.  And you can see that, like, the boredom on the face of the people who were interviewing there.  So I said, "What do I have to lose?  I have a great job.  I don't, you know, I don't care whether I get this or not."  So, I decided I was going to tell them exactly what I thought the Cultural Affairs Commissioner should do in the City of New York.  So, when I finished, she said, "Okay, your next interview is..."   So, I then met with another group of people, same thing.  Then I get a call and they say, "Tomorrow morning, you're meeting with the Mayor [Ed Koch]."  And I remember I called my friend, [HM] Gordon Davis, who had been Parks Commissioner, a very successful Parks Commissioner under Ed Koch.  I said, "David, you know, I'm supposed to be going in to meet the mayor.  I don't know whether I want this job."  He said, "Listen, you better decide right now.  If you go in there and have a meeting with the mayor, you have to go in knowing that you will... that you are going to take this job if it's offered to you."  And all of a sudden, I realized this is really serious.  I mean, you know, I have to really think about this.  I called my son, my first son [Garikai Campbell], my oldest son who is, he's at Swarthmore [College] now, right, okay.  He's at Swarthmore and he's a freshman, I believe.  And I tell him.  I said, "You know, I've got this possibility to go to, you know, to go into city government.  What do you think?"  He said, "Well, you know, Mom, I think that what you have to say about art and culture is really important."  And he said, "I think if you go into city government, you'll have a bigger platform, and more people can see you, and more people can hear you say that."  And that was good enough for me.  So, I went in, had my interview with the mayor.  And in a few days, you know, I got the phone call.  And it was very funny, because apparently they do some fact checking on you, right?  And they call all around the city, and say, "What do you know about Mary Schmidt Campbell?  What do you know about Mary Schmidt Campbell?"  And the Chief of Staff, Diane Coffey, was very funny.  They started saying all these nice things, and she said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know about all these nice things.  I want to know... nobody can be that nice.  Tell me, what are her weak ones?  What are...?"  And they were saying that it was one of the most thorough, you know, sort of like trying to... it was a discovery process.  You know, they really hadn't had, you know, had a Commissioner who had to resign.  They wanted to be very sure that they had somebody who was going to able to sort of stand the test, you know.  But the good thing, the good news, was that I was married; I had a family, you know, I was sort of a solid citizen.  But they also wanted to sort of check me out with a wide range of constituencies.  And they did, and I was appointed.
Story_ID: 48240
Speaker 1: And so, this is a whole--that's what put you on the stage. Ed Koch is Mayor [of New York City, New York]--
Speaker 2: that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, how did you find this experience?  And--
Speaker 2: The first clue that this was going to be real different, was when I was coming home from the Studio Museum [in Harlem].  I had gotten in a taxi to go to this train station.  And I get out to the train station, and [HM] Randall Pinkston is sitting there with a microphone.  (Laughter).  When I get home, my two sons [Garikai Campbell and Sekou Campbell] said, "Ma, there's somebody from the [New York] Daily News who was coming up and asking us a whole bunch of questions."  They were sitting on the front stoop of our house, and the newscasters.  (Laughter).  You know, they had ambushed them.  I said, "Okay, I'm going to have a very public life now."  And that was, for me, that was probably the single most radical change--this notion that all of a sudden, who you were and what you did--how you dressed, what you said, where you went, who you were seen with--all of that was up for grabs publicly.  And that was I think the most radical change.  In terms of management and things like that, the Studio Museum was a very complicated place.  We, we were in a building that had tenants who rented from us, and we were landlords.  We, you know, there were all the museum functions that had to be managed.  There was a store, so there was a small business; we had a permanent classroom.  It was, I mean it wasn't the same scale as the Museum of Modern Art, but it had the same range of activities as any other museum.  So, the whole management and administrative part of it was not as much, so much of a jolt.  It was really the public visibility and accessibility that was new.
Story_ID: 48241
Speaker 1: And I have also another question about, what did you tell those people when you were interviewing [for Cultural Affairs Commissioner of New York City, New York]?  What were your ideas that you wanted to see?  And what did you--
Speaker 2: I said, you know, I said, "Look, all of us wish there could be more money.  But that's easy.  The real issue is that we live in a very complicated city.  We, we, have to have access to different services.  If you have an issue with the subways, then you need access to the Department of Transportation.  If you have a tax problem, you have to have something to go to in the Department of Finance.  If you--any issue that comes up, you need an agency that's going to act as an active advocacy for you, so that as institution, you can manage and navigate this complicated place called New York City."  The second thing I said is that, "You know, we have literally thousands of cultural institutions in New York."  I said, "You go around, there is nothing in terms of a public relations campaign that tells the public that public money is going to go--goes to all these institutions.  There's nothing that tells the public of their availability, nothing that invites them to come in, nothing that sort of extends itself and makes it accessible to them."  I said, "If I were Commissioner, I'd go and I'd do a big public relations campaign."  The third thing I said is that, "Look, there are no arts to speak of in the public schools."  So, that's kind of, to me that was like a no-brainer.  "Why not have a concerted effort to put the arts back in the schools through the cultural institutions, and then you sort of kill two birds with one stone.  You have cultural institutions--you're supporting the cultural institutions and you're supporting that through--cultural life for public education.  And there are plenty of models, good models that you can replicate for this."  So, those were some of the things, some of the ideas that I had.  And there were a few other ideas about using real estate and using building...  I mean, because I'd had the experience of having a building donated and, you know, making partnerships, you know, between the state and between the local government and federal government, and things like that; using cultural institutions more creatively as economic development tools--and not just tourism.  Because what we did in Harlem was not about tourism.  It really was about making an investment in a distressed community in a way that put real resources and real expertise back into that community.  And I said, "You can do that with cultural institutions."  So, those were just some of the ideas.  And you know, and I felt passionately about that.  It wasn't that I so much wanted to Cultural Affairs Commissioner, but I felt real passion about these issues.  And I think that's what I conveyed in these interviews.
Speaker 1: When you got hired, it was the last, the last term with [New York City Mayor Ed] Koch's--
Speaker 2: His last two years.
Speaker 1: His last...  So, okay, you were part of his last two years, okay.  And then you were still there under [New York City Mayor David] Dinkins.
Speaker 2: Dinkins, right.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I think that I was the only Commissioner who was reappointed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You had that relationship, too.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)
Speaker 2: It would have been kind of--I mean he had, he had--he in fact put me up and endorsed me in the first place, right?  So--
Speaker 1: Unless you were (unintelligible)--
Speaker 2: That is possible.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 48242
Speaker 1: So, what were the things that you were, you know, you were proud that you accomplished during that time [1987 to 1991]?
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly enough, the thing that I'm most proud of was not something that was my idea.  Do you remember Richard Green, who was the chancellor of the public schools?  He died of an asthma attack while he was in office.  And I had gone to Richard Green with this whole idea about putting cultural institutions back in the public schools, because he was the chancellor.  And he said, "I want you to take a trip with me, I want you to see something with me."  And he took me to the hotels where homeless families were being basically warehoused.  Remember there was one period in New York [New York City, New York] where instead of shelters, they had these hotels?  And the thing about a hotel, of course... remember, a hotel is just one room, right?  So there are these whole families who were in this one room with, you know, maybe a bathroom.  And the kids have no place to go, they have no place to study.  They walked out of the hotel room, they were in the halls; they had no place to play.  There was no relief intellectually or academically for the children who came home from school, and had to go into these hotel rooms.  He said to me, he said, "Look, you create a meaningful cultural program for these children, and then I'll talk to you about putting arts in the public schools."  So, I got together with the head of Human Resources Association, [William] Bill Grinker.  The head of the... the chancellor appointed somebody from the Board of Education for us.  And it was Cultural Affairs... and our three agencies got together and we figured out what we needed to make this successful.  We needed a way to, after school, identify the kids, get them on a bus, take them to a designated program.  The program had, they determined that the program had to have very key elements.  You had to have writing, you had to keep a journal; there had to be something that the kids made over time, so at the end of it there was a product at the end of it.  And the Board of Ed [Education] would provide food for them; that was a key element.  The Board of Ed would provide food for them when they first arrived at the cultural institutions.  And then some little snack, I think when they got home.  And the Board of Ed would monitor their progress in school.  So, we got that all worked out.  Now, all I had to do was convince the cultural institutions that they, this was something they wanted to do.  And I met with a barrage of objections.  "Well, this is not what we do."  "We're not a social service agency."  "We don't have the skills to work with..."  And over a long period of time, we convinced a core group of institutions to work with us.  I think the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art], The American Museum of Moving Image, Natural History Museum, Public Theater; really good institutions.  They came up with some of the most spectacular programs you could possibly imagine.  And the impact on these kids was transformative.  Their attendance in school improved, their behavior improved; their grades went up.  Their motivation increased in every indicator that you would use.  Because what was happening is they would come from school, and instead of going home to this environment, they went someplace where they discovered something brand new.  Now, maybe it was at Natural History... they taught them astronomy.  These were teenagers.  They would do astronomy, or they would go into Central Park and then do research in the park.  Or, at the Public Theater, they would do a play.  Or they'd do mask making at the... whatever.  One was, one group taught dance to a group of... I don't know, fifth graders or something.  And it was, it just transformed their lives.  And then over time, we began to get the parents involved--parents or caretakers.  And it became a real important part.  And you began to see clearly what participation in art does for a child's mind, a child's intellect, a child's emotional life, a child's way of grasping the world and understanding things.  You know, this is not, this is not icing; this is really the cake.  You know, this is...  Their reading scores improved, their... and all kinds of things were happening to these kids.  And when I left the program was still going on, and I know that it continued for many years thereafter.  Now, of course, they don't have hotels.  And so, I don't know how the program's transformed.  But that was the single thing I was most proud of.
Speaker 1: And did you, did that lead to getting education, art education for the schools?
Speaker 2: Dr. Green died.
Speaker 1: He died?
Speaker 2: He died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll never forget.  My assistant Commissioner called me on the phone and she said, "Mary, you won't believe this.  Dr. Green just died of an asthma attack."  And then I couldn't, I didn't--and I never could establish the same relationship with the chancellor as I had had with him.
Story_ID: 48243
Speaker 1: Now, when you came in, was there plenty of money available at that time during those years?  And then did it change under [HM] [New York City Mayor David] Dinkins?  Was there?
Speaker 2: Well, see, everybody says that it changed under Dinkins.  The truth of the matter is that when... I came in 1987, October 1.  October 19 was the stock market crash.  So, it actually started changing in early, I mean, for me, during the [Mayor Ed] Koch administration.  That's when the money just started--I mean it was very clear from then on that we were on a downward spiral.  Tax revenue went down, and so the city didn't have as much money to give out.  I mean, it was--and it just continued to get worse in Dinkins' administration, because the economy was rotten.  The economy didn't start improving until Giuliani became mayor.  That had nothing to do with Ed Koch, David Dinkins, or Rudy Giuliani.  You know, that was just the, the sort of life of the New York City economy.
Speaker 1: Now, did you overall like public life, or did you find it--
Speaker 2: I loved it, for four years.  But, but, you know, I think [HM] George [Campbell] and I both have a very private part to ourselves.  And certainly after my third child [Britt Campbell] was born then I really began, I really liked it less, and really didn't want to be in the public eye all the time.  I really wanted to spend more of my time in my private life.  And so, when the Tisch School [of the Arts at New York University] extended an invitation for me to think about coming here, at first I told them, I said, "Oh, you're crazy.  I'm an art historian.  This is film, theatre, dance.  What do I know about that?"  But when I came and visited the school, I realized I could preserve a lot of what I liked about working in city government, and still have my, have more of my private life for me and my children and family.  And at that point, with a very young child, that was very important.
Story_ID: 48244
Speaker 1: So, what has this experience [as Dean at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts] been like, you know, for you?  And what, and where are you at in your life, you know, sort of--?
Speaker 2: You know, somebody just asked me that.  (Laughter).  Somebody asked me, "Well, now, Mary what are you doing next?"  Beats me, I don't know.  I have no idea.   I never had a blueprint.  I mean, my decision to go to cultural affairs was almost impulsive.  You know, it's like closing the door, and saying, "Well, I can do that."  I don't think I'll ever do that again.  (Laughter).  But I never had, I've never kind of sat down and said, "Okay, my life is going to look like this."  When I get to someplace, I sink my teeth in, and I feel as though I want to, I want to succeed.  There's no question about that.  I have a drive and determination to do a job and do it well.  But I have rarely thought about what the next thing is going to be.  I mean when--it was Romare Bearden who picked up the phone and said, "Mary, I have just the job for you."  I wasn't thinking about going to the Studio Museum [in Harlem].  So, I figure life will tell me when it's time.  Until then, you know, I'll just--you know, as they say, sort of dig my... situate myself here.  So, what I found here was like a beautiful piece of architecture that had gotten a little worn, and had wonderful potential that I thought hadn't quite been realized yet.  As wonderful as it was, there were still so many things that could be done with this place that hadn't been done yet.  And there were an extraordinary group of people here.  And some of them, I thought weren't being used to their fullest capacity.  I kind of looked around and I said, "That's an awfully talented person, and that's a talented person, and that's... well, that's a wonderful program.  Why isn't that program larger and more..."  There were just so many wonderful things that had kind of, I felt could realize themselves more--people, programs, opportunities.  And so I felt that, well, my job here is to kind of unlock all of those possibilities and give people, and those programs, and those opportunities spaces to grow.  And that's how I kind of envisioned my role here.  I'm very cognizant of the 35-year history of the Tisch School of the Arts, the history that came before me.  So in a way, this already had a blueprint, say, much more than say the Studio Museum did.  So, my idea was to build on that blueprint that was there.  The DNA was already in, you know, in the blood, so to speak.  So, I found that area, found that there a lot of very specific areas that wanted to pay attention to.  Number one, the school had the most amazing group of alumni you could possible ask for.  Tony Kushner, George Wolfe, Spike Lee, Martin Scorsese, Billy Crystal, Alec Baldwin, on and on and on.  And there was almost no relationship with them.  So, that was like one thing, you know, just bringing those people in.  Just their... with their sweat equity in addition to whatever financial support they could give--but mostly their expertise in artistry and, you know, all that, and just reconnect that to the schools.  So, that was one thing, to discover the alumni.  The other thing was, as I said, was to discover the people who are here.  There are just some wonderful talent who was here, and let them kind of rise to the fore.  And so we now have this, just, I mean in my view, just remarkable group of men and women who lead the artistic programs here--Susan Hilferty, Sarah Schlesinger, [Christine] Chris Choy, Lorie Novak--I mean, just wonderful people.  Then... I mean frankly the... the capacity that you get when you link a place like this with New York City.  This is the art, this is the cultural capital of the world; this is an art school.  So, what happens when you, you know, you really try to make some meaningful ties?  That's where the Department of Art and Public Policy comes in, you know, and also my, you know, my background, and a lot of interests that were here at the school.  A lot of the people here are from the sixties [1960s], and have a real social conscious and a sense of activism.  And so, we began to corral that.
Story_ID: 48245
Speaker 1: When an artist comes to this school [New York University's Tisch School of the Arts], I want them not only to, you know, learn their craft and learn how to point their toe and raise their leg if they're a dancer, or structure a screenplay.  I want them to understand something about the world, and what their connection to the world is, and what are those issues and challenges that they're going to run into as an artist in the world?  And I'd like to give them some opportunity to incubate their ideas out in the world.  And the other thing that I wanted to really--and I think it's been an incredible accomplishment--and I really can't claim it, I can't claim it as my own--is that we have installed an extraordinary range of international programs; we're in 16 countries.  And the way we've done it is that we identify an institution or an institute that provides a level of advanced training that you couldn't get here.  So, for example, the BBC [British Broadcasting Corperation] provides advanced television training.  The Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts [London, England] provides a level of dramatic training.  The University of Cape Town [South Africa] and the University of (unclear) have a way of approaching theater and an authoring that's very different from the way we do it here.  So, we try to identify areas of expertise that will add to and enrich what our students do, and we try to get them to really sort of get a deeper understanding of those countries when they go there.  So, this... I think of the international experience, and particularly now.  I mean our world is just so global, and anyone who wants to be a professional, a working artist, has to understand how to navigate across these boundaries.  So, that's been an important thing that we've installed here.  And the other thing, frankly, is that if we're going to stay and be able to give the kind of education that we give, and do all this, and produce artists like [Martin] Scorsese and Lee and, all- Ang Lee and Spike Lee, you know, and all of them, you have to have resources.  And so, what I--and the other thing that I've discovered in the schools is that there were wonderful opportunities to invite people to be stakeholders in what we're doing, and that's been really exciting.  I mean some people call it fundraising, some people call it development.  But I really think of it as really inviting people to become part of what you're doing, and making a real investment in it.  And that, when that investment is financial, it really symbolizes the emotional and spiritual commitment that they're making to the school.  And most of the people who give to our school also participate in the life of the school.  And that's been, that's been very; that's been very... I think it's been a really important part of the way we've been able to grow the school over the years.
Story_ID: 48246
Speaker 1: And financially, how have you [New York University's Tisch School of the Arts] grown?  You've grown--I mean in quantitative numbers.  You've grown from--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll give you some, a few quantitative numbers.  Ten years ago, our applications, we had about fifteen hundred applications.  And we would accept about 67 percent of those.  We now get about four thousand applicants, and we accept about 22 to 24 percent of those.  So, we have become demonstratively a much more selective school with a much broader reach in terms of our applicant pool, a much deeper reach in terms of our applicant pool.  Quantitatively, when I came here the student body population was about 80, 90 percent white.  It's now about 60 percent white, and 40 percent others... students... all students of color and other categories.  So, it's a much more diverse population.  Our average SAT scores used to be about 1066, 1100's, something like that.  The average SAT score now is close to 1300.  So, I'm very proud of the fact that as we diversified by the 'standard' measures of excellence--and I underline 'standard,' because I'm not sure I accept them all the time.  But that's what we use as the standard.  By the standard measure of excellence, SAT scores, we've improved our excellence.  What I think has been really significant for me, is that over the years, the work of the students has gained professional prominence.  So, an assignment the students did in drama called "The Bomb-itty of Errors," is now being filmed as an MTV show.  It was produced off-Broadway, and now it's going to be filmed for MTV.  The student who did her thesis film in the graduate program had the piece bought by HBO.  They cut it in half, and that piece won an Academy Award--not a student academy award--an Academy Award.  So, we have seen the work that gets done here compete on the same level as any professional work that you would see out there in the world.  And to me, that tells me that we are really working at a very high level with our students, and the relationship between our faculty and our students is really one that encourages that kind of work; it opens up the students to that kind of work.  So, I'm especially proud of that.  Now financially, when I came, my first year [1991] I ran a deficit.  In the past five years we've run ever increasing surpluses.  And I've been able to take those surpluses and use them to re-capitalize the school.  Another indication of our financial success is that in the past ten years, we've raised about 54 million dollars.  And I was very, very proud of that number until I sat down and I did a ten-year analysis, sort of looking forward, of what it would cost a student to come to this school.  This year, it cost close to $39,000 for tuition, room and board.  In five years that figure goes up to $50,000, and in ten years that figure goes up to $60,000 for one year.  Our average financial aid award now is $7,000.  I calculated I need 60 million dollars alone just to add to my financial aid base to make it possible for me to have those wonderfully talented students to come here.  And so I realize now (Laughter) kind of looking at the next ten years, that my challenge really is a lot bigger than I would have defined it maybe ten years ago.  So, I, that sort of, it's just an indication of how my understanding of my job and what I need to do has changed as I've been here.
Story_ID: 48247
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to move into some, you know, sort of philosophical questions.  And your life has been art, you know.  As we were talking, you started with something that was, you know, in study at the time that was very Eurocentric.  And look at where you've moved, to a very sort of diverse... you've been involved in... and now you're sort of on the forefront of cultural diversity, you know, the standing of blacks within the art world  And I was wondering what your thoughts were about that.  And I, you know, I enjoyed this one speech that you gave, I think with the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts], and you were talking about cultural diversity, and how we had achieved cultural diversity--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but we had not prepared for... how did you say it?
Speaker 2: What, what--you know, we admitted everybody, you know, in the room, right?  But once everybody got in the room, we didn't know how to have people talk to each other and relate to each other.  There was no real--and I've noticed this.  There was one of the experiences I had at this school.  You achieve diversity, you get lots of people, different people around.  But just having them standing around next to each other is not the best use of diversity.  You have to figure out how that then contributes, in the case of education, contributes to their educational experience, to their--how those different experiences contribute to the way they look at the world, how they solve problems, how that enriches them; how your difference enriches me; how that girl who sat next to me at Swarthmore [College] couldn't figure out why in the world I was upset because [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had died.  Well, that's a failing of the school.  Why didn't the school take some time to have a conversation about that, and have us just sort of disclose to each other some of our differences about that?  And that's a much harder process.  Because much more... you, as the teacher or the leader, leave yourself much more vulnerable.  And the potential for conflict, misunderstanding, missteps, righteous indignation--all those things, you know, just goes up.  However, if you can get over that, you can kind of work through that.  What you get at the end of that is a community and an environment that is so much more interesting, varied, complicated, rich, and just full of wonder.  When you get to that, it's just amazing.  So, the payoff is great, is so great.  And in my view, at an educational institution, it's well worth the risk.  The advantage of having it at an institution is that you're kind of working in your own environment.  Now, I understand that for the NEA or for DCA, or for any funding agency, your environment is New York City [New York City, New York] or, you know, it's a much bigger, much more un-related environment, you know.  And so, you know, I grant them that.  Nonetheless I still think that we've got to think a little better about how we maybe forge collaborations, partnerships, ways of having cultural institutions begin to have a lot more sort of conversation with each other than these little sort of isolated balkanized things that they are now.
Speaker 1: And do you think that's possible?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it's possible.  I've seen, I've seen it, say, take a place like the New Museum [of Contemporary Art, New York City] that worked with the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York City] and the--oh, I can't remember.  It was a third museum they worked with to do a collaborative show.  I mean there have been some... there have been some, I think very valiant efforts.  And I think over time, as people work through these more and more, I think they'll find ways to do it even more productively, and in more interesting ways.
Story_ID: 48248
Speaker 1: Now, what about our African American institutions--I'm talking about the cultural institutions, and also maybe, you know, museums...  What are your thoughts about that, and their... you know, building just from... growing and thriving, you know, going forward?  Because these institutions... I mean, not just at the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York City], but nationwide, they're still very much challenged.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I, well, I can't speak for them.  I can speak for the Museum, and what happened there.  But I know there was a very painful time that I had to go through.  It was actually just before they tried to fire me.  When I had to look at the museum, I said "Okay, we're in financial trouble.  So, I have to make some very hard choices here."  And the choice I made was to get rid of the Kwanzaa celebration.  Well, I thought some people were going to actually come and, you know... with me with a hook, you know, right then and there, right?  And I got rid of something called a "book fair," which was a very popular event.  Because you look at the balance sheet, they're hemorrhaging money.  And just from a business point of view, I couldn't sustain it.  I also made the decision that I was going to be accredited as an institution.  I caught hell for that from a lot of my colleagues, because they said, "Oh well, that's the, you know, that's the white people giving you, you know, saying that you're..."  I said, "No, what it is, is it's saying to black people they know that because I'm accredited, I have the appropriate storage facilities, my temperature control is right, I'm handling their artwork responsibly.  And somebody has come in, looked at this, and certified it.  So, you should feel comfortable about coming here, you should feel comfortable about giving your work to the Studio Museum, and you should feel comfortable about loaning works to the museum, because somebody had said they're doing it the right and in a professional way.  And I want to be able to say that to my community.  That's why I want to be accredited."  So, you sometimes have to make some very hard decisions about your institution in order to survive.  I'll tell you another hard decision we had to make.  When we got that building, there were squatters who were in it.  You know, very well meaning not-for-profit groups who weren't paying any rent. But they had an office and a chair, and they managed to get some telephone service in there and some electricity.  And I had to put them out.  I had to put them out, because I said, "Look, in order for the Studio Museum to survive, I have to have rent-paying tenants."  "Now, well, we can pay you rent."  "No, I have to have long term leases.  I have to have five, ten, twenty-five year leases.  I have to know that there's going to be a stream of revenue."  And I went to all the, I went to all the elected officials, and I said...  I went to [HM] Carl McCall, [HM] [Charles] Charlie Rangel...  At the time Fred Samuel was still alive.  And I said, "Look, I can tell you, I'm going to be evicting these people, because the only way we can survive is to have income, and they're not income producing.  And I may get some community uprising, but I'm asking you now if you will please support our doing that."  It was a hard choice.  They took us to court, we had to go to court and fight.  It was, it was not--and you know those were difficult decisions.  There was one right after another that we have to make, that sometimes on the surface appeared that we are going against our community's best interests.  But you can't serve everybody's interests in the community.  You have to decide which interest it is you're going to serve.  And we decided the interest we wanted to serve was we wanted to establish a permanent black museum in Harlem.  And that's our, that's the interest we want to serve.  Then we had--the hard decision was that we had to give up some of the other sort of well-meaning interests that went along with that.  My guess, and this is a guess, I don't know for sure.  My guess is that that might be a hard decision for other institutions to make.  But I think in order to be successful, you have to sort of say, "Okay, this is what I can do, and so I'm going to focus my time, attention, and resources on trying to do this."
Story_ID: 48249
Speaker 1: Now, do you, what would you consider...  Do you believe in a black arts movement in the United States, and what you would consider that movement?
Speaker 2: I think there have been black art movements from time to time.  I'm not sure that there is one now.  I think that, you know, it depends on what's going on in the world.  I mean, certainly during the Civil Rights Movement there was sort of a--definitely a theme that ran through a lot of works by a lot of African--not all--but a lot of African American artists.  Certainly during the Harlem Renaissance, there was an outburst of work on the part of a lot of African American artists, and a lot of critical writing.  I think those things come and go.  And at this point, I think there's enough... enough artists who have been recognized as really great artists; that there's probably--again, this is my guess.  There is probably not as strong a need on the part of young black artists to feel as though they need to have a black art movement in this way that perhaps in the sixties we did.
Story_ID: 48250
Speaker 1: And your views about the Harlem Renaissance.  Do you think that that was one of the most significant things to come out of this area here?  I mean, it's the thing, one of the things that is talked about over and over again, and overshadow other parts of the country.  In like, Chicago, we like to think we had our own... (Laughter)...
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean the... I think one of the things that makes the Harlem Renaissance so significant is the fact that New York City is so significant.  I mean, it's hard to separate the two.  Harlem was in New York, it's in Manhattan, you know.  I mean, New York is what New York is.  And so therefore Harlem and Manhattan, you know, became part of that.  So, you know, it's like the Tisch School [of the Arts at New York University], it's part of New York.  I mean, part of our greatness comes from the fact that we're in a great city that is the cultural, one of the cultural capitols of the world.  And so, yes, in that regard Harlem drew some, but not all of its energy from that.
Story_ID: 48251
Speaker 1: And do you have any favorite artist yourself? I know you and your husband [HM George Campbell] are like significant collectors.  I know you collect--
Speaker 2: I'd say idiosyncratic collectors.  I mean, but, no, I mean I obviously love all of the artists that are in our collection--Mel Edwards, a fantastic sculptor.  Of course, Romare Bearden.  And I have a beautiful print by Jake Lawrence; I wish I could afford to have a painting by him.  Betye Saar is an artist I've admired for a very long... very, very long time.  I think she's probably one of our under-estimated artists.  I think she's far more talented than she's given credit for in the media and in the galleries and museums.  You know, I love the work of [HM] Sam Gilliam... huge Sam Gilliam...  Richard Yarde was an artist, a water colorist, who in my view is just one of the truly dazzling painters of the, you know, post-World War II era, and again, is an artist who doesn't, I don't think gets his recognition.  But he just had an approach to figurative painting and streetscapes and interiors that was truly original and innovative.  So, I mean, you know, I have a lot.  You know, it's like my... I don't have a favorite color.   You know, I have artists who I connect to at certain periods of time, and certain times in my life.  And I just, I truly do love art.  I love painting, I love theatre, I love going to films.  I mean, you know, I can't imagine what it would be to live in a world without art.
Story_ID: 48252
Speaker 1: And speaking of that, what do you think...  And you had spoken about this just sort of briefly, when we were doing your early years.  But what do you think the value of having an arts center, or arts education, or even being, having that exposure to the arts?  What do you think that does to a person?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I'm very much someone who believes that you have many different ways of knowing the world.  I think art is like a whole system of knowing and understanding.  An intellectual, emotional system--a way of connecting to things, a deep inner life that may not be evident.  Art kinds of makes us see things, hear things, and know things we couldn't otherwise.  And to me, if you don't have access to that, you're not as alive as you could be.  It's as simple as that to me.
Story_ID: 48253
Speaker 1: And one thing that I'm sure people have commented on a lot during your life...  But you and your husband [HM George Campbell]'s marriage, and the fact that it started when you were very young. (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Young teenagers.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, you know, and then it's been successful, and you've had both, you know, successful careers.  And I know when we interviewed him, he spoke really, you know, he likes his new position there.  And he talked about how you've been extremely helpful to him, navigating his new role, you know, as President of the university [Cooper Union University].  And so, you don't find that a lot.  I mean, it's not that it doesn't exist, but you don't find a lot of it.  I was wondering if you would comment about your family and sort of the, having sort of a life's partner, if you will.
Speaker 2: You know, I think there is--the term I think of is sort of reciprocity.  Or, quid pro quo sounds a little too harsh.  But there is an awful lot of give and take.  I remember when I was trying to finish my dissertation, and I had a very real deadline.  George was working out at Bell Labs, and he had access to UNIX, which was their word processing language.  And word processing was not, you know, in great use then.  And he, we were able to, he helped me, he helped me type my dissertation.  He would go in after work, and he would work on it all night long.  He would call me up at one or two o'clock in the morning and say, "Mary, I don't understand this.  What does this mean?  Don't you think you really mean this?"  And that gesture, the generosity and the sacrifice of that gesture, just overwhelmed me.  And so, we've always kind of...
Speaker 1: [sound of sirens].  Let's stop. I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, because of this.
Speaker 1: It's so loud.
Speaker 2: New York, New York.  The generosity of that gesture--that he would, that he was willing to give up that much time and energy and effort to see me complete my degree, meant the world to me.  And it's that--I think it's that kind of understanding between two people, that at this moment, this is what you need.  Or, at this moment, this is what I need.  And remember when he decided to take the job at Cooper Union.  And I said to myself, "Well, that's going to require me to be a wife.  I'm going to have to be there.  I'm going to have to be at the dinners, I'm going to have to be at the reception, I'm going to have to be smiling, and I'm going to have to be... that's what I'll have to be."  And that decision was that, "That's fine.  Because if that's what it takes for him to succeed, my presence in that way...  And as it turns out, also another kind of presence...
Speaker 1: We're going to stop, it's just the sirens.
Speaker 2: ...okay, well, if that's what it takes, that's what it's going to take."  And I think what's--and it hasn't been easy.  I will say 30... the 33 years... there have been times where we have had to struggle to find what the right balance is.  We really struggled.  But I think that because we've always been willing to take the time to go through the struggle, we've been able to sort of keep things, you know, in balance.  But it takes a lot of, it is a lot of give and take.  Sometimes things aren't always going to be that, where both parties are just honky dory and doing exactly what they want to do.  Usually, someone is going to be giving up something to the other one at some point.  And the understanding that that's going to shift back and forth, and it will, I think that recognition has made us able to kind of go...  Because with that, we've been able to kind of move forward.  And now, I think we've been through enough of our marriage to understand, to look back over 33 years and say, "That was a, that was a pretty good strategy.  That really worked for us."
Story_ID: 48254
Speaker 1: And you're living in a new place?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In a new part of town?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, right.
Speaker 1: You moved into the--are you in the president's...?
Speaker 2: We're in the president's house [Cooper Union], the Stuyvesant-Fish House, which is in East Village [New York City, New York].  We moved out from Harlem.  We kept our house in Harlem, but we moved down.  So, he can walk to work, I can walk to work.  And my son is about five or ten minutes away from school.  So, it actually works out very well for us.  Even though I love Harlem, this is, I must say, a much more comfortable way to live your life.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 48255
Speaker 1: And you know, I can't help but think back at, you know, sort of the rich family you came out of, and how you've in turn have been able to have--you know, there's been a succession of solid structure, you know, family structure.  And I, you know, so--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Two minutes.
Speaker 1: It's what?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Two minutes.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Geez, okay.  So, I... but your father's [Harvey Schmidt] still alive?
Speaker 2: He is--
Speaker 1: He's sick, is that--?
Speaker 2: He's very sick.  Yes, he suffered from Parkinson's, and his condition seems to be deteriorating; and that's very difficult.  Somebody who's that, you know, dynamic and vibrant and...  You know, that's been very difficult for my sister and me.  And so, we're trying now to figure out to make the... you know, sort of his life now comfortable.  I'm trying to figure out what are the good... what are the good decisions for him?
Story_ID: 48256
Speaker 1: What would you like to see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think there are several things.  Some of them are human legacies, like my children and their children... and the knowledge that those sort of iron core values of my father [Harvey Schmidt], that I found so engaging, kind of went through me and them and through [HM] George [Campbell] and his... George's... that we're sort of able to sort of really have that carry through.  And to see, you know, not only your children, but now my grandchildren.  I mean, it's really valuable and meaningful, and I think that's a very real part of our legacy--I think, for both of us, a very human one.  And on the human side, I think one of the things I've been very proud of is I've gone from one job to the next... is that I've been able to mentor a number of young people, particularly women, who have gone on to have really quite wonderful careers.  And so, that's also been an important part.  So, that human side of the legacy, I think is very important to me.  The notion of institution building is something I would not have guessed that I would have gotten into.  But for whatever reason, I found that I have a real knack for it.  And I know that now, and I feel that's definitely going to be a major part of what...  Someone has to say of me will be these institutions.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: [ambulance sirens blaring.]  We're just plagued by these things.  I mean, I have a knack for institution building, and I think that that certainly will be something that will be evident in places like the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York City] and the [New York University's] Tisch School of the Arts... and I think even what the Department of Cultural Affairs has come to mean in the life of the city.  And finally, I think there have been my writings.  I haven't taken as much care and time with those as I probably should.  But over the years, either the lectures I've given, or the occasional articles that I've written, the catalog essays I've written--I feel that if you would start to compile them, they all should be pretty significant.  And maybe that's something for me to do, you know, as I, in lieu of retirement, will be to begin to get those together, and edit them and compile them.  But I think that that speech, for example, that I gave about the NEA [National Endowment for the Arts]--it was incredibly controversial.  It ended up being re-printed, included as a part of a chapter in a book, cited on several occasions.  And I knew, even though people were more than a little miffed when I gave it, I knew that what I was saying was important, correct, and needed to be said.  And I liked having that role.  And I liked doing that; I liked being able to say things that maybe other people won't say, and making observations that other people won't make.  I like doing that.  And at some point, I'd like to bring that together, so that the arc of my thinking over time is evident.  And that's the one thing I really felt I haven't accomplished yet.  But I think it will be a real part of the legacy.
Story_ID: 48257
Speaker 1: And this one last question.  What would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Oh, that's interesting. (pause) My honesty.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it, we're done.
Story_ID: 48258
Speaker 1: Just describe, if you could describe who's in the picture and the year approximately.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother and father on their wedding day.  And the year is 1941, maybe '42' [1942], about 1941 probably.
Speaker 1: And give your mother's name and your father's name.
Speaker 2: My mother is, my mother's maiden name was Elaine Harris, Elaine Juanita Harris.  And my father, my father's name is Harvey Nathaniel Schmidt.  So, she became on that day Elaine Schmidt;
Speaker 1: This was a photograph of a picnic, and the photograph was taken when I was about oh, maybe less than a year old.  And I'm the one with my arms held high in the air, my mom is holding me.  And that's my dad looking at me.  Just to the right of my mother is my sister [Barbara Vance], who looks very sad, with her little bows.  And behind my mother is my father's brother, Eddie Schmidt and his wife Ophelia.  Oh, and in front of my father, I'm sorry--in front of my father, that's my cousin Joyce.  And Joyce, Ophelia, and Eddie all lived next door to us.  So, this was truly one big happy family.
Speaker 2: This is Thanksgiving dinner, and I would guess that this is about 1958.  And I can date that, because my cousin Sheila has come to live with us, and she's standing right beside me.  I've got my arm around my younger brother, his name is Harvey.  We called him Chico.  And standing up there carving the turkey is my grandfather, my father's father, Edward Schmidt.  And standing next to him is my older sister, Barbara.  And at the end is my grandmother, Elizabeth Brayhon Schmidt.  And she and I were great friends.  She was my best buddy, she really looked after me.
Speaker 1: If you could go from, let's see, left to right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you just give me names?
Speaker 2: Elizabeth Brayhon Schmidt, my grandmother.  I'm sorry, just names.  Elizabeth Brayhon Schmidt, Barbara Schmidt, Edward Schmidt, Sheila Nutt, Mary Schmidt, and Chico Harvey Schmidt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Nut, is that N-U-T?
Speaker 2: N-U-T-T.
Speaker 1: N-U-T-T, okay.  And do you know the year approximately?
Speaker 2: It's either 1958 or 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's August 24, 1968, probably around 11 o'clock in the morning. (Laughter).  That's the day I got married.  And that photograph is me in my wedding gown coming down the steps of my living room with my father, he was giving me away.  And [HM] George [Campbell] was waiting for me at the bottom of the steps, and he had the biggest smile on his face I've ever seen. (Laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Just give me a moment.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I took piano lessons for about nine years, starting when I was about five or six years old.  And every year--and my piano teacher was a woman named Miss Bell, Charlotte T. Bell.  And every year, we had a recital.  And I'm in the upper right-hand corner gathered around, having been part of the annual recital.  And that was a very big, monumental event for me.
Speaker 1: This is you right here?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's me.  And Miss Bell wrote to me, and wrote to me long, long after I stopped piano lessons, but she stayed in touch.  She was a lovely, lovely woman, a really important part of my life.
Speaker 1: Could you give me the year approximately?
Speaker 2: The year, that was probably around 1956.
Speaker 1: Was that shortly before your father ran for Congress?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I can tell by the way I'm wearing my hair. (Laughter).  I can always tell by the hairstyles.
Speaker 1: Now this was 1987, all of 1987, when I was sworn in as Commissioner of Cultural Affairs for New York City.  And Ed Koch was the mayor then, and he was my boss. And standing from the left is my oldest son, Garikai.  Then beside him is Sekou.  Behind Sekou is George.  Then I'm standing there, and Ed Koch.  And at the end is Diane Coffey, the chief-of-staff.
Speaker 2: Will you spell Garikai and Sekou's names?
Speaker 1: G-A-R-I-K-A-I, and Sekou is S-E-K-O-U.
Speaker 2: That was after we got back from Africa.  And I, of course had a very large afro--and my first little boy, Garikai.  Garikai's probably about two years old, so that's probably in 1972.  And his son, who's about that age now--actually he's about three.  His son--Garikai's probably about three in that picture, maybe it was 1973.  His son is now three years old, he looks exactly like him.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's true.  He's a cute looking--
Speaker 2: Yes, I know, the little short pants.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now this Garikai when he's an infant.  He can't be more than six months old, maybe not that, maybe four or five months old.  And this is in Zambia, about 40 miles from Kabwe, where he was born.  This is truly in the bush.  And all those lovely young ladies were my students.  And they would come over almost every day and they would knock on my door.  And they'd say, "We've come for the child."  And they would scoop him up in their arms, and just like you can see them hugging all over him, that's just how they played with him all day long.  And that's me, of course, with the very big afro.
Speaker 2: What does his name mean?
Speaker 1: "Stay at peace."
Speaker 2: "Stay at peace," okay.  And Sekou?
Speaker 1: "Warrior."
Speaker 2: Warrior, oh, (Laughter). Under one household.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Do they both come from the same culture?
Speaker 2: No, Garikai's name comes from the Shona, in Rhodesia.  And Sekou's name comes from Guinea, where Sacred Torah is from.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: When I first came to the Department of Cultural Affairs, I, one of the first things I did was arrange for public school children to see the show, "Sarafina."  And here I am with the cast of Sarafina.  That must have been 1987, because I had just been appointed Commissioner.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: When I became Cultural Affairs Commissioner, we moved to New York City, and I moved uptown to Harlem.  And this is on the left, George.  Next to him Sekou, and next to him Garikai.  And I'm standing over my young men.  And that was my family, the size it was in 1987, maybe '88' [1988].  That might have been actually '88' [1988].  I think that photograph was taken for an Ebony Magazine article.  It might have been about '88' [1988].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Now, this is the exact same room as the earlier photograph, with the addition of a new child.  On the left standing is Garikai.  Seated is Sekou, I'm seated next to him.  And I'm holding Britt, who at that time must have been about, oh, I don't know, maybe three months old.  So, that was probably late in 1991.  And of course, George is standing.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay go ahead, next.
Speaker 2: Did we have Studio Museum's--
Speaker 1: We didn't.  You know, I'm looking around here, I couldn't find one at home.  I was looking around, and I couldn't find a Studio Museum shot.  That's amazing.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Yeah, and it's broke, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's an old photo.
Speaker 1: That's a beautiful chest there.  What year is it?
Speaker 2: I think it's, somebody told me it was 17th century.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My predecessor picked it out, or found it somewhere and put it in here;  We're sitting on the lawn of our house in Zambia.  And the little baby to the left is a neighbor.  And seated almost in my lap was my oldest son--I'm sorry, no, excuse me.  I just realized where this is.  This is in Senegal.  And the child on the left is the daughter of the person we're staying with.  Sitting in my lap is my son.  And to the right of him is his other daughter, his oldest daughter.  I, of course have the big afro.  And behind us is the nanny of their household.
Speaker 1: Now, is Zambia French speaking?
Speaker 2: No, Zambia is English speaking.  Senegal is French speaking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 1: A man who needs no introduction, one of our distinguished alumni, Spike Lee.  But as I mentioned, one of the things I think of as the accomplishment for the school is that we re-established contact with a lot of our alums.  Mr. Lee has been teaching for the past five years, and he's now the artistic director of our graduate film program.
Speaker 2: Huh.
Speaker 1: And this was when I actually first met him, and first established contact with him, when he was making "X."
Speaker 2: Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: Hence, the "X." (Laughter).   So, whatever year Malcolm X was released, that's when that photograph was taken.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Ninety-Four [1994].
Speaker 1: Was it '94' [1994]?
Speaker 2: Do you know the photographer on this one?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: I happen to be--I don't have any Studio Museum.  I have my grandchildren, but I don't have any Studio Museum.  They're right behind, I think right behind me right here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: These are oldest son's three sons.  My little son has a daughter, Sakai, but my oldest son has all sons.  The one on the left is William Matthew.  In the middle is the newest arrival, George Hampton.  And on the right is Robert Daniel.  And Robert Daniel is the one I think looks exactly like Garikai did when he was about his age.
Speaker 2: Now where does, where does your son live?
Speaker 1: He lives in Swarthmore.  He's a math professor at Swarthmore College, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 1: He went to Swarthmore as well.  He had a much better experience than I did.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Obviously, he lives there, right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: The science and art all combined.
Speaker 1: That's right.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 1: Well, she doesn't have...
Speaker 2: As I said, I don't have any Studio Museum... if I send... if I get one...
