Story_ID: 653998
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, would you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Canada, spelled G-E-O-F-F-R-E-Y, C-A-N-A-D-A.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 13, 1952, New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it the South Bronx?
Speaker 2: It was the South Bronx, New York [South Bronx, Bronx, New York].  That's right, I don't wanna sort of deny my boogie down roots.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently the president of the Harlem Children's Zone.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 12th, 19--I'm sorry, 2016.  I started to go in the 19s (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And where are we at the, the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the Harlem Children's Zone in Harlem, New York.
Story_ID: 653999
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we, we ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And they only take, re- require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sure, my favorite food is cherries and there's a long story about me and my grandmother [Canada's maternal grandmother, Lydia Pearson Williams] and cherries, so.
Speaker 1: All right (unclear) when we get to it (laughter), I'll have to ask.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's--I would, I would say the spring.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Yes: it is what it is.
Story_ID: 654000
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history, your mother's side and your father's [McCalister Canada] side.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll start with your mother's side of the family. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, it's Mary Elizabeth Williams [Mary Williams Canada], M-A-R-Y, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 10th, she is eighty-seven, I'm can't do the math of what year it was, and she was born in Harlem, New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, now how much can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: They--can you trace them to some other place other than Harlem and what are the stories (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I know a lot more about both sides of my family history because they did a piece on it, Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] did which they did some further research.  So, let me just talk about the part that I personally know.  I, we lived with my grandmother and grandfather on my mother's side of the family [in Wyandanch, New York], and her name was Lydia Williams [Lydia Pearson Williams] and his name was Leonard Williams [Leonard Williams, Sr.].  They were both from Kinston, North Carolina.  They were part of the migration [Great Migration] of African Americans from the South to the North settling in Harlem before eventually locating to the South Bronx [Bronx, New York].  I knew my mother's father [Canada's maternal great-grandfather, Reuben Pearson] and stepmother, they were the Pearsons; this was my grandmother, I meant to say Lydia, and I actually would go visit them every now and then because they also lived in the South Bronx.  My grandfather's mother [Mary Williams] whose name I should know, but don't recall stayed in Kinston, North Carolina where she was eventually buried and her family, both of my grandmother's and grandfather's families, were slaves in North Carolina and were directly descended from the slaves. One of the group of Williams owned, one part of the family, and I forget the part that owned my grandmother's side of the family, but their leaving Kinston was sort of the first sort of break from them--my, I think my great-grandmother, if I'm not--I was looking at the--her date of death and date of birth.  She might have been just born when slavery ended, but maybe she was three or five when slavery ended, but she told me that her grandmother was a slave, but her mother was actually a slave and maybe had never just explained to her that, that was the case.  So, it's, it's always interesting for me that I actually spoke to someone, who if they were not a slave, at least their mother was the slave and they could talk about it, which just shows how recent a lot of this stuff is in I think the lives of African Americans.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 654001
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from slavery that are passed down, or?
Speaker 2: You know what, it's interesting not a story.  I, I think that on my grandmother's [Canada's maternal grandmother, Lydia Pearson Williams], my grandfather's [Leonard Williams, Sr.] side who I actually spoke more to about these kinds of issues, there was a deep humiliation about the degradation of their life in Kinston [North Carolina].  I, so my mother [Mary Williams Canada] when we were--she had four boys, we were really small, she took us to Kinston for the first time.  This was in--I was four, so this was '56 [1956], 1956 and I remember going there and having to go to the back of the bus, and I remember at four I was thinking, what's going on here?  Why--, and my mother was really nervous.  So, we got to Kinston, it was I, I think what was typical for poor, rural southerners, and African Americans probably, in particular, it was the outhouse scene.  It was sort of the collection of animals, chickens and other things, and we were just like, whoa (laughter) this is, I mean for, for fun we used to build dirt molds in the ground and wait an hour before a car came by 'cause they were so rare that anything--we were so far in sort of the country, but we were going into town and I remember my grandmother saying to us, "When y'all go into town, you do not look white people in the face.  You do not do that."  We were like, "Why?"  And she was like, very, "You shut up and listen to me.  I don't have to explain to you, you just do not--you see a white person, they say something to you, you look down and--," and, I mean now obviously, I understood what they were saying.  You know you have a group of young city kids who obviously look like city kids, we were going to be the usual, you know boisterous and probably somewhat provocative to folks who hadn't grown up with folks from the city and they feared for our safety, but it scared the hell out of me.  I mean I was just thinking, where am I?  And I remember we went into town, we saw you know colored and whites, but we were just looking down which I think was just very typical.  When I was about fourteen I went back south, went back to Kinston and I remember I was riding with my grandparents and we pulled up, we were looking for directions, we pulled up to this rural place--where a young African American boy, probably maybe a year or two older than me, and he just wouldn't lift his eyes up and I was just stunned.  It wasn't 'cause we had whites, it was just a sense of submissiveness that I had not experienced in the city and so, I say that to say that I think when they got out of there, when they decided that they were leaving Kinston, it was because many African Americans were terrorized.  Harlem [New York, New York] was a place they felt like they could have a chance and you could kind of be a man and you didn't have to worry about those kinds of things.  I mean later there were lots of different issues, but they never spoke about it.  They never talked about what that experience was like.  They never talked about their relationship with white people, they just sort of left that blank, and I think that was probably the reason they did so.
Speaker 1: Now, were the Williams--they lived on the white Williams' land continuously, is that what you're saying, or okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they, they, they'll--after slavery they, I, I, I don't know whether they did some time sharecropping or they didn't do any sharecropping, but they had a very small parcel of land that I, maybe I would say an acre maybe that seemed to be totally disconnected from anything else.  There was no sort of house around that you would say well, maybe that was where the, the slaves' masters lived in.  Again, they kept that part totally separate and alien.  We were stunned by the level of poverty--we were poor in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York], so when we went there, we were stunned by the level of poverty that--you know people were basically doing subsistence farming, and with very little cash money coming in and they were just making it the best way they could, and no refrigerator and you know, or, or used lanterns it was, it was really a whole scene that was very shocking to us.  It was probably very typical in the '50s [1950s] for lots of African Americans in the South.
Speaker 1: Oh, sure that '50 [1950], '60s [1960s], is it '55 [1955] when Emmett Till?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a scary place and I don't, I don't you know, I don't know that it was as bad as lots of places, but it was the worst I ever experienced as a child; and everyone knew there were real challenges.  Now, that's my grandfather's side.
Story_ID: 654002
Speaker 1: On my grandmother's side, Reuben Pearson was a bit of I think an adventurer.  He actually owned property, he was a, a person known to carry a six shooter, drank and smoked to excess, was--my grandmother explained to me, was not a very nice person to his wife and to her.  He was very stern, but he brokered nothing from anybody.  There was no intimidation from my understanding from him and whites.  In fact, my grandmother told me a story, now this is Lydia Williams [Canada's maternal grandmother, Lydia Pearson Williams] and she said her grandfather had--her father had gotten really sick and she needed to get some wood and he sent her out and they called her Lottie, but he said, "You can go out and you chop some wood and bring it here and build a fire," and she went out and she chopped the wood and the person who owned the land came and said, "You can't chop wood on my land." And my grandmother said she told him, "Then you just gonna have to shoot me, 'cause I'm chopping this wood, 'cause my father told me to get this wood."  And she said the guy thought about it for a moment and then realized who her father was, and left her alone.  Now, that's one story I heard.  Now, my mother [Mary Williams Canada] tells another story about my grandmother who was, I--we always thought was one of the strongest, most beautiful ladies.  She said her father Reuben gave her a gun for her, I don't know fourteenth or fifteenth birthday and she pulled it on him on his--her sixteenth birthday when he wanted to beat her and she told him, "You never put your hands on me, I'll kill you."  He left her alone.  We all believed that story and then when my grandmother just thought there was a place where you know you would just leave her alone.  My grandfather [Leonard Williams, Sr.] said--so, if I asked him how they met, so my grandfather said he was the farmer, when years later my grandmother pulled me aside and said, "No, your grandfather grew up in the city.  I work the farm."  And he thought farming--I, 'cause I said, "Grandma, how come you never farmed?"  She said "'Cause I never liked farming."  He said she--he thought farming was fun because he never had to farm.  She said, "You walk behind a mule for six hours and you tell me that's a fun existence.  I didn't want anything with it."  So, she said they met 'cause she was out in the field and she was throwing fifty pound sacks of potatoes on a mule driven cart, and, and she goes it was her grandfather, my grandfather came up and was like, "Hey, you little gal, what you doing trying to throw those bags?"  And he came and he was always a big strapping guy.  He came down and said, "Let me show you how to do that."  And my grandmother said, "Yeah, I just let him go throw you know a few bags on. 'Oh, thank you you're so strong.'"  She said, "I'd been throwing those bags all day for eight hours a day. It meant nothing." And something, they fell in love and had a bunch--my mother was the first child.  They had, I think six children, all together and at some point, decided to come north and relocate north.
Speaker 2: Now, was she raised in Kinston [North Carolina] or was she raised in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Kinston.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: No, my grandmother was raised in Kinston, they were both from Kinston.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh--your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My mother was raised in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She never.
Speaker 2: She was--the family already moved.
Speaker 1: Spent any time, she was born in Harlem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she never spent any time.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: When they got married they came to Harlem, and they had my mother and several of their, their other children were born in Harlem.  My mother was born at Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 654003
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Mary Williams Canada] sa- say about growing up?  Did she have any stories about growing up in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Her, her growing up was interesting.  My grandmother [Lydia Pearson Williams] and grandfather [Leonard Williams, Sr.] were strictly religious people, and they kept a very religious household, there was no drinking, no smoking, no cursing, no card playing, no listening to rock and roll.  There was like church, right, and if you wanted entertainment you went to church services in the evening time and that was, I mean that was it.
Speaker 1: Now, what denomination were they?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baptist--my grandfather ended up being the pastor of the Mount Pleasant Baptist Church which was located in Harlem for, for many years, and I always felt that it was a kind of a suffocating relationship.  They were--I mean they weren't Calvinist and I don't really know Calvinists, but everything I've read about people who sort of take the joy out of everything, right?  Because everything was just like the evil was around the corner and you had to watch for it in everything you did was being critiqued you know with this absolute sort of damnation that would happened to your soul was the way that she grew up.  She, at--my mother was very smart, and ended up going to Johnson C. Smith college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], but after her sophomore year, my grandfather said he didn't have the money.  Now, maybe he didn't have the money, I don't know.  My mother says he said he didn't have the money.  It was not unusual for the women of the household to have zero idea of any of the financial circumstances, and so she had to drop out of college and it had a real impact on the next twenty years of her life, because she just didn't have the professional degree to be able to get involved in employment that would have lifted us out of poverty as children.
Speaker 1: So, was she a good student in those days?
Speaker 2: She was very good.  My mother was a good student, she was the best I understand.  She was B plus to A student, and it's easily understandable because she and I share the love--I got it from her of reading.  My mother read about a novel a week, sometimes two, but every week for every year that I knew her until she got into her eighties.  So, she was just consumed and I, I got my love of reading from her 'cause she would let me read these adult books, right.  I mean not the little Dick and Jane stuff, I'm talking about real adult books and I just fell in love with reading and I think that when people wondered why the teachers thought, oh, that kid is smart, is because I had been exposed to all of this vocabulary and everything else from reading which I, which I loved to do.
Speaker 1: What kind of (unclear), I mean (unclear) like.
Speaker 2: This was novels, this was so we've (unclear), a, a--this was in the '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] but you know everyone from Steinbeck [John Steinbeck] to some half-trashy novel that was on the top bestseller list of The New York Times.  She typically got the books of The New York Times bestsellers list for fiction and those were the books with a lot of science fiction we read.  She was, she was interested in, and that but a lot of it was just what I would consider the day to be, you know the books weren't as trashy, they didn't have as much sex and violence in the '50s [1950s] as they do today, but it's the same sort of top twenty, top thirty books, novels that she was reading on a regular basis.
Story_ID: 654004
Speaker 1: So what did she do for a living when you were, in the early years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother started as a secretary and what might be considered an administrative assistant today.  These were very tenuous jobs, she often was laid off or lost her job.  When she did we went on welfare and we sort of were, were exposed to this sort of horrible system of you know people coming by looking under your beds, looking for stuff or men or whatever.  It was--and when she--I told folks, she made so little money that we saw no difference between being on welfare and her working.  I, I mean, she was making twenty-five dollars, thirty-five dollars a week which you know was, for us you know Fridays which were paydays which was just like you might get a quarter, right, which was like a huge amount of money, for us we were just you know basically desperately poor.
Speaker 1: Now, that's really tight.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know--a factory worker in Ohio where I grew up, and we were poor, makes about a hundred--we were making about a hundred dollars a week.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) plan is so necessary to the job.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: But you had to have like two jobs to even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, to even make that, to make that work, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When, when I explained (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was making like twenty-five--
Speaker 2: When I explain, when I explained to folk how poor we were, that you know this idea we, we--you know we had meat once, twice a week maybe, if we were lucky.  A lot of beans and rice, a lot of figuring out how to stretch things and how to make things work and I, I think that the tenuousness of poverty and how easily you're sort of, your whole life is destroyed by being laid off or having an emergency, needing fifteen dollars, ten dollars that you didn't have, was very apparent to me at a very early age.  I mean we lived on this sort of razor thin edge for many, many years, and by the time I was probably midway through elementary school [P.S. 99, Dimitrious Myers School, Bronx, New York], so maybe nine to ten, she was at, in a, in a somewhat better position.  She had worked her way up so that--an assistant bookkeeper and was making enough money so you know we could keep the lights on, right.  That's one issue whether or not you pay the light bill or you pay the gas bill.  It's like still--don't talk on the telephone 'cause you know, you couldn't run that bill up, but it gave us enough so that we weren't worried about being, you know, kicked out of our apartment because we didn't have rent money, and we fast forward when, when I finished college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine], I was the third oldest and then I have a younger brother [Reuben Canada] than me, so, when by the time all of us were out of high school, my mother went back to college.  She went back to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] actually, 'cause City College was still free and got her bachelor's degree and then ended up going to Harvard at the ed school [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and getting her master's degree in counseling and then changed and when I tell her grandkids so, my kids [Jerry Canada, Melina Canada and Geoffrey Canada, Jr.] and my brother's kids, if they only knew her since she's been this educated woman, right.  With this degree, she's a counselor, a degree from Harvard.  I was like that was not the Mary [Mary Williams Canada] kind of that we grew up with who did not have sort of that professional background and that kind of a, an income.  So, it--for me it was always quite interesting that--she obviously always was very gifted and the fact that she could not finish college, right.  Just really put her on a totally different trajectory, and it put us in a different place in growing up in poverty in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York].
Story_ID: 654005
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father, can you give us his full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, his name is McCalister [McCalister Canada], M-C, capital C-A-L-I-S-T-E-R Canada.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't--well I was gonna say I do know where he was born, but actually I don't know where he was born.  I certainly don't know his date of birth.  Our father left us when I was three.  I'm pretty sure I was three.  I have no--the only memory I have of my father is that my youngest brother Reuben [Reuben Canada] had a metal fire truck and he stepped on it and cut his foot.  That I remember, I have no idea why, but I know where we were living, I wasn't four years old yet.  Sometime after that he came home drunk without any money for the last time.  They turned our lights off and my mother [Mary Williams Canada] put him out the house, and that was the end of that for--and then I never saw him again, until--
Speaker 1: Never (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until I was, was I at (unclear) yet?  So, I was about, no, no I was about eleven, so when I was eleven, my oldest brother who was thirteen asked my mother where our father was, and he was in Harlem [New York, New York] and my brother said, "Well, I wanna go see him," and I said, "I wanna go seem him, too," (laughter).  And I explain to people that I, you know you grow up in a place like the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] without a father, you are vulnerable, you have no protection.  There's nothing that's separating you from sort of the wolves outside and I was explaining to my nephew, because I was explaining some of the trauma of his father that, that when I was about seven and I was walking with my mother.  She, we were walking to the train station and she passed this bar where the guys all hung out, and the things they said as she walked by, were just insulting, vulgar kinds of things, and, and the fact that men said that was not a surprise to me.  That they would say that with a young boy next to her, I just felt like, and I knew that if I had a father, right, men couldn't do that kind of thing, there'd be somebody to say you know, "You can't say those kinds of things to my wife," or something else, and this idea of, of being totally at the mercy of forces that were dangerous was something that I knew if my father met us, he would come and say, "Okay, even if I don't live with you guys, I'll protect you.  I'll come on the block, I'll teach you how to play football or how to ride a bike.  I'll do these--," so, we go off on this mission to see our father and we, he's, he's a superintendent of a building and we find him and we come in and he looks and he says, "You must be Dan [Daniel Canada]." And Dan says, "Yes." And then he was like, "And, who are you?"  And I was like hm, I guess he really had not a clue so I told him who I was, and he said, "Okay, great, it's nice to see you guys," you know.  "You wanna play cards?"  That--he drank, smoked cigarettes, we played cards--there was nothing, there was no, "How's school, what do you like to do?"  It was literally nothing and it was very obvious to me he didn't care, which was just shocking for me.  He just didn't, he wasn't mad, he wasn't angry at us, he just honestly didn't care.  We could have been two kids who came in off the street, and the shock of knowing that someone could be your father and literally not care about you at all was, I mean it was almost unimaginable to me and I just thought, he just doesn't know me well enough right, 'cause I'm such a wonderful guy, if this guy really knew me, he'd be like, "I'm so proud of my son." And so we went on, my brother and I decided, "Okay, let's get to know him," and we went back two weeks later and we went two weeks, and it really never changed and you know about the fourth time I went there and he asked me, "Now, which one are you?"  And I realized this is not connecting at all was just the reality that we lived with and so then we didn't see--I didn't see him again for probably twelve or fourteen years until when I finished ed school at Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he was in--at that time living in Boston [Massachusetts] and I decided I would just look him up and we would talk once every ten, twelve days if you would call it talking.  He was, he was, he had been an alcoholic his entire time since I guess my mother had met him. And by that time he was pretty far gone.
Story_ID: 654006
Speaker 1: Did he have relatives in Boston [Massachusetts], or (unclear) what was in Boston?
Speaker 2: He, no, not that I know of.  In fact, my father's side of the family was an absolute mystery to me until he died.  When--we knew he had a brother named Morris [Morris Canada (ph.)], 'cause my mother [Mary Williams Canada] knew when she met him, she knew his brother Morris and his sister, our Aunt Pearl [Pearl Canada (ph.)] we actually knew and spent some time with, but there was--when I tell you there was not a word ever said by anybody about the father, about their family, about what happened--so, we didn't have a clue.  When my father [McCalister Canada] died, some of his relatives ended up coming to the funeral and we met a few of them, and probably eight or nine, maybe ten years later the senior Canada died and they notified us and we went there 'cause we wanted to see who these people were and so we met some of the others, but we had, and still have, very little connection with that side of the family and no, a lot less now, subsequent to, to Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] when he decided to do the profile, actually spent most of the time.
Speaker 1: This was a couple of years ago, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah on my father's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Skip Gates' television program (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 'Finding Your Roots' yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Finding Your Roots' right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep.  He spent most of the time on my father's side of the family and we found out the name which we never knew where it came from, came from white slave owners named Cannaday in Virginia and they were slaves--the only reason, on both my grandmother and grandfather's side, the only reason we actually know that they were the slaves of my ancestors was that in both cases they were sold, 'cause they didn't keep records of slaves like that except if you sold 'em as property, they would list you know, "I'm leaving you a horse, and I'm leaving you a slave called--," whomever, and we--Skip was able to find the, the bill of sale for them which is how we figured out the Cannadays were my grandparents' ancestors.
Story_ID: 654007
Speaker 1: So Skip Gates' [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] program Fin- 'Finding Your Roots' traced your father's [McCalister Canada]--back to where?  Where, where w-?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) It was a plantation in Virginia which I actually visited, and it was really eerie.  First of all, it's in Nowhereville, Virginia--we lost, when I lost radio in, in and satellite signals, I said, "We really are in the middle of nowhere," 'cause I was using you know a navigation system which just went out.  We were on the property, so the, the, people owned the, the house and the and around there, they had no, no necessary connection with the, the family that lived there before, but they gave us permission to go on the property, go up to the gravesite and kind of see if they could find any indication (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the Cannaday property?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Former Cannaday. Where's it at in Virginia?
Speaker 2: And I, I, I, no place I've ever heard of, and probably (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think I forgot the name of it.
Speaker 2: What--it's a very rural, very rural place in, in Virginia, and what they explained to me was that, that it's always been a place where people ran stills and they didn't quite want strangers around and we should expect that folks would know we were there and within seven minutes--so, we went on the property, within seven minutes the pick up truck came, shot guns and I was thinking, this is, you know I really wanna get outta here, I'm just not feeling this at all, and they came and they said, "You know we know these are our neighbors, what are you guys doing here?"  And they explained (unclear) we had permission because you know we're filming this thing and they were like, "Okay, we just wanted you to know that you know we keep an eye on things around here, and we notice strange cars," and so, it was just one of those--for me, I was thinking the fact that you could be watched so intently because surrounding the area were just hills, and I mean literally everywhere you looked there were hills and I thought, if you were a slave, first of all I didn't know where was I without navigation, right.  I was just somewhere you're taking all these winding turns and everything.  I think if you could not read, you could not write, you didn't know the states and, and you were trapped here and they were like, "Well, isn't it beautiful 'cause the land--." I was like, it may seem beautiful to you.  It doesn't seem beautiful to me.  This seems like a place that if you were trapped here, and you knew 'cause you know you could hear the dogs and if you knew that you could, even if you wanted to run, where would you go, you don't know where you are.  It seemed to me like a, a place of desperation and I have to admit while someone looking at it with an unbiased eye would say, "Oh, it's beautiful, you're in the hills and you've got--."  I looked at it like, "Oh my god, my family could not get outta here no matter what."  This was just a place that you know the slaves were sort of isolated from anybody and you had people watching constantly, right--any movement.
Speaker 1: That's a, that's a thoughtful observation and I think a lot of times black people coming up, when we came along and even now they think about slavery as, why didn't the people just leave?
Speaker 2: Just leave.
Speaker 1: Why didn't they run off?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, like it was so simple.
Speaker 2: Like it was so simple, and I tell you and it wasn't like I had ever had that realization before, it was standing there, and it was the fact that without navigation, of course I didn't bring a map 'cause I had navigation, but when the navigation went out, I was totally--not for fifteen minutes, for an hour and a half of driving at fifty-five miles an hour.  I had no clue where I was and I was thinking, suppose you were trying to walk and there weren't these roads and where would you even think about going?  And it was no city anywhere close by where you could think, well, I could get in and blend with somebody.  So, the sense of, I think, of hopelessness and helplessness, I was really struck by that and, and it was a very unsettling feeling.
Speaker 1: So, was your father actually born in Virginia, or was he born in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think his, his family certainly was born in Virginia, but I'm not sure technically where he was born at although I think they actually did trace it because it turns--no, I actually do know.  He was born, no I won't say a hundred percent, his father lived in the Bronx [New York], so my grandfather lived in the Bronx only about twelve or fourteen blocks from where we had grown up, which to me I didn't find out until Skip did the what you call 'em, and had the address down.  So but that still doesn't suggest to me that my father was born in the Bronx. I'm not quite sure where he was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he basically grew up in New York [New York] then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a New Yorker, yeah was a, yeah he's a real--by the time my mother [Mary Williams Canada] met him he was a New Yorker.
Story_ID: 654008
Speaker 1: Now, that's the interesting thing now, what--I, I assume, was he older than your mother [Mary Williams Canada], (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were, they were pretty close to the same age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He may have been a year, but it wasn't much older.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met?  Did she talk about--did she (unclear) or did he?
Speaker 2: Isn't that, isn't that interesting?  I'm sure she would tell me if I asked.  I don't think any of us ever asked.  It's, it's kind of funny.  The interest we had in him as our father [McCalister Canada] became much more clinical, right.  We just kind of wanted to know who he was or family that, but not in terms of this connection emotionally that they must've had at some point in time, right?  But by the time we were aware it was gone.  Whatever existed for him, it didn't exist for my mother any more, and it certainly didn't exist for my mother for him anymore, and so we just never even asked a question of how they met 'cause at some point they must've been in love and must've had some romantic, you know relationship before they decided to get married, 'cause he, they got married before the kids were born.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and had what four?
Speaker 2: Four, there were four, yeah.
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were four.
Speaker 1: So, there was a relationship there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a relationship.
Speaker 1: And a strong one apparently.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To last that long.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it just, so as far as you know, did he finish school, or did he have any?
Speaker 2: My mother has always explained him as being really, really smart and I believe he finished high school, but again, I'm not a hundred percent sure about that.
Speaker 1: So, he worked basically as a superintendent (unclear)?
Speaker 2: When we knew him, he was basically working as a super for the entire time that we were aware of him. He was taking these jobs which were you know pretty easy to maintain if you were drinking on a regular basis, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, but had to do something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he had to do something and he was earning a paycheck and a place to live and you know.  He had remarried, and so we met the new wife and he had, had a son with her, who we also met and I think that we were, actually much closer to the wife who was really a very nice lady and really enjoyed us being around and was a very warm--then he, who was much more sort of neutral to our presence than she was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's kind of a mysterious thing.
Story_ID: 654009
Speaker 1: Now when you think about--well I, you know, well I always ask this question, but I already, already know the answer pretty much.  But if you think about parents' [Mary Williams Canada and McCalister Canada] personalities, their talents, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like you know, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: That's very interesting.  I think that my grandmother [Canada's maternal grandmother, Lydia Pearson Williams] and grandfather [Leonard Williams, Sr.] were a huge influence.  My grandfather was the man I wanted to be.  He was a big guy, he was strong, he liked to be outdoors with the dogs and you know planting stuff and doing that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: But tell us about him and your grandmother.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause your grandmother you describe her as your, as an angel in your life and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes--and she.
Speaker 1: They're the ones that lived on Long Island [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're the ones on Long--but, but they lived in the Bronx [New York] first, South Bronx, and we stayed with them when we were kids, 'cause when my mother had no one to care for us when we were really young and so my grandmother did not work and traditional, she always like baked pies and sold them and did those kind of things but and always took care of us kids but she didn't go out formerly and get a nine to five [o'clock], so she was home.  We grew up with them in the early parts of our life and it was fascinating to me because there was, they were in the process of changing.  When we were staying with them there, my mother, the difference between my mother and her youngest sister, mom's eighty-seven, Rachel's [Rachel Williams (ph.)] probably gonna be sixty-nine.  During that period of time when the other, my mother have had, it well four of them in steps, and then Rachel, and then my, my other Uncle George [George Williams (ph.)], so they came a little later.  My grandparents were changing, they were becoming less rigid, they were less dictatorial and less oppressive in my opinion from when my mother grew up in their household.  So, that's when we were there and we were beginning to see the change you know.  My Aunt Rachel had a record player could play 45s [45 rpm record] and she could play popular music, so that shows--I know all the music from the '50s [1950s], we grew up listening to The Shirelles, and the rest of the crew.  That could've never happened with the other kids that were there, but the reason that I was so close to my grandmother, was that she actually would talk to me like a grown up.  I don't know why, she realized I, and it was mostly about religious stuff, because I would ask her these questions like, "If there's a god, why are so many people suffering? Why would He let this happen?"  And she would explain, and I just--, "But I don't get it, I mean if He's all powerful why wouldn't He just snap his finger?  He could just fix this and we--." "No, you got to have free will and God is (unclear)."  And we, and she could tell and, and I tell folks which I believe, she was battling for my soul, and she really was because I was looking at the world and I said "No, no, no."  It seemed to me a lot of crooked people were making it and a lot of good people were suffering and dying and I don't understand how you know, you could tell me that that's okay with God, that, that's part of God's plan and the, the great thing that I ended up loving about her, she didn't pull punches, she never was angry or felt insulted, and she talked to me in her best understanding, sort of this idea of her own spirituality, and I tell folk and she was an absolutely honest woman.  I tell people, that in describing my grandmother, and sometimes read that the Brink's truck, the back opened up and money all fell out and one person takes the money to the police, which when I was a kid was the stupidest thing, and my grandmother would've been the person.  She would've never--as poor, and they were dirt poor, as poor as she was, she would never keep a dime, not a dime and I would sit there and say, "Well, that is absolutely stupid, no one cares about that money, it doesn't, it's not gonna impact anybody's life."  It would change our lives, you could--to her, this was either you were honest or you were crooked and there was no black or white in, in the middle of it, and I enjoyed--anyone else talking to a kid would be, "Just because I told you, leave me alone, don't ask me any more questions," she would just spend the time talking with me.
Story_ID: 654010
Speaker 1: Now, my [maternal] grandfather was a very closed person now.  He was, his whole life revolved around the church.  He wanted to be the pastor of Mount Pleasant Baptist Church [New York, New York], and he wasn't adept at the politics of church politics, so he did become the pastor of, of the church after the Reverend Brown [ph.] passed away.
Speaker 2: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: Leonard, Leonard Williams [Leonard Williams, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Leonard Williams, okay.
Speaker 1: And, I, I loved him because to me he was everything a man should be.  He was the protector of his family.  He worked and provided, he was strong.  He was a physically imposing strong person.  He didn't drink, he didn't smoke, he didn't use bad language.  And if I, if you ask me sort of you know, "Who is it you hope to be like?"  It was him, he was the man in our life and he did this mysterious things, like take the dogs out hunting which I always wanted to go.  He never came back with anything, but I'm sure he had a great time in the woods with the dogs, and when he, when they saved enough money which I still think is a miracle to buy a house in Wyandanch, Long Island [New York] which was one of the few places black people could buy a home and they built their house, all of us, all four of, my brothers [Daniel Canada, John Canada and Reuben Canada] ended up going to high school [Wyandanch Memorial High School, Wyandanch, New York] with them there because it got us out of going to a drop out factory here in the city, it would've been Morris High School [Bronx, New York] for me.  It totally changed my life, but the fact that they had the house did not sort of belie the fact that they were still desperately poor, right?  They just didn't have any money; and the, the, the reason--
Story_ID: 654011
Speaker 1: Now I'm in high school [Wyandanch Memorial High School, Wyandanch, New York], and my grandmother [Canada's maternal grandmother, Lydia Pearson Williams] and I still have this wonderful sort of relationship; and I talk with her and try to understand her and she told me some of her, you know their challenges growing up [in Kinston, North Carolina] and but the, the thing about me and the cherries happened because and I actually--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --wrote about this and, and actually I, I gave this as a talk and The New York Times ended up printing it as an op-ed.  It's called 'Cherries for My Grandmother' ['Cherries for My Grandma,' Geoffrey Canada] was that the, the thing that my grandmother loved the most in life were cherries, but they were so expensive we couldn't afford to get a pound, and she didn't have money, right, I mean the money was to saving the house [in Wyandanch, New York], but she would sequester I will say fifty cents, and she would send me to the store to get fifty cents' worth of cherries and I would come back with those cherries and we just delighted in them and there was always just enough.  So, we wished we could have eaten a lot more but we never could and I tell folks, I used to measure our summers by how good the cherries were, and we'd be like, "Aw, this is a great cherry summer, they're really all great this year." And my, and it wasn't even a fantasy but I was absolutely gonna do it.  When I went away to college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] and I graduated and got a job and I was gonna have money, I was gonna buy her a crate of cherries.  I mean a whole crate, I could see them in the crate and I was gonna sit there and we were gonna eat cherries 'til we didn't want any more which we had never had that experience, and she died my sophomore year in college.  Just, never happened.  It's interesting to me the sort of love that folks have and when people say you know, I, I love my mother [Mary Williams Canada] and very close to her even 'til this day, but I spent those times with my grandmother and my grandfather [Leonard Williams, Sr.] and they really shaped a lot of my sort of belief structures growing up.
Story_ID: 654012
Speaker 1: I clearly got all of my love of learning from my mother [Mary Williams Canada]. She was just a really smart and talented woman.
Speaker 2: You think, was there like a point in time when your, your mother and your grandparents kind of fell out around the strictness of it, and does that--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I think, I think it happened to most of the children.  My mother, she still always stayed with religion, but she moved to a different philosophy called Christian Science which was much less sort of biblical, magical and much more sort of philosophical and logical and I think it in many ways was a repudiation of sort of this very strong and traditional Baptist culture that they were raised in.  It was not praying before every meal, it was not sort of you know this blind belief without facts of you know spirituality.  She taught us spirituality, but it was always based on a logical set of beliefs and facts that she felt we needed to have to underpin our faith basically versus just believing for believing, and yes, you know my mother drank, she smoked, we all smoked growing up.  That was a sin in my grandparents' home and when my mother got to be grown, well, unless she threw it in their face, but she didn't sort of hide it, and I could just see the disapproval on, especially my grandfather [Canada's maternal grandfather, Leonard Williams, Sr.] much more than my grandmother [Lydia Pearson Williams].  My grandmother was like, "These are my kids," and you know, but my grandfather, you could just see him saying, "Boy, look at this--," kind of stuff.  And so, that stayed up until I think when we began to go to college.  I think that she felt somewhat justified in her child rearing and in her practices and felt like, "See, I told you that there was a better way to get this thing done," and I think that softened a little bit and my grandparents continued to soften, you know they just became much more tolerant over time after their grown kids were there and sort of we were living in their household.  I tell people we saw a different side.  When I talk about my grandmother and grandfather to their own children, they often don't recognize who I'm talking about.  That was not the people who raised them, right?  So, I think that there was a falling out.  I think my mother always felt like, you know what, you, when I needed you, you didn't support me.  You didn't help me get through college [at Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], and you know that had an impact on me.  I think my grandfather always thought you know, you married that guy [McCalister Canada], he was drinking, smoking.  He ended up leaving you with kids and look what.  And I don't think that they ever sort of reconciled that.  I think at some point they had detente, right.  Just said, "We're gonna sort of leave that alone, and we're gonna start from this place here and move forward."
Story_ID: 654013
Speaker 1: Now you have like three siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you have two older brothers and a younger brother.  Can you tell us about, about your siblings, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so I only have two siblings who are still alive.  The--my Dan [Daniel Canada], who's my oldest brother, John [John Canada], who's my sibling who's no longer alive and me, we were steps. And so, Dan was five, John was four, I was three and then my youngest brother, Reuben [Reuben Canada] was two and a half years after me, so he wasn't quite step, there was a bit of a gap.  We, I think the biggest influence on us growing up was growing up was growing up in a place that was dangerous and violent and a mother [Mary Williams Canada] who had no idea how to prepare her kids for the world that existed.  I, I tell folks, sort one of the stories that I think women relate to most in my book 'Fist Stick Knife Gun' ['Fist Stick Knife Gun: A Personal History of Violence,' Geoffrey Canada],  I tell the story of--I, I happen to know that I wasn't in school yet, so I had to be around four, so that meant Dan was about five and John was about six, and then before we moved to our other place on Union Avenue [Bronx, New York], and it was right behind the--we were living in sort of a, three story family house and we were on the second floor.  Right behind there was a little backyard and my mother used to let John and Dan go play there, and he came up and John told my mother that they, some boys stole his coat and my mother looked at my brother Dan and said, "And so what did you do?"  And he looked, "I didn't do anything, I mean I can't beat those boys."  And she said, "Well--," I've heard parents say to kids in the schools I run, "If you don't go out there and get your coat, I'm gonna beat you worse than those boys could ever beat you."  And, I remember sitting saying to myself, "Whoa, Dan's doesn't know how to fight.  John and--what are they gonna do with those bad boys?" And they went out crying, right?  'Cause my mother was threatening them.
Speaker 1: So this is a six year old, a five year old, and you're four.
Speaker 2: And I'm four, and they went out and ten minutes later they come back with the coat, and my mother said, "Now, I hope you learned a lesson from that."  And I tell folks, the lesson she thought she was teaching is, "Y'all stick together.  You don't let someone abuse your brother.  You go out and you stand up for yourself because you got--you can't be a victim." And the lesson I got was, "Don't ever tell your mother anything, just keep it to yourself."  I was like I couldn't believe that.  I was like, she's gonna make you go out and get involved in violence to do something, and I think we all learned then that we were basically on our own, which is bad because kids need the kind of adult supervision to help them make tough decisions about what they should do or what they shouldn't do, and it had a real different impact.  So, during that time that we lived in that place, it was relatively calm.  It was a couple of bad kids but we, we were basically pretty isolated.
Story_ID: 654014
Speaker 1: Mother [Mary Williams Canada] lost her job, we had to move; and we moved to this apartment building on Union Avenue [Bronx, New York] which was filled with kids, which we thought was a good thing but we didn't realize that the kids had a set of policies that everybody who came on the block had to have a fight so you could figure out where they were in the pecking order, and again, we didn't know anything about violence. I tell folks I remember--my--we were looking out the window, we were on the front.  We're in a third floor walk up.  When we got to the front we could look out on the street, there's all the kids and we see the kids there. (Gesture) Four of us in the window, we waving at the kids and the kids look at us and rub his eye like this (gesture) and look back at us, right (laughter).  I said to my brother, "I think these guys are gonna beat us up."  So, we did a little more tentative this time, and we sort of waved like, and they did the same thing.  They pointed and rubbed their fists (gesture), so they looked at me and my brother and since I always had the best relationship with my mom, they were like, "You got to go tell our mother."  So, I said, "Okay, I'll tell her."  So, I went in, I said, "Mom, can I talk to you?"  Said, "Yes."  I said, "The boys downstairs, they gonna beat us up." And she said, "Why are they gonna beat you up?"  I said, "I don't know."  She said, "You're gonna tell me that boy--you don't even know those boys, and they, and you're scared to go downstairs 'cause they're gonna beat you up?"  She said, "See, you got to quit being so intimidated, quit making stuff up.  Those boys aren't even thinking of you, they don't know you."  So, I came out.  I gave my brothers the bad news, "Mom ain't helping us, so you on your own," and so we decided we wouldn't go outside, right.  It was just too dangerous but--, "I mean come on you kids, you gonna have to go out."  My brother John [John Canada], who remember he was a year older than me, he was probably one of the greatest athletes I've ever seen, and he was always a great athlete which was absolutely humiliating to me because I was just a year younger than him and he at eleven was already playing stick ball with the grown kids, right, the seventeen and eighteen year olds, and I couldn't even hit the ball, and I couldn't catch and he was out there and that was just the way he was and he was the first one to go out, and he went out and he had his fight, and he came in, (unclear), "How was it?"  He said, "Well, I had a fight."  "Did you win, what happened?"  He was like, "Nah, just had a fight and I'm good, and--," and I was the next to go down and I just remember they would just say "What's your name?"  "I'm Geoffrey [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Canada]."  They said, "Okay, you look--you're David's [ph.] size, so you two fight."  I was like, "I don't even know this kid."  They said, "Nah, y'all gonna fight, so let's see--," and you had to fight and after that it was good, my brother Dan [Daniel Canada] never went out.  When we--if you look at the history of our time on Union Avenue, my brother John and I were always outside, we were playing basketball, football, stick ball, tag, all that.  My brother, Dan, never went out.  He stayed home, loved animals and other things, went to school, did not go out on those streets, was not gonna deal with that kind of stuff and my youngest brother [Reuben Canada] ended up going out over time when he got a little older, 'cause he was a little bit younger than us, but that, those boundaries shaped our life.
Story_ID: 654015
Speaker 1: And what happened to John [John Canada], my other brother, I tell folk--I quickly figured out intellectually what it meant to grow up in an environment where violence was sort of there all the time.  It was just underlying everything and so you had to adapt, either a set of bluffs, which I was really good at and enough skill so every now and then you could convince everybody that the bluffs were really you know your talent, that you--people would leave you alone, and so I was able to figure out a way to carve out (unclear), to, to back the street off, I could curse with the best of 'em.  I could look intimidating, I could do all of that kind of stuff, but I didn't realize that's all part of the game.  My brother John had no stomach for any of that stuff.  He just was a sweet kid, wanted to play sports.  He had no interest in fighting anybody, picking on anybody, teasing anybody.  It just was not him, and he lived a miserable life because the kids were merciless.  When he played sports, everybody loved him, but they picked--we were very poor, our clothes were raggedy and the kids were just--I mean you have eight kids sitting around and this one kid would just go after you.  "I guess you're religious 'cause you sure got holey shoes," and everybody would be laughing and they would just, and he wouldn't stop.  He'd go from one piece of clothing to your--the fact that you didn't have a haircut to all of this stuff and they would just sort of humiliate you to the point that you either went upstairs or you fought, or you suffered which is what mostly what we did.  You just suffered, feeling bad.  My decision was, I'm gonna fight, I'm not gonna have people talking about me like--and my brother John's decision was suffering.  In the end, he began drinking really, and I know the first time he actually used alcohol it was self-medication.  He saw the world totally changed.  He was like, "Not such a bad place after all, right?"  And it was horrible because I understood it, we all drank very early on.  I mean it was just like one of the rules of the road.  By fourteen, fifteen you were drinking wine, and kids were--it wasn't too much marijuana then.  That happened a couple of years later but his escaping into alcohol at a time that there were no boundaries, right.  Remember, mom [Mary Williams Canada] wasn't out there, she didn't know what was happening in the streets.  We were all sort of on our own out there, surviving and in the end, he, when he, he ended up playing basketball.  He went out to Wyandanch [New York], he was a shooting star, one of the top.  In fact, he was voted the best player there on Long Island [New York].  Was supposed to go to St. John's [St. John's University, Queens, New York] with Lou Carnesecca, ended up Louie came by, wined and dined John, I mean just really wanted him to come there.  He had a pretty good squad then, ended up not doing well on the SATs.  John had zero interest in that.  When I say zero, zero interest in academics, and I saw him sleeping--he wasn't a dumb kid, I saw him sleeping through the SATs 'cause had been up all night, and I was just like, it was funny 'cause I was just like "John, John, you--this is serious, you got to do this."  Didn't get a high enough score to go to St. John's, ended up going to Suffolk Community [Suffolk County Community College, New York] and being on a team that played for the national championship for two year schools.  Again, the, the I mean the highlight of his career was playing against Dr. J. [Julius Erving] in '69 [1969] and when he was playing for Roosevelt [Roosevelt High School, Roosevelt, New York] they came to Wyandanch to play, but then John went into the [U.S.] military and in the military, he was drinking one night and we think someone gave him a barbiturate. John didn't use drugs and he died in his sleep.  He asphyxiated in his sleep, and in his sleep and he died--I was twenty, he died at twenty-one.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. That's a sad story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, people respond to things in a different--
Story_ID: 654016
Speaker 1: He lived to twenty-one? Was it twenty- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He died at twenty-one.
Speaker 1: --twenty-one.
Speaker 2: He died at twenty-one.  The saddest, one of the saddest experiences of our life going to that funeral because everybody loved the guy.  He was just like the sweetest guy in the world and he had gotten his first professional tryout.  He still had another year to do in the [U.S.] Air Force before he was gonna be released, but it was a probably a 75 to 80 percent chance that he would've ended up in the NBA [National Basketball Association] if he had lived and he just didn't.
Speaker 1: So, he played in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: He played in the Air Force, yeah, he played in the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado].  His, his--he had two kids.  His oldest son, Derrick [Derrick Canada] ended up playing for the [U.S.] Army and then Iona [Iona Canada (ph.)] and ended up playing overseas for about ten or twelve years.  Did some time with the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], he's just a phenomenal--John [John Canada] was 6'5", Derrick was 6'2", 6'3".  He was two inches too short and one step too slow to get into the NBA, and that was it.  But no one, he was just--I mean as a playground legend, no one could stop the kid but he just couldn't break into the big time, but he had a full, professional basket career, basketball career overseas, and the--I don't know what happened to that gene pool, it totally skipped me, that whole, I'm a great athlete thing, 'cause I'm telling you we were a year apart and it wasn't even close.  People--when I went out to play basketball on Long Island [New York], they heard John's brother was coming.  It was like, "Wow, we gonna have two of these guys?"  They were gonna look at me like, "You sure y'all are related?"  But, it did absolutely hit his son who was just an incredible athlete.
Story_ID: 654017
Speaker 1: What happened to your brother who, who stayed in the house, Dan [Daniel Canada] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dan?  Dan is interesting.  So, Dan was--so, this is just what has always bothered me about the education system.  So, Dan's in elementary school, and they make the decision that he is slow, possibly to the place of being retarded.  Why, I have no idea.  Dan's always been deliberate.  He's always been thoughtful.  I think they translated that into being slow.  They put him in a class where no learning was going on and my mother [Mary Williams Canada] who could be a bit of a radical went to the school.  It's hard to say, she cursed out the principal 'cause my mother doesn't curse and made him take Dan from that class.  'Cause she walked in the class, the kids were standing on the desk.  They were throwing paper, the teacher was just sort of letting it all happen, and got him back into a regular class.  Now, he stayed in a regular classroom.  He, as the first one to go out to Long Island [New York] with my grandparents [Canada's maternal grandparents, Lydia Pearson Williams and Leonard Williams, Sr.].  Ended up graduating high school, went to Farmingdale junior college [Farmingdale State College, East Farmingdale, New York] and then, now this is--I went to school [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine] in '70 [1970], this is '68 [1968].  So, in '68 [1968], the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] was going hot and heavy, and if you were not in college you were going go to war and you were probably gonna end up in the [U.S.] Army and you are probably gonna end up on the front lines.  And so, Dan after he finished his two years at Farmingdale, he knew he couldn't get a job because then you'd get drafted.  He signed up for the [U.S.] Navy because he wanted to be a biologist, right, a marine biologist.  And he planned to go--you got a junior college degree, whatever you ain't gonna be a marine biologist, come join the Navy.  He got to the Navy and they said, "Sorry, what we need is medics.  So many of our medics are being killed that we can't enough, so I know we told you marine biology, but you got to do medics." And Dan said, whatever choices they had, they said you can re-up and here are the careers you can go into if you sign up for another four years, and so he signed up for to become a nuclear technician on one of the nuclear battleships and ended up doing maybe twelve, fourteen years in the Navy and then went to work for a nuclear facility in South Carolina where he retired from two years ago.  And I tell folk, here's a guy who's doing nuclear engineering, who they said when he was eight, right--couldn't get, forget going to college, they wouldn't even put him in a regular classroom and it's what's frustrated me about educators that they, and again this has happened to numerous people in my family, that they would just make a statement like that and Dan married, has kids, has had a very successful life and career and I think that, that decision that, I'm just not going on no streets, was, was a good decision for him.
Speaker 1: But without that intervention of your mother he would be, he would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would've destroyed his life.
Speaker 1: --in that class.
Speaker 2: They would've destroyed his life after, 'cause, 'cause it not only, it, and it wasn't just that, they weren't teaching him.  He was starting to believe something was wrong with him.  Right, that you weren't smart and once you believe that you give up and you don't try hard anymore and you've--anything that's hard you say, "I can't do it."  You just don't put any effort.  I mean we've seen these sort of self-fulfilling prophecies, happening with kids over and over and over again, and so when people wanna know why I am so angry about education systems that fail poor kids--it's because I've seen it up close and personal and I see what it does to children and how it destroys their life.
Story_ID: 654018
Speaker 1: Tell us about your education experience.  Now, where did you--did you go to kindergarten or di- or did you have any kind of preschool or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually I didn't go, I didn't go to kindergarten--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I was really, really upset about not going to kindergarten because the kindergarten that my brother Dan [Daniel Canada] and John [John Canada] went to had a playground on the roof, which the most exotic thing I had ever heard, and I just had to go, but we moved and my birthday's in January and for some reason it was the decision of whether I go, or when I go, or do I go to the first grade or kindergarten was beyond my sort of knowledge, but I ended up going into the first grade and I went to the first and second grade at a school that I remember very little about, but in the third grade I moved, we moved to Union Avenue and I sent to P.S. 99 [P.S. 99, Dimitrious Myers School, Bronx, New York], which I ended up graduating from in the sixth grade, and the, the so, remember now I, I told you my mother [Mary Williams Canada] was an avid reader.  I started reading and I had really a strong background in reading so the teachers are saying, "Here's a smart kid," and they put me in the one classes, right and at that time people didn't even pretend about tracking kids.  Everything was done, you're in 3-1, 3-3 and it went up to 3-7 or 3-8, right in, in P.S. 99, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so one was a smartest--
Speaker 2: One was the kids who supposedly were the smartest and eight were the kids who were supposedly the slowest and everybody knew it.  We all knew it, and so each year if you were in 3-1 you went to 4-1.  One or two kids dropped out and went to 4-2, this to us was like, "Oh, my god, did you hear what happened to Rodney [ph.]?  He's not with us next year," and that meant one or two kids went from 3-2 into 4-1 but that it was it.  So, when you thought about the mobility within, it was nonexistent basically.  Whatever they tracked you at, second grade, you were basically stayed there until sixth grade and that's just the way it was.  So, we were in the class that the teachers and everybody told us we were the smart kids, right.  It was just everybody said, "Well, you know this is 5-1, you know you kids are the smartest."  They said 6-1 you know, so honestly you start believing that.  From '59 [1959], but this is what I knew, my friends that I was growing--the kids I played with every day, they were not in these one classes, or the two classes, they tended to be in the four and the five classes, and I knew these were smart kids.  I knew that and the question that I--I was like, how come if I know they're smart, the schools don't know they're smart? And there was no reconciling this, but I knew something was wrong even in elementary school.  I just knew this, something happened in this system and they were judging these kids and it wasn't right.
Story_ID: 654019
Speaker 1: Forget that, that didn't crystalize it for me until--when I graduated elementary school [P.S. 99, Dimitrious Myers School, Bronx, New York], you had to take a reading and math test.  I scored high enough so then they put me in a gifted and talented class, but my local junior high school P.S.--Junior High School 136 [J.H.S. 136, Walter J. Damrosch School, Bronx, New York] didn't have gifted and talented so I had to go to a school outside of my district, Junior High School 133 [J.H.S. 133; Bronx Regional High School, Bronx, New York], which did.  So, I show up, there's seven--they call 'em special progress classes, seven SP-1, seven SP-2 and then it went from 7-1 to 7-22.  I just--this in junior high school, I'm in the seventh grade and I'm looking and remember now, in sixth grade we only went to 6-7, 6-8 right?  Which was pretty bad, right, if you're in 6-7 then it was like, whoa, even was 6-5.
Speaker 2: Did each sub-group have a classroom?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: So, they're like twenty-two?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Classes of seventh graders and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep, classes, yes, twenty-two classes of seventh graders in the school, and so I'm sitting saying to myself, "Oh, my god, what does it mean to be in 7-15?"  I mean you know your life is over, much less he had 7-20 or something like that, but even what I found was even the kids in 7-4, they did not think they were gonna go to college, zero, no chance.  The kids in 7 SP-2 were paranoid 'cause they weren't in 7 SP-1 and they were trying to figure out what the difference was and there the belief system ran through the educators, directly to the kids and all of us understood what I meant when you said, "I'm in 7-12."  We all knew just what they meant, right.  Probably weren't gonna finish high school, gonna going to one of the drop out factories, no future in anything, maybe think of automotive or take a lot of shop classes, because that's what you were gonna be doing, right.  And there were these kids on the bubble, 7-2, 7-3, people like maybe a few of them might make it and they didn't get languages, they didn't get algebra, they didn't get geometry.  They didn't get any of that kind of stuff when they were in middle school, and I again, so if I thought in the fourth grade the system was unfair, I'm looking at middle school, and I'm just like, "This is crazy, this doesn't many any sense to me," and how could you have all these kids with no future? But still I was happy I was in 7 SP-1, because again it was like maybe you've got a future. But then it all fell apart for me.
Story_ID: 654020
Speaker 1: Ninth grade, so in the ninth grade now I'm in 9 SP-1 [at J.H.S. 133; Bronx Regional High School, Bronx, New York], and we're all looking at high schools and they're like five good high schools in New York City [New York, New York], right.  And what's so weird is it's like the same five high schools, right?  Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York], Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and there were a couple of others that were considered okay, but you had to take tests to get in 'em, so like in most places they had practice sessions so you could take the test so you could compete, but I tell anybody, which is true, my hormones kicked in sometime in the eighth grade.  I couldn't've cared less about things.  All I was interested was, where were the girls, and how could I spend more time with them? And I just, I mean I took the whole thing as a joke and sure enough I didn't get in.  I didn't get in anywhere, and I'm thinking, holy cow, I'm gonna have to go to Morris High School [Bronx, New York].  Now, the thing I knew about Morris High School, when I was in the fourth grade I got out of school [at P.S. 99, Dimitrious Myers School, Bronx, New York] at 12:30 'cause they had split schedules, and I was a latchkey kid.  My mother [Mary Williams Canada] gave me a key, after school I went in, opened the door, made my lunch and then did whatever I wanted, right, until my brothers came home at three o'clock, and there was no one out.  There was only me and another kid who, on our block who had the same split schedule, but there was this one kid, a really nice kid who was in high school and he was nice 'cause he would talk to us.  Remember, I'm in the fourth grade, I'm talking to a high school kid?  And--I'll just hold it (background noise).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So, I'm talking to the kid and I'm asking him--I know why I'm home, right I got a split schedule.  "You have to go to high school, why are you home?"  He said, "Because they pulled a gun on me at Morris," and I stopped.  I had never heard (unclear) gun, I was like, "They pulled a gun on you, why?"  "I don't know why."  Said, "I was just in the yard, some kids came up, they started saying some stuff, and I asked 'em why they was messing with me, and they pulled out a gun, and I thought they were gonna shoot me."  I said, "In high school?"  He said, "Yeah."  "So why didn't you tell anybody?"  "You can't tell people stuff like--."  "What do you mean, tell the teacher."  He said, "No, no you don't understand little Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Canada], not high school, you don't tell the teachers.  You either fight."  He said, "I couldn't fight these--the guy had a gun, what am I?"  So, I'm sitting there thinking, holy mack.  I'm worried about you know fourth grade stuff.  This kid is telling me at Morris High School they walk around with guns and you're on your own.  So, now you fast forward back to, now, I got to go to Morris High School.  And I realize, now remember, I'm, I'm a pretty tough kid, right?  But this is the definition of toughness.  I'm a tough kid in my middle school, but we knew just like the classes were ranked from 7 SP [special progress], the toughness in the school was ranked.  We knew who the toughest kid in the school was, right?  And when I got there, he was in a grade ahead of me and everybody knew him.  Nobody in the whole school could beat this kid and we had seen him in action.  That kid went to Morris.  He came back and told me they were taking his lunch money, and I just said, "They're taking your lunch money?"  I mean he wasn't--he was like, "Nah, I ain't never seen no kids like this, these are big kids, they're like eighteen," and--I was like, oh my, I was, I was in the middle of the pack, I was feeling good that I was ranked number 132 or something right, and if this kid couldn't make it, I knew there was no way I'd get through that.  I was like, how do you actually get an education and get through that?  So, now I'm thinking I don't know if I'm gonna be able to make it through because you have two choices.  You have my brother Dan's choice, never go out, never--but if--I couldn't live like that.  I was a kid, I was used to being on the streets.  I was used to being the people, going wherever the girls were, and to the parties there, and so I asked my grandparents [Canada's maternal grandparents, Lydia Pearson Williams and Leonard Williams, Sr.] if I could come live with them in Long Island [New York] and go to high school there.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: And it saved me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it saved it, they're just--I wouldn't have made it out of Morris, I wouldn't have.  I know me, I know the, the culture that I was fighting against and barely holding it together.  I mean I was getting by, by the skin of my teeth.  I, when I went out to that school [Wyandanch Memorial High School], Wyandanch [New York] is a real tough town now.  It was not tough when I went there in '68 [1968], it was not tough.  It was a country town slow, very calm, no fighting, none of that stuff.  There were never fights, you didn't see any fights and I mean we've seen fights all the time in the city.  I focused on academic stuff and it prepared me to go to college [Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine].
Speaker 2: Okay, so everybody was, was, that you and Dan [Daniel Canada] and John [John Canada] were both in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We went, Dan went first, when and then John went.  By the time, I got out of, got there Dan had graduated and gone on off to college, when--so, it was John and I were there for two years until he graduated; and then I did my senior year there.
Story_ID: 654021
Speaker 1: Did you tell us about Mike?  Was Mike the high school student that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. No. Mike--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Mike was the guy in the Bronx [New York].  So, I'm in the Bronx I tell you I'm trying to figure this whole thing out.  The person who was the most revered person on our block was a guy named Michael Adams [ph.].  He was a good athlete, he was handsome beyond belief, he was as tough as nails, and everyone coveted his attention.  The way Mike and I became friends is I had a habit of getting up very early in the mornings.  On Saturday morning, in July nobody is on the streets of the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] before 9:30, 10:00.  I'm out at 6:30, sitting on the stoop.  The only other person that was up was Mike Adams who had this really tough life.  His mother was on drugs, put him out of the house.  He was probably fifteen.  He was living in the basement which we called the cut 'cause it's just an empty apartment down there that he had a bed that he made and the super had let him stay there and he would get up and go to breakfast and get the news.  He'd get the Daily News [New York Daily News] and he'd read the newspaper and have breakfast, and I was up and so we just got to know one another and you know, he to me was everything I wanted to be.  He was a person who read, he played sports, but most importantly he told everybody, "This kid here y'all leave him alone.  He's gonna be somebody."  I was just, I mean I felt like the chosen one, right?  No one could bother me, anything happened I, I wouldn't go and just say, "I'm gonna get Mike," right?  But if I did, and once or twice I did, he was always there and I tell folk that, that there two issues which I think are, impress me.  Mike was teaching me how to play basketball and I later played basketball in high school [Wyandanch Memorial High School, Wyandanch, New York] and I played my junior and senior year, and I played a year of freshman ball in college and half a year in the varsity, so I--Mike taught me how to play and we were up early in the morning and he was going--I had the basketball, he was going to wash up.  I was outside and I was shooting the ball off of a no parking sign, and there was a Cadillac there and the ball bounced off the pole, hit the man's car.  So, the man came out, he's a grown man.  And he started cursing at me, you know, "What the F are you doing with that ball?  You hit my car."  He said, "Give me that ball."  And he took my ball and he put it in his trunk and closed the door.  I said, "Mister, mister that's not my ball.  That's Mike's ball, and I'm sorry, but I wasn't trying to hit your--."  "Shut up, I'm not--." So as this is going on, here comes Mike, and I say, "Mister, mister really, that's not my ball, that's--."  He said, "I don't care whose ball it is."  Mike comes out he says, "What happened Geoff [HistoryMaker Geoffrey Canada]?"  I said, "This guy took the ball and put it--."  And he said, "Why'd you take the kid's ball?"  He said, "Well, you mind your business (unclear)."  He said, "No, no, no, that is my--why'd you take that kid's ball?"  So, now Mike is--I'm telling you he's like fifteen, this is a grown man.  The guy started lipping at Mike, he said, "Give 'em back the ball."  And the guy said, "You're gonna make me?"  And when Mike put his hand in his pocket and you could hear, well a big weapon was a K55 [Mercator K55K], you could hear that knife opening.  That guy took one look at Mike, went in his car, took the ball out, gave him back the ball, gave me the ball, said, "I'm sorry," and he left.  Mike never batted an eye.  Never said nothing about it.  I was just mystified.  I was like, oh, my goodness, this is great.  He was like, "Come on, let's go play."  And that was it, and at that level of clarity that he was willing to risk his life, did not matter, for what he believed as a principle, you just don't do that.  Kid didn't do anything, you're not gonna take stuff from anybody I know.  That was just the way the deal went--
Story_ID: 654022
Speaker 1: And I tell folk, my first interaction with a gun was when--we had this kid named Gregory [ph.] who said something nasty to one of the women who were on the block, who was a drunk and he said something you know, "You're drunk, or you're ugly or something." So, her nephew who was this huge guy, the guy was--the guy had to be about 6'4" and weighed maybe about 260 [pounds].  We hadn't seen people like that.  He came in a car and he came up, we were all sitting on the side and I was fourteen now, maybe.  I was--I had wanted then--maybe I was fourteen, thirteen and he said, "I'm looking for Gregory."  Two guys then, you know a bunch of teenagers and they was like, "Why?"  He said, "'Cause he said something about my aunt, I'm gonna kick his butt."  He used a little stronger language, and they were like, "We don't know him."  So, Gregory's there and the guy said, "No, I'm looking for this guy.  Y'all gotta tell me where he is."  And finally, Gregory says, "Here I am, I'm him."  So, the guy said, "Now, you said that to my aunt, I'm gonna whip your--." So, Gregory's like, "Come on, let's fight."  We knew Greg couldn't fight very well.  Well, I was amazed, he gonna fight this huge guy.  So, the guys were like, "Oh, this is gonna be good."  So, he goes up, Gregory puts up his hands and this guy begins to smack him all over the street.  He is so big, Gregory can't do nothing with the guy and then finally Mike [Michael Adams (ph.)] says, "Okay, that's enough."  (Unclear) the other guy, "Look, that's enough." And the guy said, "No, that ain't enough.  I'm not done."  He said, "No, no that's enough, you won, you did your point."  And the guy said, "No."  So, it was about six of us on the fence.  So, all six get up.  Now, I'm the youngest one and these are teenagers.  I'm like a little skinny kid.  I'm like okay, there's six of us, this looks like we can win.  This guy is huge, but I guess six against one, we can whip.  The guy goes and he gets in his trunk, goes in his trunk and he take out a .22 [caliber] and he takes out the .22 and he says, "Back up."  And I said, "This is over.  That's enough, let's go sit back down.  Let him beat up Gregory, we'll--." He didn't move, just didn't move.  Here's the deal and, and Gregory's yelling, "Come on, I ain't (unclear), come on and fight me."  The guy puts the gun in his pocket and starts fighting again, everybody gets closer to the guy.  He pulls the gun out again.  Now, Mike had told me one of these words of wisdom, "A real gangster you shouldn't worry about.  They won't shoot you accidentally.  It's a person who is scared who will shoot you.  So, if you see somebody and you see they're scared with a gun, that's the person you have to be worried about, not a professional who does it for a living, they go stick up people, they--."  So, I'm looking and the guy's hand is shaking with this gun and I'm thinking you know, someone's gonna die.  Didn't no one back down, they took another step forward and the guy was gonna be forced to either shoot or get jumped and he just jumped in his car and he left and that, that kind of city bravery stuck with me and changed the way I thought about existence and whether or not your group will protect you.  Now, this was before guns were around.  Nowadays, somebody would have shot all those guys.  They wouldn't have thought nothing of it, right.  But they back then people didn't shoot folks with guns.
Speaker 2: This is like 1967?
Speaker 1: This is, yeah this is '67 [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right--
Speaker 1: It was just not, not--
Speaker 2: It was more of a fist thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was more of a fist thing.  This was really about fists and maybe a knife, but it really, the gun thing hadn't come in for another you know ten, twelve years before they became prolific, but that was the group and this guy Mike was my hero.  He was just a guy who he wouldn't bother anybody, but he, nor would he ever back down from what he thought was a principle, and he both protected me and coached me and made me feel special.  Now, I'll tell you a funny thing.  You fast forward twenty years, I'm a grown man, I'm working, I come back to New York [New York].  I meet other people.  You know what they said to me?  "Mike saved me, I was the most special guy Mike--." I said, "No, you weren't the most, I was the most special."  This guy was like, "No Mike, I was the most--."  This guy had gone through life just reaching in, saving kids, convincing them that he saw something so special in them that they were gonna get out of this mess that was devastating our community.  You, fast forward, I'm gonna be sixty-five in a month.  Out of all the kids that I grew up with as friends, the guys--I know two who are alive today.  One has cancer, and the other is waiting on a kidney transplant, everybody else is gone.  Those streets in the Bronx [New York], they destroyed everybody.  And some died young, some died middle age, but no one really got to be healthy, and sort of you know, their senior years it was just too devastating all of the stuff that people went through and so, that again when people think about why I wanted to recreate, right, a community.  You get a toxic community, it will destroy everybody; and that's essentially what the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] was.
Story_ID: 654023
Speaker 1: This is an interesting 'cause do, do you know what happened to Mike [Michael Adams (ph.)]?  Yeah, 'cause here's a fifteen year old kid--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --encouraging younger kids to do something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) positive--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and protecting 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, Mike ended up coming to work for me here [Harlem Children's Zone, New York, New York], he was known as Coach Mike and everybody loved him and he coached a whole new generation of kids and about four years ago he got brain cancer and he died and it was, it was very sad, and if you go, you look at our coaches, we have some of the best coaches.  Our teams hardly ever lose--anybody, our charter school league, we have been champions every year I think except once, or maybe for the last ten years.  Who were the coaches trained by?  Coach Mike, so he had this impact, and that was just and this, but it was all in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] and well something we call old timers' day in the South Bronx, where people would go back and from the you know the early days.  He was still like a star, like a legend and it was just, he was a just a good and interesting person.  I tell folk, you know I, I have always wanted to be like him, right?  'Cause he got no money, he got nothing out of this deal, he didn't have no professional degrees, he was just saying, "I'm gonna try and save as many as I can save." And he did it through sports and mostly basketball which is what he loved to coach and I think saved a bunch of kids.
