Story_ID: 659069
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	I am Donald Eugene Camp.  Donald, D-O-N-A-L-D, Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Camp, C-A-M-P [HistoryMaker Donald Camp].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	Twenty-eight, July, 1940, Meadville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2:  	I'm, I'm an artist, a photographer.  I guess we could leave it at that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Today's date I think is the 11th, isn't it?  Yeah, June 11, 2014.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	In my studio at 4511 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 659070
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask.  Our director likes these.  And they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gumbo.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	Favorite time of the year is fall, late fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	New Orleans [Louisiana], of course.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  (Pause) I've created thee noble and thou hast abase thyself.  Rise then and be--I forget exactly how it goes.  I can give it to you in text, but it is a Baha'i--it's, it's a quote that talks about human nobility and the necessity for us to do it, to be there.
Speaker 1: Okay, you say it's a Baha'i quote?
Speaker 2:  	It is a Baha'i quote.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2:  	And I should have had it memorized but I don't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's good. That's, that's anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I can give it to you.
Speaker 1: --we get the gist so.
Story_ID: 659071
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: Your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ira Camp, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	Her name is Martha Gladys, G-L-A-D-Y-S, Erving, E-R-V-I-N-G [Martha Erving Camp].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember.  She died when I was young, when I was twelve years old.  And, there's a history of her having been kidnapped as an infant.  And so, she wasn't really found.  She was found by her sister, one of her sisters in around 1948.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  She was--
Speaker 2:  She had been kidnapped.  My grandmother on that side had been murdered and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is--let's slow down and maybe just tell this story.  What is the, what is this story?
Speaker 2:  	It's, it's, it's not complete.  I, I asked one of my aunts on, on my mother's side about that and she didn't wanna talk about it because she said it was just too horrible.  What I do know about it was that my gran- that her--my mother's mother was murdered.  She had five girls, and my mother was the youngest one.  And, when she was murdered, when my grandmother was murdered, a--someone came in I assumed that it was probably a person by the name of Sylvia Prevost because that's the name that was on my mother's and father's marriage certificate.
Speaker 1: Prevost?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  P-R-E-V-O-S-T.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Because she was--that was the name and the address on my, on my parents' marriage certificate.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a white woman?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that name sounds like it would be but I don't--who knows.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I mean, it's, it's French--but it could be Haitian French--
Speaker 1: Sure, that's right.
Speaker 2: --or New Orleans [Louisiana] French.  So, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, anyway--so, my mother never really knew her real history.
Speaker 1: So, she was raised by Sylvia?
Speaker 2:  	She was raised by Sylvia Prevost, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who--the way you reacted she probably was black I guess.  Is that what you think?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know.
Speaker 1: You have no idea?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Well, it would be remarkable if she was white, so most people would probably say something if it was.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I mean, I, I would think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because my mother was a very dark woman.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, it probably was a black woman.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, I never knew her, you know.
Speaker 1: So, do you know where, where your mother was born?
Speaker 2:  	Someplace in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	New York State.  And I only know that because the other four sisters were from New York State.  And when I asked my--one of the aunts about it very late, I mean, probably twenty or thirty years ago, the last one was living and she wouldn't give me any history.
Speaker 1: So, were the other--was your mother the only sister kidnapped?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Yeah, she was the--
Speaker 1: She was an infant you say?
Speaker 2:  	She was an infant, yeah.  And so, she never knew she had sisters.  Even though there was something kind of mysterious that happened during the mid- ear- mid-'40s [1940s], mid-1940s.  And this was--she--when she finally--my aunt Vera [ph.] who found her, when they were sharing stories, you know, I was, I was a kid and I was very curious about what was going on about.  So, I remember when they were talking about who her sisters were that my mother said, well, there was another--my aunt V said that there was another one who died.  And, she died around 1944.  And, my mother went and got the Bible and she had written in the Bible that night when her sister died, that my sister died.  Even though she didn't know she had a sister which is, you know, kind of a very kind of mysterious to, to happen, you know.  But that was kind of what my mother did.  She was like that.
Story_ID: 659072
Speaker 1: And also, an incredible singer.
Speaker 2: Okay, really?  Okay.
Speaker 1:  	(Pause) I can tell you more about my mother [Martha Erving Camp] because parents are critical to who the children become.  And my mother, of course, was a really great part of (pause) kind of encouraging creative light--a creative lifestyle.  Because she was--first of all she was an incredibly good singer.  She sang professionally, even though when she had, she had seven of us as children and so she chose to be a, a, I can't stay at home, but probably a stay in town mom.  And, but she gave concerts and she did have an offer to sing professionally with one of the, one of the nationally known gospel groups of the '40s [1940s].  And, I, I don't recall, again, I don't recall the name of the group.
Speaker 2: So, she specialized in gospel music basically?
Speaker 1:  	Well, no, not really, I mean, she, she did classical as well.  And I remember, you know, several times that she--I would ask her to--that was the wonderful thing about being her little boy 'cause I was eight years younger than any of them, so I was kind of the last one at home.  And I could say, you know, you know, "Could you sing 'Ave Maria' [Franz Schubert] for me?"  And she would sing it for me.  But she encouraged all of us to be artists.  I mean, we had art stuff at home.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: Go, go ahead, finish what you were saying.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, so it's--no it's--yeah, I was finished.
Story_ID: 659073
Speaker 1: Was she raised in, in New York?  Or--
Speaker 2:  	No. (Shakes head) No, she would have been raised around the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] areas, a town south of Pittsburgh. I can't--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not Allegheny [Allegheny County, Pennsylvania] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) Pittsburgh--
Speaker 2:  	It would have been between Pittsburgh and Washington [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Monroeville [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	At least that's the name that was on the marriage certificate was Monroeville.  That's where Sylvia Prevost would have lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did your mother [Martha Erving Camp] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2:  	No, no.  Both my mother and father [Ira Camp, Sr.] maximum at eighth grade.  (Pause) Well, I mean, that was almost standard then, you know.  My, my father was born in 1890, my mother I think 1902.  Eighth grade education at that time were a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so your mother died at what, at fifty-two?
Speaker 2:  	She died, yeah, she died in 1952 at the age of forty-eight.  That was, for me, I, I always, I always kind of dropped a year.  I always thought I was eleven when she died.  And not until probably about twenty years I went back to visit the grave and I found out that I was twelve not eleven.  So, it was like I'd lost a whole year out of my life when she died.  And, I didn't know that was gonna happen.  When I was--I, I grew up with her being sick and I didn't know it.  She was--when I was seven, eight years old, nine years old, I would--I knew how to give shots because she was in a lot of pain, and so sometimes the--her arms where she would give herself shots would become so hard that she couldn't, she couldn't give herself a shot.  And so, I would find a soft spot on her body to give her Demerol [meperidine] which was the painkiller that she was on.  She had a disease called dropsy [edema] I guess and--'cause she had rheumatic fever as a child.  And her body would just fill up with water and she would have what was called a tap.  I don't know what the surgical procedure was, but she would come home and she would basically fill up bedpans.  And it was my job because I was the only child at home at that time, the only--you know, everybody else was gone.  My father was working 'cause he was a barber, and so it was my job to take care of my mother.  And so, I would empty bedpans and give shots and learn how to cook and--but to me that was normal, that was my childhood.  And, on top of--and then I guess on top of that, you know, I had a creative--I had creative brothers and sister who were before me and I kind of had that path to follow too.  So, I've always had a, I've always had kind of a pressure on me to be creative.
Story_ID: 659074
Speaker 1: So what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side as a result of being reunited with your aunt and--
Speaker 2: (Cough).
Speaker 1: --and were there any stories about them or, or what your mother's parents were like?
Speaker 2:  	Almost nothing.  I, I do know the one aunt who found, who found my mother [Martha Erving Camp].
Speaker 1: That's Aunt Vera [ph.], right?
Speaker 2:  	Aunt Vera, yeah.  And she was at I think an Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] meeting and that's when she kind of knew.  She made a relationship, she found somebody who knew someone, who knew someone, who knew my mother.  When my mother died, she died in front of me, you know, so you can imagine what that was like.  So, then my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] was left alone and I went to New York [New York].  My aunt Vera brought me to New York and so I went to school there for a while, P.S. 52.  And, the--I remember there one night and she--we'd gone to the corner drugstore to get a soda and on the way back she pushed me out of the way and she took the full force of a car.  So, my last image of her for a long time was her rolling on top of this car.  And, I, you know, later on I found out she broke--well, both legs were broken and she was really severely injured of course.  But, that sent me back to my hometown, Farrell [Pennsylvania], and my father, who in a sense really didn't know how to take care of a kid and had to, you know, had to work daily in order to make a living because, you know, barbers--being a barber is not an easy life.  I knew I had two other aunts there, Aunt Ruth [ph.], and Aunt Alberta [ph.], and, you know.
Speaker 1: Are those your mother's sisters?
Speaker 2:  	Those would have been my mother's sisters that were still living at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So then talk anything--they didn't say anything about your--their, their parents or what they did?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I--the only, the only time I really thought about it, you know I mean, you know, growing up unless you're sitting around those tables you don't hear those stories, you know.  So, I heard the stories that my father would tell or my mother would tell around our table, but around my aunts' tables--first of all, I wasn't around their tables that often.  And Aunt V's stories I wasn't there long enough to even get any.  I was only there for about three or four months before the accident.  I later tried to get some information from Aunt Ruth who was the last of the--the last one to survive, and she just kind of clammed up and said, "It's too terrible.  I don't wanna talk about it."
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause their mother is murdered and the--did the father [Andrew Erving] do it?
Speaker 2:  	No, no.  She ran--from what I hear she ran a boarding house and it was one of the boarders who murdered her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that really--that's interesting that they ran a boarding house.  So, your grandparents--at least your grandmother ran a boarding house. Which is a--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  But I know nothing, I've never even heard of a grandfather--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in that situation.  So, I don't know what happened with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Never just--never even an inclination there was a grandfather on the scene.
Story_ID: 659075
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side and then we'll, then we'll try to put them together.  Can you give us your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	My father is Ira Guy, that's G-U-Y, Camp [Ira Camp, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I know a lot more about, I know a lot more about him and some of its very good and some of its very bad.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	His date of birth was May 8th, 1890, 1890.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1890.  And where, where was he born?
Speaker 2:  	Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2:  	My--I can talk about my grandfather who was Sylvester Kamper.  And that's with a K, K-A-M-P-E-R.  And, I--again, a grandmother, I'm not sure.  I keep hearing a difference between a Anna Kamper and Ophelia Kamper [Ophelia Jackson Kamper].  I think Anna Kamper was my, my father's mother.
Speaker 1: Anna, you said?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, A-N-N-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	(Cough) But my father talked a lot about Ophelia, so I don't know exactly who Ophelia was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, my, my father spoke of both of--he, he spoke of her, of his mother being a very kind person.  And he spoke of my fa- my grandfather as being extremely mean person.  And he swore that he would never be like his grandfather--or his father which is why I guess he was so kind to us.
Speaker 1: So, did he have any stories about what he was like, I mean?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  First of all, he said he would beat him mercilessly with no reason.  And so, he had to--as soon as he turned of age, and at that age it was I think fourteen, that he could leave home he left.  He was kind of noted in the city, you know, Columbus, Ohio as a mean man.  That mean one.  And, when he died, the only people at his funeral were the ones in the poor home and they went there as an outing, as something to do.  Just to get out, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now is there a story behind his name--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --K-A-M-P-E-R?
Speaker 2:  	No, I don't have a name--I don't have anything about the K-A-M-P-E-R--
Speaker 1: Well it sounds almost kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I have a story about how I became Camp.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it sounds almost like Eastern European or a Jewish name.
Speaker 2:  	It sounds German.
Speaker 1: German, yeah, Kamper.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) well it is German, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, how it became German, I don't know.  But I think at that--you know, well, first of all, you know, there was not an interest in, in, in genealogy at that time.  And my father didn't want anything to do with my grandfather so, you know, that kind of disappeared.  Once he left home, he didn't want anything else to do with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But both--but the thing is, is also my grandfather was incredibly talented.  He was a calligrapher, I mean, he, he--at that time they had handwritten calling cards, business cards.  And that's what he did for his business.  There's a brief mentioned about him also having been a, a server, a waiter and waiting at the White House [Washington, D.C.].  And I don't know if that's fact or if, you know, if got mentioned in the story somewhere.
Speaker 1: Well, the people that did it are out here somewhere--
Speaker 2: (Cough) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and they were black people, yeah, too--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those days.  So, he may have been a waiter at the White House.  It's worth writing down.
Story_ID: 659076
Speaker 1:  	The other part of the con- the confusion on that is my grandmother on my father's side--and it's interesting.  This really is oral history in that sense because she was said--well, my father [Ira Camp, Sr.]--she was Indian [Native American].  And I think Lakota.  My father remembers being on a reservation, being taken to the--a reservation when he was young.
Speaker 2: Out--out west?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, yeah out west.  He showed me a photograph of her.  He was probably about fourteen or fifteen and it was one of the photographs that he didn't--it was, it was like a photograph but wasn't on display.  It was framed and everything.  But he, he took me in the bedroom, he opened the drawer, he took out the clothes, he picked out the paper that was on the bottom of the shelf, he pulled out a little gray box, opened the box, opened the tissue and inside of that was this photograph of this woman.  And he looked and he said, and she was--, "This is your grandmother."  And she was six feet tall, and her hair touched the floor.  He showed me this photograph of this beautiful woman and her hair touched the floor.  It was like, you know, that long.  And  he jus--and then he wrapped it back up and he put it back.  And I was never able to retrieve that photograph once he let--you know.
Story_ID: 659077
Speaker 1: Back to the name Camp.  I'm, I'm, well, I'm sure he changed his name after that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: --that's what, that's what happened, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, because he went, he went in the [U.S.] Navy when he was twenty or so, and he went on the USS Matsonia.  That's interesting, he recalled that when he was about ninety years old.  Someone asked him if he knew this ship, and he--oh, yeah, the USS Matsonia.  But, anyway, he went from Norfolk [Virginia] to France and back, and when he got back because he was a barber and because of the mistreatment that he had received as a black man and--he left.  He said, "I'm not going to put up with this."  And so, he just, he just left.
Speaker 1: Now, this would have been--this is 1910 when he's twenty years old.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So, this is earliest before World War I [WWI].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  And so, he said when he came--he went back to Cleveland [Ohio] I believe it was, which is where his mother was living, he had left my grandfather [Sylvester Kamper].  And he went and he found, you know, he went to the house and he saw the sea Ps there, the sea police and so he never went back in.  But then, that's when he dropped the E-R from the end changed the K to C and that's how we became the Camp family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they never caught up with him after?
Speaker 2:  	No, they never caught up with him after that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days when public records weren't as crispy as they are today--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so you could by change of the spelling disappear.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  And so, that's--'cause he says he wasn't, he wouldn't--he wasn't going back to the Navy after that mistreatment.  He said they kind of limited (unclear) (shrugs shoulders).
Speaker 1: And the Navy is notorious for being the toughest branch for black, I mean, servicemen, I mean, from what we've heard in these interviews.
Speaker 2:  	Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Navy's really been, well, bad on white sailors (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) Yeah, but anyway, that's how we became Camp.  And, you know, and I think the thing is, is that, you know, a combination with my mother [Martha Erving Camp] and my father [Ira Camp, Sr.], my father supported my mother.  He loved her very much and unlike his father, he treated us all with kindness.
Story_ID: 659078
Speaker 1: So, he was a barber by trade, all right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, is there a story about how he--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, did he go to barber school and (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No. He had an uncle in Chillicothe, Ohio, and so when he left home he went to the uncle to learn a trade.  He said he had to learn something.  He wanted to be a veterinarian.  That was the other thing my grandfather [Sylvester Kamper] did that was really mean.  Because he loved animals and he was really talented at, at, at working with animals and he had an offer from a white veterinarian who offered to send him to school to pay for his schooling, and my father often said, you know, his father would not let him do it.  And then later on he said, well, he--my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] would not have wanted me to be anything that he couldn't have been.  So, he was denied the opportunity to go vet school.  But then, he became a barber and he was just very competitive about that.  He did have some experience in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause he said at that time Chicago had some of the best shops, you know, in the country.  And so, he went to Chicago.  And he said he couldn't go to Chicago he--he got to the point where he could go to Chicago and be assured that he would get a chair.  So, that's where he'd go to make money for a short while.
Story_ID: 659079
Speaker 1: Okay, so, your father [Ira Camp, Sr.]--now.  Oh, we were talking about him--so his schooling basically, you know, he went to about the eighth grade formally (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, he trained as a barber with his uncle in Chillicothe [Ohio].
Speaker 2:  	Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: And was able to then move about the country and always have a skill he could, he could use.
Speaker 2:  	Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in Columbus [Ohio] did, did he have his own shop in Col--
Speaker 2:  	No, he didn't, no, he didn't have his own shop.
Speaker 1: Not, not in Columbus but--now, you grew up in
Speaker 2:  	I grew up in Farrell.
Speaker 1: Farrell, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us something about Farrell, Pe- Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2:  	It's a right on the Ohio border.  We use to--as kids, we used to enjoy being able to walk to Ohio.  We had to walk around the steel mill, but, you know, for us kids it was a nice three or four mile hike.  And so, we'd walk to Ohio and walk back just to say we'd walked to another state.  It's a steel town, and it's on a hill.  It's interesting the town, but it's interesting in the, in the sense that the hill is divided economically.  The mill is at the bottom.  The workers are the next rung up on the hill, then there's the middle class, and at the very top of the hill were the merchants in a sense.  We kind of thought of them as rich people, but they were the ones who owned the stores, they were the teachers and things like that.  But in--there was not when I grew up, there was not a black teacher or a nonwhite teacher in the entire system.  We lived--I remember, you know, as a kid, as a very young kid four or five years old living on the lowest part of the hill.  And then at some point we moved a little further up on the hill, and then in the--around 1947 or '48 [1948], we moved to kind of the highest part of the middle part of the hill (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a railroad track or something dividing the sides of town or anything like that?
Speaker 2:  	There wasn't a railroad but there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just a hill in gradations.
Speaker 2:  	You knew where the line was, you knew where the street was that divided it.  But, that then put me into a school, Eckles Elementary School [L.R. Eckles Elementary School, Farrell, Pennsylvania], where for the first year I was the only, the only black kid in the school.
Story_ID: 659080
Speaker 1: I'm gonna get to that in a minute, but I--I have to backtrack a little bit here--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and just ask you the question.  And, I don't know if you know, but is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  My father [Ira Camp, Sr.] was a gambler (laughter).  And, I don't know where he was gambling but he saw my mother [Martha Erving Camp], he liked my mother and wanted to date my mother.  And he said--my mother said, "I can't marry a gambler."  And so, my father quit gambling.  And, they got married.  My father often looked at me and said, "I saw her and she was just this beautiful black woman," (laughter) okay.  And, it's interesting because my father was light enough that if he had pushed it, he could have passed.  But I think what was going on at that point, because I think, you know, I mean, he was half Indian [Native American].  I mean, you know, his father [Sylvester Kamper] was a very--what photograph we do--I have seen of my grandfather he was very dark.  My mother--my grandmother was Indian [Native American], she was very light.  And my father was very light and had that kind of, you know, hair.  And I, and I think a lot of--probably a lot of Indians became colored or black at that time.  Colored would have been the term.  Because I think that at that time in that co--in the United States, it probably much better being colored than it was being Indian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's something, yeah.
Speaker 2: --if you wanted to come off the reservation.  At least you weren't being hunted down.  And I found when I was at the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin], I was going through the morgue, and I found this one photograph made in 1915 of (Unclear), the renegade in Michigan.  He's a renegade Indian in Michigan and they were hunting him down, 1915.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, this is five years after your father was, was, in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and only ninety-nine years ago.  So, it's not ancient history.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, this, so, now your parents met in--was this in Farrell [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	No, yeah I don't know--no.  I don't know where it was, somewhere in western Pennsylvania I believe.  My father moved around as a barber and even the early part of my family when I, when I talk with my brothers, they lived in Rochester [Pennsylvania] and then it was Conneaut Lake [Pennsylvania], and then it was Meadville [Pennsylvania], and then it was Lionsville [sic. Lionville, Pennsylvania], then it was Sharon [Pennsylvania], then it was Farrell (laughter).  So, there was a lot of moving around and finding a place that could house a large family, because they were six.  I wasn't born until 1940 but before 1940 they moved a lot.  And, sometimes it was just simply an economic move so that they could farm.  When people would not come to, you know, when people stopped getting their haircuts during the Depression [Great Depression], my father started--he rented a farm, a small farm because he knew he had to feed his family.
Story_ID: 659081
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, how they walked, how they talked, what they looked like, who do you think you take after he most?
Speaker 2:  	Probably my mother [Martha Erving Camp].  My, my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] was a very brisk, very alert person.  And my mother was very, conte- a very thoughtful person, soft person, a gentle person.  And I, I think I'm much more like, much more like that.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 659082
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings beginning with the oldest and just tell us a little bit about what they're doing or what they did?
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  Ira, and he'd be junior he's Ira Jr.--Ira Guy, Jr [Ira Camp, Jr.].  And he was a silver solderer.  And he was sixteen when I was born, was in the [U.S.] Navy during World War II [WWII].  Ended up in the Pacific but fortunately the war ended just before he was, he was going to go into battle.  He was in the Navy though.  And, he was also a really good dancer and swimmer, an incredible swimmer.  In fact, he was--they, they thought he might be Olympic material and so he went to Virginia to training for the Olympics, but they wouldn't let him in the pool.  He could train but not get in the water because he was black.  And then he went to jewelry school in Cle- in New Castle [Pennsylvania] where he became an engraver.  He studied engraving and jewelry making and watch making.  And his work was really accepted, you know, really highly thought of there.  And, at that time, Tiffany [Tiffany and Co.] would go in and they would judge students work and they would offer a job.  So, my brother went to New York [New York] because they offered him the job, because his work, his work was the best of all the students.  But, then he found out, well, he couldn't go in because he was black.  So, and that was--this was 1946, '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  And so, he moved to Rochester [New York], started working for Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] as a silver solderer which is, as I understand it, is kind of one of those things that very few people can do.  All of my brothers and sisters have passed away by now.  I have one left in Atlanta [Georgia].  But, in order after that, is Sylvia [Sylvia Camp], my sister.  And, she was a nurse.  She went to Ha- she studied at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she moved to Camden [New Jersey].  And her husband died--she had two children and then her husband, who was a doctor, died.  And so, a few years after that she took the kids and moved to France, the southern part of France.  And she stayed there until they graduated.  And she said--she was living in Camden and she saw the decline of Camden beginning so she just wanted to get them out of there.  And so, she said she did the financial calculations and found out that it was like three or four more dollars a month to live in the Cote d'Azur [France].  The French--well, Cote d'Azur, that's what I know it as, then Camden.  So, she decided to give her kids that experience.  Then there are the twins, there's Hubert [Hubert Camp] and Herbert [Herbert Camp].  Hubert was the oldest, the older one, and he was a, a dentist.  Studied at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], played trumpet, but mainly he, he just really kind of loved--he loved dentistry, all right.  That's the, I mean, the thing is that everyone in my family we really ended up doing what we loved to do because that's what we were taught to do.  And he loved dentistry.  He loved being able to restore someone's mouth, making them healthy.  Herbert was a graduate from Columbia University [New York, New York], the first one in the family to really study art.  And, he was a--he ended up being a ceramist and really fine painter.  But he ended up being a ceramist and moved to Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago] where he did work on the presidential palace there.  And, you know, it was also kind of an escape.  He couldn't--he like my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] could not stand the, the, the racism, you know, that he was running into in trying to be an artist here.  But, he was also my father says, the most like my grandfather [Sylvester Kamper] in that he was watching him paint one day and he looked and said he could have sworn he saw his father.  Because, he said, the similarity of the way he handled the brush and everything it was just like a reincarnation of his grandfather--or his father.  (Pause) He was the first one of us to pass away.
Story_ID: 659083
Speaker 1: So his (background noise) father, the, the--Sylvester Kamper, I know he was a calligrapher--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but he was--did he paint too (unclear)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --as well--he paint--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But just the way he handled--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he was a calligrapher.  But, yeah, just the way he was handling the pen and everything.  The next one would have been James [James Camp].  James, Jim, he was--he spent time in the [U.S.] Army.  He was a drill sergeant in the Army for a long time.  He also kind of bought the house, he, he arranged to buy the house, the last house in Farrell [Pennsylvania] that I remember living in.  And, he was also at home when my mother [Martha Erving Camp] died.  He was--the thing with him he, he, he did a lot of things.  But, when he was in Camden [New Jersey] and I went to stay with him in Camden when I was ready to quit school, and that's another story, but he came to Farrell and got me and I went to Camden to live with him.  And in, in his basement he was doing wood sculpture, functional wood sculpture.  So, they were walnut tables and chairs but really beautiful designs.  And then he decided, well, you know, I, I can't stay at RCA [Radio Corporation of America; RCA Corporation] anymore and so he got one of the shops down on Sa- Sansom Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And that was his life, that's what he did.  He did really wonderful, really beautiful walnut carved furniture.  And, Frank Sinatra had a piece, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] had a piece.  Frank Sinatra used his on stage occasionally.  So, he did, you know, he did these pieces and he did them for some celebrities but he couldn't make a living off of that, I mean, but he--so he just sold--he created art, I mean, he was an artist.  But, he was a wood sculptor.
Story_ID: 659084
Speaker 1: William, he's the one that's living now he lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  And, he was a pianist.  Age three years old he started playing piano.  When he was eight years old, he was on the Major Bowes program ['Major Bowes Amateur Hour'] and he won that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a major, major program the Major Bowes.
Speaker 1:  	And he won national.
Speaker 2: Did he?  So, so, William Camp?
Speaker 1:  	William, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Won the Major Bowes--now, this would have been in about what year?
Speaker 1:  	Around 1940--well, he's--now, let me see.  It would have been just after the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 2: Now, this was Major Bowes radio show broadcast all over the United States.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: People listened to it and first major talent show--
Speaker 1: Yep (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I guess before Arthur Godfrey and Ted Mack, and those other people.
Speaker 1:  	Yep.
Speaker 2: Major Bowes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--yeah, he won that national.  And, he sold a song that he wrote for eight dollars or ten dollars, 'Chattanooga Shoe Shine Boy.'  Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, now that's the song that was parodied in the 'Young Frankenstein' [sic.].  "Pardon me boy, is that the Chattanooga choo--"; is that the one you're--
Speaker 1:  	That's the one.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Track twenty-nine (mumbles).
Speaker 1:  	Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	And he thought he was getting a lot of money for it.  I mean, he's a young kid.
Speaker 2: He sold it for how much?
Speaker 1:  	I think it was ten dollars.  Which was, you know, a fair amount of money at that, but (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Chattanooga Choo Choo.'
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  He later became--he was, he was a pianist.  I mean, really fine pianist.  And, he led the Club Harlem band for years in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  And so, when Atlantic City started going down, he saw that was no longer a method of working, you know, making a living, he got a Ford scholarship [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] to go to med school.  So, this would have been about thirty, about forty, about forty years old.  And, so that's when he started med school, became a physician, moved to Atlanta and is now retired living in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Now, this is one man you're talking about?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Speaker 2: One human being, one person did all of this.  And as a retired physician in Orlando [Florida], you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) No, Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Atlanta, okay, all right.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  But, he would never describe himself as a, as a musician or as a doctor.  Just, "I've always been an inventor," so (laughter) again, you know, he's a brilliant person.  And I think he's the one who really inspired me.  He's the one that really inspires me as it to, how to--almost nothing--there's almost nothing that you can't do.  Later when I wanted to go to college and I was forty-two, it was the fact that he--I thought he was forty-two as well, but it was the fact that he started--really started med school at a late ag- late age.  So, I figure, well, you know, if I need college that's what I can do because I have that family connection.  It wasn't just some abstract thing out there, you know, I had a brother who did it.  So--
Speaker 2: Wow.  So, that's quite a--is that, is that it and you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, that's, that's, that's my immediate family.
Speaker 2: So, you'll have to get us William's phone number if he's--
Speaker 1:  	Oh, definitely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's--yeah, so this is a talented family.  Now, they were much--how much older is your--is William than you?
Speaker 1:  	Eight years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, there's quite a gap.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  I, I was like an only child.  They thought I was (laughter)--they thought they were finished.  I was a surprise.
Story_ID: 659085
Speaker 1: So, now, do, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  And it would have been in that little house on the, you know, on the lower level of the, of the hill [in Farrell, Pennsylvania] and the--I loved--for some reason I loved newspapers.  And I loved the photographs, and I remember there were two things that I loved doing.  My father [Ira Camp, Sr.] had this set of, this set of animal encyclopedias and I would go through those and looking at the photographs of animals.  And then, I would also go through newspaper looking at photographs.  And, if my mother [Martha Erving Camp] would tell me to go outside and play I still remember taking some of the newspaper and hiding under the porch and looking at the photographs.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know the difference in those days--now, 'cause I'm reflecting back on the same days, looking through m- magazines and newspapers, I didn't know the difference between a photograph and a work of art sometimes because of the quality, you know.  Did you know the difference?
Speaker 2:  	No, no, I didn't.  No, I can't say that I knew the difference, but I possibly did because it was always more attracted--I was attracted to the photographs.  I don't know why.  But, when I think back about it, I don't remember looking at drawings even though, even though my old--one of the brothers [Herbert Camp] was, was a painter.  And they all drew in a sense.  Yeah, you know, maybe I did because my, because my brothers drew and I knew photographs didn't look like what they did, so that might have been the distinction.
Story_ID: 659086
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Now, this is Farrell, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it's a steel town, you say, and what, what size is it?  It's a smaller city.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, it's population then was twelve thousand and it's one mile square.  But, it's attached to Sharon, Pennsylvania in a way, you know, but it was a different school district and that, that town was a little larger.  That was probably about twenty thousand.  So, it's a little cluster of towns.
Speaker 1: Well, well just kind of--so, so, what are the demographics there?  What percent of the population do you believe is black, I mean, just speculating?  I know you didn't know exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Then?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna have to kind of judge by the number of black students in the school versus white, probably about 15 percent were black (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 659087
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) Sulfur.  Smelled of burnt coal because it was the, the steel mill.  And, they were constantly dumping slag, and so it smelled like sulfur.  And, the air--
Speaker 1: So, that's kind of like a rotten eggish kind of smell, right?
Speaker 2:  	Right, yeah, which I don't think you have there anymore because I think they've stopped everything.  But, you might still get the smell because of the huge slag heaps.  Haven't been back there for fifteen or twenty years, don't wanna, really wanna go back.  But, at that time, the air was really dirty.  You get up in the morning and there were little black pellets on the car.  In the winter, it would--the snow would turn really kind of a grayish with the matter over a few hours.  And it was always--there were always these little black pellets that you were breathing and they were just kind of constantly in the air.  It was a--the thing that's interesting is I look back on it and that's what I see, but then it was all normal.  That's what it was, to me that was what the world was.  I, I never thought about it until, until I left [Farrell, Pennsylvania].  And, you think about it later on when your first brother [Ira Camp, Jr.], you know, dies of cancer and the second one dies of cancer and you think, well, this is, is it genetic or is it the way we were--what we were raised in?  You know, so, (unclear) know if it was environmental or genetic or both.  But, I mean, that's what that town is.  It was, it was a really difficult town to (pause) want, to want to do something of value in.  Everything was based on the steel mill and the support of the steel mill.
Story_ID: 659088
Speaker 1: So, it wasn't a lot of art in town I guess in terms of--
Speaker 2:  	(Shakes head) No.  There was no art in town.  I wasn't close enough to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to get, you know, to be able to see art.  It was ably discouraged about being art- you know, being an artist.  The school was partially, was partially integrated, I mean, it was an integrated school but there were things within the school that were segregated.  For example, I wanted to be--I wanted to join the, the photo club.  I wanted to be a part of the photo club but I was told, well, that was for white students only.  I wanted to be a part of the thespian club because I, you know at that time, I, I was doing magic and I was making money actually doing magic, I was performing publicly.  And so, you know, that's somewhat acting.  I wanted to be a part of the thespian club but couldn't do that because that was white.  So, there were things you could, as you know, if you--there were things in the school that you couldn't do because you were black even though it was integrated.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it would be worse than if it were you had a separate school where you could do whatever you wanted.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, in a way it was.  But I never--you know, again, I never thought about those things.  You, you just--when you're growing up in that stuff, you, you see it, you experience it--you think, oh, this is the way the world is.  And then you figure out a way to navigate through it.  You know, you know I never thought about changing the world.  I just thought this is it.  How do I navigate through this?
Story_ID: 659089
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of that first school you attended in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Eckles.
Speaker 1: Eckles. E--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eckles Elementary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) E-C-H-O?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	I think it E-K-E-L-S [sic.].
Speaker 1: E-K?
Speaker 2:  	It's actually in the application, I looked it up but I think it's E-K-E-L-S, Eckles.
Speaker 1: All right, so Eckles Elementary School [L.R. Eckles Elementary School, Farrell, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a--did you like school?
Speaker 2:  	I did up until my mother [Martha Erving Camp] died.  I was very good in school up until my mother died.  And, that was the seventh grade.  And, that's when probably three months after my mother died a teacher, Mrs. Lucas [ph.], and I recall her name right now, kept me after class, took me over to a window and I don't know if the dog was just there by convenience or if she was going to do something else, but she looked out in the street and she saw a little black dog, a little abandoned black dog and she said, "Donny [HistoryMaker Donald Camp], you see that little black dog on the street?"  And, I said, "Yes ma'am."  She said, "You're no better than that little black dog.  You may leave."  That in combination with my mother dying in front of me, my aunt getting hit by a car that just reversed things.  And, I repeated sev- I failed seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Now yeah, that exceeds most of the bad counselor, bad teacher stories we've heard. I mean, that's pretty bad.
Story_ID: 659090
Speaker 1:  That followed, you know, a few years later with the Emmett Till--and I'm sure that you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 1: --a lot of Emmett Till stories.
Speaker 2: But, did, did you see the Jet magazine or the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)  I s- I was sold--I sold that Jet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	Because I was--my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] would bring me to the barbershop, my father would bring me to the barbershop because I was learning to barber, but I was also learning business so he took me--I was selling the magazine.  And so, when Emmett Till was killed I remember all of the arguments in the barbershop.  And, of course, you had those that were saying, "The boy should have known better," and--to, "This is enough, this is the last straw, we can't take this crap anymore."  So, it was either I think what we would call the fight or flight.  And, at that time, I think I had enough piled onto me, my method was flight.  I just went to sleep.
Story_ID: 659091
Speaker 1: We went over--that your mother [Martha Erving Camp] passes away when you're twelve.  Now, you have a lot on you growing up.  I'm just, just--I mean, you said it was your normal fare but that's a lot on a young boy, taking care of your mother then she passes away, you move to another place, your aunt gets in a car accident, you gotta come back to--I mean, that's a lot--to, to Farrell [Pennsylvania].  And then you fro- from Farrell you went to stay with another aunt, right, in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No.  No, that's when I wanted to quit school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	You know, it was the whole Emmett Till issue.  I went to sleep, I would--we were on a trimester system so I would get two Fs and then an A in all my courses to kind of bring everything up to D.  Because I was kind of--I was afraid to fail.  It's just that I was kind of too sleepy to get through the rest of it, you know, and sleep was just avoiding, it was just avoiding.  I guess it was avoiding any more hurt.  And it's interesting because when you're hurting you don't know you're hurting like that.  I know I was hurting when I look back on it, because how could a kid go through that and not be, okay.  So, when I was in the twelfth grade that's when I wanted to quit so I was ready to quit school.  My brother, James [James Camp], came to Farrell and got me and took me back to Camden [New Jersey] to make me finish high school, and so I went there, finished high school, and then went into the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: So, you finished high school in Farrell?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2:  	In Camden.
Speaker 1: In Camden, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I graduated from Camden High [Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: This is Camden, Camden, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2:  	No, Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Camden, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2:  	No, Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Oh, Camden, New Jersey.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it was Camden High School?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, we got that wrong here so we'll scratch that out.
Story_ID: 659092
Speaker 1: But, now along the way, now we, we have not talked about magic yet.
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: But you started doing--becoming interested in magic when you were about eight years old is what I hear.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  I received a typical magic kit probably that my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] gave to me because I didn't know it but he was a magician.  Also, eight years old he did magic for my Halloween party, and he did a, he did a trick that I'm sure most magicians today if they see this, they're going to cringe.  But, he did the needle swallowing trick for a group of eight year olds.
Speaker 1: Needle swallowing?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it was something that--it was an old trick, I mean, people think it was Houdini's [Harry Houdini] but it was, it's much older than that.  But, you swallow needles, you know, you get a little bundle of needles and you swallow them and then you swallow some thread, and somewhere in your stomach they all get tied together and you pull them out, they're all on the string.  And my father did this for us kids.
Speaker 1: They're all threaded?  Threaded needles, huh?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, yeah.  And, today most magicians would think you can't do this with kids because--well, first of all you'd get sued if a kid tried it.  But, I'm the only kid who ever tried it and I didn't do that until my father gave me his books when I was thirteen years old.  I found his little cache of books and he says, "Do you like this?"  He caught me reading them and he had, you know, a few tricks in there but he had these, these books.  And he said, "Do you like this?"  And, I said, "Yes."  "They're yours."  And, he later said he gave those to me because he knew that would keep me out of trouble.  And it did, because I would stay in my room and rather than going out and trying to find something else to do, I would stay in my room in front of the mirror practicing moves and reading about moves.  And then, when I was about fourteen years old, the, the choir director, Sam Campane [ph.] who--he was, he was the choir director.  Every now and then he would let me direct the choir, but the greatest thing he did was he would get me jobs.  And he would come by and he would pick me up at my house, he would take me to the Lions Club [Lions Clubs International], to the Kiwanis [Kiwanis International], to other places.  He'd get my--get job and I was getting fifteen--in 1955, I was getting fifteen dollars a job.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a job doing magic?
Speaker 2:  	Doing magic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	All right, and I did a little twelve to fifteen minute act and, you know, that was quite a bit of money then for a, you know, for a kid.  So, I mean, that was to me that's what a teacher could do versus the teacher who (gesture)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, tells you you're not going anywhere, you are like a lost dog.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, at least you had two different, I mean, you, you had--I take it your family was a bigger influence than the teacher.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah, yeah.  Family was incredible.  The family taught me I couldn't fail.  You know, so even though I was, you know, getting Fs somewhere in my mind I knew--I, I gained this thing, you cannot fail, you have to succeed.  And you have to succeed at doing what you'd love to do, 'cause that was the other thing was that you just can't do anything.  You know, even though I--my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] wanted me to be a barber, I didn't want to and he respected that.  He later said, "I really wanted you to do that but I realized that that's not what you wanted to do.  That's great."  He let me, you know, he let me get rid of something that was practical.
Story_ID: 659093
Speaker 1: After your mother [Martha Erving Camp] passed away here I have a note here that you became a pretty dogmatic atheist.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What--was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	In two ways, you know, my mother, my mother was choir director but she was very open, you know, she, she didn't--I don't ever remember her closing things off.  She, she loved, she loved the--I'm not gonna say that she loved the church 'cause I don't remember her loving the church, but she loved the music of the church.  She didn't take me to church a lot, but I do remember coming back from church once she took me to, took me and I went to Sunday school, and I came back and I told my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] I knew who the devil was.  And, you know, of course he was interested, and asked me "Who?"  And I said, "Muhammad."  And he kind of told me then that, "There are many paths to God and Muhammad was one of them," and "You can't do that."  And I honestly don't think I went back to Sunday school since then.
Speaker 1: So, you were told that in Sunday school?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Now, I went back to church I'm sure, could be because I remember sitting there listening to my mother sing.  But, after my mother died, I went to school--I went, I went back to church and it was a couple of years after my mother died that I finally went back.  And, the minister said, "There's someone here who hasn't been here in a long time and I wish they would not return."  He probably wasn't talking about me, you know, but I always thought at that time that the church should have been comparable to a hospital.  Now, you don't invite people out of the church when they come.  To me, I just--that was just a severe violation.  So, I--you know, I think what happened was, you know, I felt with God taking my mother, God getting my aunt hit, God telling me that I'm no better than this little black dog in the street, God telling me that I needed to leave the church, and I'm just blaming all that on God.  And, I just couldn't believe that God would do that, a god would do that.  So, I think that was possibly the reason for my denial, you know, denial of a god.
Story_ID: 659094
Speaker 1: You told me but I forgot--so you got to can- Camden in time to graduate [from Camden High School].  So, how many years did you spend in Camden, New Jersey?
Speaker 2:  	Probably two.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, two years.
Speaker 1: And, were there any, were there any teachers along the way in high school either in Farrell [Pennsylvania] or Camden that, that you remember as being important?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, two.  I--one was Sam Campane [ph.], who was the choir director, really very helpful.  And then I don't remember the name of the, the teacher in Camden.  I wasn't there long enough to know who I was going to come up with, you know, so you learn teachers by their, you know, that.  But I was--I went into Camden and there was one teacher who noted that I was a good speaker.  And so, he arranged for me to be able to stay after class for special speaking classes and things.  So, those two were very helpful.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did, did you get any opportunities to speak publicly in those days?
Speaker 2:  	I don't recall.  Probably.  I think that was part of what we had to do.  And, but then again, also I was a magician, I was performing and that was, you know, you speak.
Speaker 1: All right, now, at age fifteen, now this is the same year you, you graduate, right, from high school?  You graduated at fifteen?
Speaker 2:  	Oh?
Speaker 1: Well, they've got it down here.  I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	No, I would have graduated in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1960.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so you would have been.
Speaker 2:  	Actually, before that I would have probably finished because I had to finish--I had to, I had to spend a little extra time in Camden because of the, you know, the other stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: But, I would have probably graduated in 1958 or 1959.
Story_ID: 659095
Speaker 1: At the time you graduated [from Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], you had already joined the magicians brotherhood, right?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah, yeah.  I joined them when I was about fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	That would have been the International Brotherhood of Magicians.
Speaker 1: Now, what is that?  The International Brotherhood of Magicians that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) There are two organizations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's the International Brotherhood and there's the Society of American Magicians.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I joined the International Brotherhood of Magicians because there was another magician kind of across town, and, and he was a white magician and, you know, he would kind of guide me and teach me things.  He was kind of a tutor.  But, he also said the IBM would be a good place for me to get information.  It was interesting also with that because even though I could join the organization I couldn't attend meetings, which were in Youngstown [Ohio].  Lot of stuff you couldn't do (laughter).
Speaker 1: You could join but because you were African American you couldn't go to the meetings.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, you know.  It's kind of a funny structure, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, you're really, I mean, you're, you're--what would your act consist of?
Speaker 2:  	Then, I did something called the linking rings, I did billiard balls.  That was the thing--that was the really difficult thing was learning the manipulation of the balls.
Speaker 1: So, billiard balls?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, something called billiard balls.  It's multiplying billiard balls, you know, you start out with none then you have one, then you have two, three and four.  And sometimes, you know, you would go up from there to eight then back again.  They disappear slowly and back down to none.  In the meanwhile, there's manipulation between that.  So, I kind of did that for a while.
Speaker 1: So, prestidigitation takes some--a lot of dexterity, right, so you had to practice a lot to be able to do these.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  That's why my father [Ira Camp, Sr.], that's why my father gave it to me (laughter).  You don't do that without a lot of time, at that time, in front of the mirror studying the moves, studying the angles.
Speaker 1: So, how long would it, say, take to practice, I mean, to be able to perfect the move like billiard balls?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) It, it can reach incredible levels.  For me, the level that I reached, I probably reached it in about six months.  But I would rush home after school and get in front of the mirror.  Weekends, I was in front of the mirror.  So, yeah, about six months of, of--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, did you ever perform before wh- white audiences?
Speaker 2:  	That's just about all I would perform for.  That's what Mr. Campane [Sam Campane (ph.)] would get to me.  But, then they did have black organizations because they had the community centers and I would do those--I would do black audience on those and a few churches I would do black audiences.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, yeah, I, I performed for both.
Speaker 1: What was your, your stage name?
Speaker 2:  	Don Ujene, with a U.
Speaker 1: Don?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Don Ujene, with a U-J-E-N-E (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Ujene --
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with a, the U. Okay.
Story_ID: 659096
Speaker 1: So, after you graduated [from Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], now, there was a--was there--were you out of school a couple of years before you joined the [U.S.] Air Force or--?
Speaker 2:  	About a year.
Speaker 1: About a year, okay.
Speaker 2:  	I started getting on my brother's nerves I think (laughter).  But, you know, I--it was incredible because you would think--my brother [James Camp] had really just gotten remarried and he--his first child was there when I, when I--he came to get me and the second child was born when I was there.  And it was a little apartment.  And, I admire him and his wife. I didn't realize what a sacrifice it was until just a few years ago, where we were doing fifty year memorial for their, for their fiftieth anniversary.  And I started to think about it and talk about it and I says, "Wow!  You guys did a lot for me."  But, you know, when I was twenty it was like, he took me aside and he talked to me and basically put me out of the house.  Says, you know, "Be a good idea for you to join the Air Force or something," (laughter) okay.  So, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I take it your grades really didn't improve that much?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No. No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you were able to graduate?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and plus I was terrified of college; I had no idea what I wanted to do.  So, Air Force--the [U.S.] military and the Air Force is probably the best thing that happened for me at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, you were saying earlier, we were talking about magic and you were talking about being a nerd.  Would you consider yourself a nerd in those days?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  You know, didn't wanna fight, I didn't know how to fight, didn't wanna fight until people just really pushed me so hard that I had no choice, you know.  Yeah, I was a nerd.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--
Story_ID: 659097
Speaker 1: So, United States Air Force.  Now, why the Air Force and not the, not the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] or the [U.S.] Navy or, or [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2:  	I could never imagine myself being in the Marines even today, okay (laughter).  No, I, I, I took the Air Force because I thought it was probably the easiest thing to do.  I couldn't see myself living on a ship.  I didn't wanna go crawling through the mud like a Marine or Army.  And so, the Air Force was clean, all right.  And I figured, well, they also have among all of them they had the best looking uniform so that's why I joined the Air Force.  And, I, I really kind of liked it, I liked it.  I stayed there for twelve years.  And I stayed because I always was going to a new place.  It was wonderful being able to go from--after I got out of the basic [basic training], you know, going through San Antonio [Texas] and Illinois, Chanute, Illinois [Chanute Air Force Base , Champaign County, Illinois], after getting out of those places, which is basic training, what you could do is so limited.  But going to Hamilton Air Force Base right outside of San Francisco [California] at the time that John Coltrane and Miles Davis and Cannonball Adderley and Yusef Lateef and all of those guys were playing down in--in North Beach [San Francisco, California].  And I could go there, you know, that was great seeing John Coltrane, you know, and full experimental.  And being one of three people sitting in the club when he's doing that because nobody else could stand what he was doing.  And I'm thinking I don't know what he's doing but, man, I have a feeling that this is great.  I need to be here.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--now, let me point out.  This is I guess I would say and then correct me if you think I'm wrong, this seems to be like a golden age for the Air Force in sense of, in the sense of the Strategic Air Command and all the, the jet fighters and stuff.  You don't see as many of them today as--the variety of aircraft--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they were glorified.  All the kids were making model planes at home, and, you know, they--I mean, the space exploration and stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, you had that aspect (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Cough).
Speaker 1: --Air Force pilots were becoming aeronauts and--
Speaker 2:  	Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know, the whole, you know, the tension with Russia--the Cold War and all that.  I mean, it's just a--seems like a--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  The Cuban, the Cuban thing [Cuban Missile Crisis] happened when I was in California and, you know, that was your defense command (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A tense time.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that was, that was scary time, all right.  But the main thing, the main thing for me though wasn't so much being in the Air Force but being close to a city where something was happening, I mean, you know.
Story_ID: 659098
Speaker 1: Even when I went to Alaska, Alaska was interesting, for two years but it was interesting because I, because of being able to experience, you know, the aurora borealis and, you know, the midnight sun, and all of that, I mean, that was a fascinating thing.  And then to France from there and being about what was it ninety kilometers, about eighty miles--seventy miles north of Paris [France].  And I could go to Paris almost every weekend, and I did.  Because, you know, I could go and, and, and I wanted to go to the Louvre [Musee du Louvre, Paris, France] and I could, I can get in the Louvre free because they would give--the [U.S.] military would get passes and nobody wanted those passes everybody else wanted to go to Pigalle [Quartier Pigalle, Paris, France].  I would get the passes and go to the museums, and just walk Paris and see the art.  And I must have, I must've walked, you know, I must've studied probably three--a good three months solid in the Louvre walking it and studying.
Speaker 2: Now, you--I have a note here that you were, you were impressed by impressionistic artists?
Speaker 1:  	I was. Yeah, I, yeah--
Speaker 2: Or, well, what art impressed you the most in, in the Louvre?  Or did any of the art inspire the work you do today?
Speaker 1:  	None of it.
Speaker 2: None of it, okay.
Speaker 1:  	No.  It was classic, and I went there to study cl- I, I, I, I cut out a little--I took a 35mm transparency and I popped the slide out and I used that, and I would go into the--and I would compose and recompose paintings and sculptures.
Speaker 2: So, just the little frame that goes around the slide and you would hold it in front of the--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, yeah.  And, if I hold it close, it was like a wide angle lens and, if I hold it a distance like a telephoto but just concentrating on that little section.  And I could change it horizontal, vertical, or do whatever I wanted to with it.  And that's how I studied the compositions.  So, yeah, that's, that's why I would, you know, that's what I would do in Paris.  And, and plus, you know, I read, at that time, I read tech books almost like novels.  Formulas to me were the most fascinating thing because I could find out--I could read a formula book and make a comparison in my head as to what it would do a color on a piece of paper.  So, yeah, it--that was a fascinating time for me.
Story_ID: 659099
Speaker 1: Now, did you encounter the black expatriate community in, in Paris [France] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause James Baldwin was over there at one time and quite a few others.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, who--who was there when you were there?
Speaker 2:  	I think the coolest thing at that time was being able to go into--I forget the name of the club, I think it was a Blue Note [Paris, France].  And I went in and sat down and I don't know the woman's name, but Dexter Gordon came over and he sat down beside her and we talked for a bit.  And so, he went back, you know.  And, at that time, I wasn't really sure who Dexter Gordon was.  It was just, you know, it was like, this is a great set.  And then in walked Bud.  Now, I knew who Bud Powell was, okay.  And Bud Powell came in and sat down in the booth with us.  And he played and he came back and sat, and I couldn't say a word, man, 'cause it was like Bud Powell.  And because of my brother the pianist [William Camp], I knew who Bud Powell was.  But, yeah, that was--you could do that then.  You could also touch the sculptures, you know, in the Rodin Museum [Musee Rodin, Paris, France].  You could feel, you could touch the sculptures and help ruin them that (unclear) (laughter), okay.
Speaker 1: Curate 'em with your finger oils.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I did my, I did my share of ruining the stuff but at that time you could do it.  And, when you touched a Rodin [Auguste Rodin] sculpture, you could feel the muscle structure that you can't see but you can feel it, I mean, that's powerful stuff, man.  So, yeah, it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause it was a pretty large group and Nina Simone spent a lot of time over there and when they had the movie 'Paris Blues' with Sidney Poitier and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll.
Speaker 2:  	'Round Midnight' with Dexter Gordon.  That was the other thing that was interesting, because I was there when Dexter Gordon--well, not Dexter Gordon but when Bud Powell was ready to come back to the United States.  The guy that's in the movie--I have a poster downstairs that was made by him.  Because he was a graphic artist and the one that he made of Ornette Coleman.  And--but, we were terrified when Bud Powell was ready to go back to the United States, and I remember the community there--I couldn't get that much involved but I remember them trying to get him not to go because we knew what was going to happen.  And, sure enough he got back and they got a hold of him and that's where he died, that's where he overdosed.  But, Buttercup and nobody wanted him to go.
Story_ID: 659100
Speaker 1: What was it about Paris [France] that, that really, I mean, a lot of black artists, writers, and political thinkers and musicians go there and they say it makes them feel freer?
Speaker 2:  	I, I think, I think what it was, I mean, just--I, I was still on the outside of it but I felt a welcoming, I felt a welcoming community.  Now, it might be because we were Americans in a foreign, foreign environment that was okay by the French.  But, then the French, they honored blacks, they honored the black artists.  I mean, Bud Powell was a national treasure, they proclaimed him a national treasure.  Things like that could happen.  And where else?  I mean, I can't go and--you know, it takes me a long time as an African American to come in and sit down and talk with people like Dexter Gordon because the community is, you know, is not as well connected.  It's not as intimate as it is in a foreign environment, so I think that's a great deal of it.
Speaker 1: Did you ever run into Josephine Baker?
Speaker 2:  	No.  No, I didn't, she was in the southern part of France by the time I got there?
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, was the sister--a black woman named Bricktop [Ada "Bricktop" Smith] had a club they say.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I never saw her either.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, yeah, she was there.  Who, who--I saw James Baldwin one night, didn't dare approach him though.  He was such a solitary figure, I saw him walking on the street.  And, I thought, should I say hello, you know.  And I thought, now, he's a solitary figure and I just decided it would--I thought it would be an interruption on his life if I recognized him, you know, if I, if I intruded on his life and I didn't wanna do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know Richard Wright was, was over there, was living in Paris I think in those days.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, and I didn't know that at the time either.  But, you know, I wasn't that interested, I mean, I--Baldwin was visually, you know, public because Richard Avedon had photographed him.  He was visually a figure out there. That's how I could recognize him.  But, other than that my--I really was interested in graphic art.  I was interested in, in photography at that time.  What could I learn about photography and how could I move forward with it?
Story_ID: 659101
Speaker 1: United States Air Force, you're in Paris [France].  How, how many years did you spend in France?
Speaker 2:  	I was there two and a half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Then de Gaulle pulled out of NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] and we had to leave.
Speaker 1: Charles de Gaulle, president of France?  Now, did you meet your wife [Marie Dumont Camp] in France?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Wanna hear the story (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, please?  That's what we're here for.  We're here for the story, yes.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  There's a friend of mine, lives in Chicago [Illinois].  Still lives in Chicago, Leroy Connelly [ph.], we were both stationed in Chambley [Chambley-Bussieres Air Base, France] because we were both, we were both at Laon [Laon-Athies Air Base, France] and we would--he was a, he was a bold guy like me in that sense.  He was adventurous in that we would go to a restaurant in France and we would look at the menu and because neither one of us really spoke or understood the language, we would order stuff to see what it was.  And so (laughter)--and he was the only one I knew like that.  Or we, we could actually go to a movie and because we wanted to go and hear the language and see what we could pick up so that's, you know, he was interesting that way.  Then we both got transferred to Chambley, which was near the German border.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Chambley?
Speaker 2:  	C-H-A-M-B-L-E-Y.  And, at that--well, he had already started playing cello.  He wanted to--because he was interested in doing things, he was interested in doing new things.  And so, he bought a cello and he was going to Metz [France] at that time, taking cello lessons and he wanted a place where he could practice just simply practice.  I need a place where I could build a darkroom of my own, and so we rented a little--a house in this village not--about five miles outside of the base.  And, so he could get up at three o'clock in the morning.  His time, his time was late time in a sense.  He could turn the lights at three o'clock in the morning and he could practice and it wouldn't bother me.  My time was early, you know, once the sun went down 'til about midnight I could have it in order to do my photography.  And I was doing a lot of darkroom with studying then.  And, the--they were having this festival in the village that year, and they (unclear)--this is a little farming village, this little communal village of about 150 people.  And, the, the--it was a saint's festival, it was a Catholic festival and it moves around from village to village year after year.  And the year that we were there, it was in this village of Janville [France] which is where we were staying.  And, all the girls came knocking on our doors, I mean, all the young girls are like, "You have to come to the dance, you're coming to the dance tonight."  And so, we finally figured, well, we had to go.  And, meanwhile, I'd seen my wife and, and liked her.  I mean, she was kind of--she was mellow.  Well, at the dance at the night I met her and neither one of us danced, which was cool for me 'cause I didn't know how to dance and still don't know how to dance, neither did she but we kind of struggled at it, you know (laughter).  But, mostly we sat and we talked.  Me with very little English, her with probably less--you know, me with very little French, her with probably less English and we talked.  And I don't know how we did it, we just did and we really liked each other, and it just grew from there.  And then, when de Gaulle pulled out of NATO and I saw that I had to leave, I really did not want to leave without her so we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1966, is that right?
Speaker 2:  	Sixty--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah.  That would have been 1966.
Story_ID: 659102
Speaker 1: You'd already gotten involved in photography at this point?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah, deep in it.
Speaker 1: Somehow we--I got passed this until we were talking about actually doing this photography in the village.  So, can you tell us how you first got involved in photography?  Now, you had been a magician before.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and, now you're in the [U.S.] Air Force.  Did you start doing photography before you joined the Air Force or after?
Speaker 2:  	I think I started doing photography when I was about seven or eight years old.  I still remember carrying a little square black box.  I don't know if it was Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company] that put it out but you've probably seen 'em, there's one back there on the, on the right hand side.
Speaker 1: A Brownie, that Brownie (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, it's not a Brownie.
Speaker 1: Wasn't a Brownie.
Speaker 2: No, this was, this was probably made around eight--1912, maybe 1920, but it was just a little black box.  I mean, it was very--it might have been a very early Kodak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And I would carry that thing around and take photographs with no film, but it was click, remember, click, remember.  And, because I would see cameras used and I wasn't allowed to touch them 'cause I was too young, you know.  And you know how adults are, you, you don't touch that stuff.  And, but I had that and I could go around with that and I was--I would go around town and click those things.  And then later they built a--my brothers and my sister [Sylvia Camp] built a darkroom in the, in the basement, you know, but it was nothing more than curtains hanging so that they could get it dark and they were doing photography in there.  So, I saw something of the process but, again, it was, you know, you don't touch this.  So, that was probably my first experience with photography.  And then, when I was probably about a teenager, a young teenager, and I didn't know this until much later by the way, I went back to my hometown [Farrell, Pennsylvania] I started to do a project there and I went into the library and I looked in the photo section because I just wanted to see what kind of photo books they had there and I pulled down 'The Family of Man,' which was this photo exhibition in catalog that they did at the--where was it?  I forget where it was.  (Pause) I forget what New York museum it was [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York]--well, anyway, they did this book of a family of man, it was just this book of photographs by photographers from around the world.  And, at that time, you could take a card and when you took the book out you would sign the card and they would take the card, and when you brought it back they would put the card back in.  I'm the only one who ever took that book out.  And I took it out more than ten times most likely fifteen times.  It was my signature, my signature, my signature, and nobody had taken it out since I had taken it out about twenty years earlier.  So, yeah, I was--and then, you know, looking at the photographs in the newspaper I think that, that was giving me a social link.  So, somehow I have this kind of, of I guess a natural love for the medium.
Story_ID: 659103
Speaker 1: What was your first camera?  How old were you when you got your first camera and what was it?
Speaker 2:  	My first serious camera was probably when I went into the [U.S.] Air Force and I got an Argus C3.
Speaker 1: Argus [Argus Cameras, Inc.; Argus Camera Company, LLC], right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, an Argus C3 and that would have been in 1960.  That's when I began to realize how hard it was, how difficult it was.
Speaker 1: So, was this a rangefinder camera or?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It was a 35mm, 35mm rangefinder and they had a hobby shop on base that had the, had the photo shop and--so I could begin to learn to process film on my own, print on my own, and then it--I thought it was easy.  But then mechanically, just mechanically, chemically, I began to realize how difficult of an art form it was.  But I knew in a sense I loved that, but I also had this kind of family pressure because, because I had all these artists in the family before me and I thought, well, this is gonna be easy, much, much easier than it would take me all the time to learn how to draw and all that other stuff (laughter).  But, no, it wasn't, it was, it proved to be very difficult and still is very difficult.
Story_ID: 659104
Speaker 1: Now did you have any idea of any of the black photographers, you know, that we know today and, I mean, things have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --codified now, but, but, okay?
Speaker 2:  	At that time, no, but a few years later I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was introduced to Roy DeCarava's work.  And, Roy DeCarava to me more than any other photographer and I will put him--I would have to combine him with Robert Frank, any two photographers who have influenced me it's those two.  But, Roy DeCarava's work is just poetic, just incredibly poetic.
Speaker 1: Describe his work.  I've seen it and I guess I could but like what, what--how do you frame his work, I mean, DeCarava?
Speaker 2:  	Well, he got a, he got a Guggenheim.  He went to see Langston Hughes, the best thing that I can--best way I can describe his work is it's like a Langston Hughes poem.  And, Langston Hughes and he teamed up to do a book called 'The Sweet Flypaper of Life.'  But, yeah, his work, his, his work looks like a Langston Hughes poem.  Compositionally, there's always this, this challenge.  His, his work is just hard to describe, it's not like--it's like Roy DeCarava it's not like anything else.
Speaker 1: I think maybe it would be--I could say that those who are watching this that wanna know, he's--I guess he's noted for the use of emotion, I mean, the figures actually are--they're figures in motion within another context in his--
Speaker 2:  	Is his work?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	No.  No, Roy DeCarava did a body of work on jazz for one, but he didn't do jazz musicians even though he did do jazz musicians but he would do the jazz club.  And his work is kind of in that vein, it's kind of soft and murky.  It feels like smoke.  His street photography--and he did--he, he was, he was doing a lot of Harlem [New York, New York].  I mean, that's what he does.  When he does street photography, he does African American culture.  And, when he does the street it's segmented, it's how you see a street.  I mean, you feel how he sees the street, how when he looks down on something--and there's a beautiful piece of him looking down--I think one of the more popular pieces is a young lady on prom night and she's on her way to prom and she's in this evening gown.  And she's kind of stepping through trash, it's a dirty street and she's holding her gown and she's making her way.  That's Roy DeCarava.  The prints are lush and they're beautiful, he's a printmaker, he's an artist, he was an artist.  And I fell in love with his work.
Story_ID: 659105
Speaker 1: What do you think are the qualities of a--what--what makes a good photographer in terms of what separates the best of--or the ones that you like from the others?
Speaker 2:  	To me what makes a good photographer or a good artist is when they speak beyond their medium.  The medium is critical because it's, you know, it's the tool but there are a lot of photographers who, if it were a writer, you'd attribute everything to the pencil.  It's getting beyond that.  When you see a piece of work you know this is DeCarava [Roy DeCarava], you, you can see DeCarava with a hundred other pieces of work and you would know that's DeCarava or that's Robert Frank.  (Pause) You wouldn't confuse it with anyone else.
Story_ID: 659106
Speaker 1: W- Well, what about Robert Frank, how, how would you describe his work?  Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Robert Frank is probably--he's--Robert Frank is raw.  Robert Frank is as close to kind of a dirt farmer as you can get.  He was a--his compositions--he used a, he used a camera.  It wasn't so much as printing because, I mean, his printing was just like really raw, but it went along with the way he used the camera.  Roy DeCarava is very careful about how he uses the camera.  Robert Frank used a 35mm camera and you get the feeling that he was walking and he said, "Oh, this happened, let me get this."  You, you, you feel like you're walking beside him and he's shooting.  And then somewhere in there, there's something that happens to be in balance almost and there's some important content in it, okay (laughter).  He has a strange, he has a strange way of getting around this balance of form and content.  And Roy DeCarava has a way of combining form and content to make poetry but they're both poets in their own way.
Story_ID: 659107
Speaker 1: When you started shooting, were you influenced by this, these photog--I mean, did you, you know?
Speaker 2:  	No, I, I--when I started shooting, I was influenced by coiled--what I called the coiled rope school of photography (laughter).  And I, you know, it's the garbage, it's the junk.  What influenced me to stop photography was Roy--was DeCarava [Roy DeCarava] and Frank [Robert Frank].  And it was like, you can't shoot.  And I honestly felt in my heart that I--you can't shoot.  And that fortunately was also the time I first arrived in Paris [France], and that's when I kind of put my little Argus C3 aside, I took out the frame of, of, you know, of the slide and I started going around.  I went to Germany to the lights factory, bought myself a Leica [Leica Camera AG] and I thought that was gonna make a difference.  And I came back and I shot with that and it was like, this's still garbage, man (laughter), okay.  So, I put that aside and I studied, and I studied, and I studied, and I shot, and I shot, and I thought, and I thought, and I wrote, and I wrote.  And, it took me a couple of decades to get around to it before I was finally able to discover and shoot, and feel what was mine.  How to, to get my voice.
Story_ID: 659108
Speaker 1: Another influence around this time was the Baha'i faith.  Now, now, you're Baha'i today?
Speaker 2:  	I am Baha'i, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us what is it 'cause we've interviewed so many Christians and a few Muslims, but I don't think--you may be the first Baha'i.
Speaker 2:  	That's interesting because you have the, the Baha'i temple [Baha'i House of Worship] right outside of--right in Wilmette [Illinois].  And, first of all, it did not bring me from being an atheist, the dogmatic atheist that we talked about earlier.  There was, there was something that happened between that and it was an experience, and there're other people who have described it.  And it's something that happens, a woman described it a few da- a few ye- a few weeks ago and she said some people attribute it to God, she didn't.  She attributed it to nature but there is something that happened.  That something happened to me.  And, it happened to me when I demanded that God prove to me that he existed.  And, I left this little church in Janville [France], which is where I met my wife [Marie Dumont Camp], and it was like the sky went on forever.  It just merged and there were sounds that you couldn't hear that I could hear.  It was, you know, a beautiful feeling.  It was like God said, "Okay, I did my part," (laughter), "okay, serve."  'Cause I said, I agreed, I said, "If you prove to me you exist, I'll serve."  And, it was like, well, "I did my part, now serve."  And I didn't know where.
Speaker 1: So, it was--did you feel like that somebody from the outside had, had moved you or did you just--or did you feel like that you finally appreciated, you know, what was out here or what was it?
Speaker 2:  	I don't know, I don't know.  It was just something that I--it was--everything changed.  I've talked to one other person that--two other people that this is--that they've experienced this and none of us can explain it.  We just get to a point kind of where we're nodding to each other, because we get to a point where verbally we can't talk about it, we can't describe it anymore.
Speaker 1: So, this experience comes after coming out of a church?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, little-yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 659109
Speaker 1: How did the Baha'i denomination of faith come in?
Speaker 2:  	That happened because I was looking for a church.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Could you say that again? After you settled (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.  That happened after I was looking for a church.  By that time, I had married.  I had an interracial marriage, I had to find something that accepted both of us and I couldn't.  I didn't feel comfortable in white churches, my wife [Marie Dumont Camp] didn't feel--I'm sure she didn't feel that comfortable in black churches even though the black community is more, you know, adoptive to our, our interracial marriages.  But, I'd asked--what happened was my brother [William Camp] in Atlantic City [New Jersey], the one who's now in Atlanta [Georgia], was Baha'i.  And he asked the Baha'is in Columbus, Ohio to come and visit me.  And when they walked in the door, you know, I invited them in, because I was searching and I was ready to listen.  And so, they, they came in and it was certainly you don't believe that Jesus was the only manifestation of God?  And, I said, of course not.  Because my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] had taught me that there were many ways to God.  And so, since that was the first question that was answered to me and then came there're certain spiritual things about the faith that I, I really loved.  And it talked about progressive revelation and that--that manifestations of God come every thousand years or so to take us to the next level and, you know, of society.  And so, it was, you know, coming from a, you know, family to--or tribe, family to tribe to, to city state to nation.  And so, now we're in a area where we are approaching a global culture.  We're, we're--and we need a spiritual solution for a global society.  And in that there were certain laws, the equality of women and men coming out of the Middle East, coming out of Iran in, in 19--oh, I'm sorry--in 1840s, he's talking about the equality of women and men.  Even today they can't deal with that.  But, he's saying this was necessary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that, that'll get you in trouble over there.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  And in 1840 that wasn't too cool. Here, still isn't.  But the science and religion battle going on now--you know, the founder of the Baha'i faith said, there is a--that religion and science need to coexist.  If there is an issue, go with science.  If it's wrong, it will prove itself wrong (laughter), okay.  It was solutions like that, that just like, this is so practical.  This has to be what I--you know, this has to be an answer.  So, for me and my wife it was the answer.  And, you know, and, and it says there is one race, that's the human race.  That was ideal for us as an interracial marriage, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now in--
Speaker 2: --because that's what we both thought when we got married.
Speaker 1: --in 1967, I mean, people say now, oh, yeah, everybody would--you, you would hear that in a lot of places but that wasn't necessarily true in the '67 [1967].
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: You weren't hearing--you know, you would hear it some places but you didn't hear it everywhere.
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: You heard about, you know, strict racial divisions and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2:  	Well, yeah, I mean, I was supposed to go to Virginia from France and they had to cancel my orders because we could not be legally married in Virginia.  And about that time it was the Loves [sic. Mildred Jeter Loving and Richard Loving], you know, coming to trial.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Love case [sic. Loving v. Virginia, 1967] and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right, right.
Speaker 2:  	So, yeah, we weren't popular folks.
Story_ID: 659110
Speaker 1: So when you came back, you came back in '67 [1967], right? To--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And so, you were stationed in Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2:  	Columbus, correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so, you would have been in the [U.S.] Air Force at this time around almost ten years I guess or nine years?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, eight years I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight, okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, eight years.
Speaker 1: So, you were in the Air Force four more years before--
Speaker 2:  	Right, then I went from there to Vietnam and then after Vietnam I went to Duluth, Minnesota, and that's when I got out, because I wasn't having fun anymore.
Speaker 1: So, this is--yeah, Vietnam--so, did you--now, a lot of people really did not--I can imagine a person who was a Baha'i, who's an artist, who's a black American, you know, would have some trouble with Vietnam at that point.  And you happened to be in the Air Force.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah, I mean, it wasn't--(pause) Vietnam was a test.  I started the--but see--Vietnam was also a challenge.  Because I started the, the, the--what do you call it--multicultural caucus on, on Cam Ranh Bay [Cam Ranh Air Base, Vietnam], because they really felt like there was going to be--well, almost they were approaching on was to a point where there were going to be riots on the base.  And so, I formed the multicultural caucus there and it was one of those things we--the commander really gave us a tremendous amount of power in order to not quell things but to solves some problems.  And we did that.
Speaker 1: So, what was your position in the Air Force at that point?
Speaker 2:  	I was--I think I was a sergeant.  And, I packed parachutes, that's kind of what I did for twelve years.  And, I shared this, this council that I formed and, you know, we, we--I mean, sometime it was simple little things like getting haircut regulations changed, or getting a barber to learn how to cut black hair.  You're a barber you need to, you know, learn this.  Or, you know, some- someone who might be harassed by their commander, and we actually--the base commander gave us the power to go by and, you know, chastise the squadron commander (laughter), okay.  And, for a sergeant, for a, you know, a straight sergeant to chastise a major or colonel who's a squadron commander based on the base commander's orders, that was embarrassing to them.  So, they, they stopped, they stopped a lot of cases.
Story_ID: 659111
Speaker 1: So you're in Cam Ranh Bay [Cam Ranh Air Base, Vietnam] and you started a multicultural caucus to try to cool off some of the tensions there.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  And, because I was a fresh Baha'i and I believed that, you know, what I believed, it was--I felt like it was my responsibility to do that.  And I still remember going in to one of the meetings to speak as the, as the chairman of this.  Because what I did was I pulled, I pulled whites in, I pulled--we had a lot of Puerto Ricans there I pulled them in, I pulled American Indians [Native American] in, and it was this group that was to be able to consult so we could all go back and talk to our individual groups.  And also, protect.  So, it was kind of like this multicultural gang leader thing, you know.  But, I still remember going into this room and I--but I asked to speak on behalf of the council and I went in and it was like all these stars, I mean, (laughter).  And I guess it was a specific, it was a specific command meeting.  And I started telling him about what the aims of this caucus was, what this, what this thing was.  And--but, at that time, you know again, at this point I, I, I had just come out of being asleep from all that other stuff.  So, you know, for me it was really quite a--I just felt like this was something you could do.  And so, I, I never thought about it as being extraordinary, it was just one of those things you do to survive.  Like you go to sleep to survive, well, when you wake up, you have to do this to survive.  And so, I, in that sense, I've always kind of been in a survivor mode, and I think--I don't know if that's a bad thing or a good I think it's something that human beings do.  But, anyway, I went in this room and I gave this talk about the oneness of humanity and all of this other stuff, and I ended up getting a call later on from the commander of the naval sector of Cam Ranh Bay.  And he sent a jeep for me.  And, when I walked in, he says, "Don't salute me I salute you," and he stood up and saluted me.  And he says, "I really admire you. That took a lot of guts to do what you did."  And I don't think it's guts, you just do this to survive.  And I wasn't necessarily afraid of, of a riot, what bothered me most was that this guy over here couldn't--was getting harassed because his hair was too long.  And it wasn't.  It was just his commander who was being a jerk and harassing him and it, you know, I felt it was terrible because somebody couldn't walk through this section of, of the base.  Because there were some folks there who were beating folks up, because they looked like something.
Story_ID: 659112
Speaker 1: Now this is--just to maybe frame this, Vietnam War, you got a military draft going on.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: You have an [U.S.] Army that had been struggling for not quite twenty--well, maybe twelve, fifteen years before the Vietnam War trying to integrate itself.
Speaker 2:  	Forty-seven [1947].
Speaker 1: From '47 [1947] to--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, about fifteen years, sixteen years, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it'd been trying to integrate itself and being somewhat successful but only within a context of America's already a racist country and you have to adopt to it (laughter), adopt to it on some level, you know.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So, black folks weren't totally free in the Army but they were--it was better than the segregated Army of World War II [WWII].  But, so, black folks being drafted off the streets of a lot of the major cities that are angry, that don't take the kind of, you know--that never would've joined the Army but they're getting drafted because of the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And sent to Vietnam to shoot Vietnamese in a war that they are not ideologically committed to and in--within the context of a southern dominated white Army.  So, is that, that pretty much--
Speaker 2:  	That was it, particularly the southern dominated thing, the racist.  I'm not even gonna say it's dominated, it, it's southern.  I--'cause I don't, you know, I'm not gonna limit racism to the southern, all right, (laughter).  It was racist dominated, all right, and that was, that was the problem and that's what was dangerous.  Because I don't know whether the, you know, the folks who were the, the NCOs [non-commissioned officer] who were living in what was basically a trailer camp and they'd see people sometime with beads.  And if you wore--because beads is how we kind of identified ourselves as to what our racial identity was, racial affiliation, not our identity but our affiliation.  So, if you kind of wore a solid black, it was like don't bother me 'cause I'm black.  If you wore white, don't bother me 'cause I'm white, okay (laughter).  It was like this tribal identification thing, all right.  And, those of us who wore--I, I wore red, white, black, and blue, or, you know, red, white, blue, and yellow.  But, you know, if you wore the wrong kind of beads, there were riffs that would be--they would pick on you and sometime beat you up.  And so, we--two of us who were in the council walked through there and we found one of the people who was doing it, and we basically said, you really don't wanna do this because the base commander doesn't want this to happen anymore [at Cam Ranh Air Base, Vietnam].  And we told them who we were, and it stopped.  Because it was, it was interesting because it was like (laughter) two young policemen walking through and saying, we know what you're doing so it has to stop.  And, it weren't about that at all, it was just simply--we were trying to survive and we were trying to improve a situation.  I was trying to--I guess I was probably (pause) in a sense doing a little bit more in, in that in fact that I, that I was involved in that because I knew I left, I'd left two girls in, in the United States the two biracial girls.
Speaker 1: Those are your daughters [Stephanie Camp and Dorothea Camp]?
Speaker 2:  	My daughters that I wanted to make a better world for.  I didn't like America the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so, so, you had some success.
Speaker 2:  	Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But--so, you, so, you were in the, in the Army [sic. U.S. Air Force] until '72 [1972], I guess it was?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, until February of '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 659113
Speaker 1: You still basically were packing parachutes and, and, and doing this kind--the work of trying to ameliorate some of the racial tensions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, I stopped that when I left Vietnam.  I went to Duluth Air Force Base [Duluth Air National Guard Base] in Minnesota and having been to Vietnam, I was treated really shabby.  They treated the Vietnam vets even on, even on base they treated us like we were ex-junkies and baby killers.  And, I just couldn't take--that just really bothered me.  Also, I was stationed and--at--like I said, Duluth, Minnesota and shortly after my family arrived from France, because that's where they stayed while I was in Vietnam, they were gonna transfer me to some base and I don't know where it was.  And I'd just gotten settled and I said, I'm not moving again.  I just simply told them, I'm not moving again.  Because, I didn't want to separate from my daughter and, at that time, I had kind of one of my sister-in-law's nieces; her father was in the Army [French Army] and she was autistic.  But, at that time I don't think they knew what it really was, and so they were saying that it was probably because he was leaving that she refused to speak, because every time she would speak to him, he would leave and so, she made this association.  And that was just trying to kind of understand, early understanding of what autism was for her.  And I didn't want that to happen to my daughter.  And so, I just simply refused to, to leave.  I said, I'm not, you know, I'm not going to the next base.  And, when I was supposed to be at the next base, I ended up in the shop.  I didn't go AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave]. I just refused to report to the next base.  But, also by then I had visited the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] and I, I, I had walked--I had gotten to the fourth floor of the Bulletin and talked to George Packard [George R. Packard], who was the managing editor, and he had asked me, you know, what I do and I showed him my pho- portfolio and I said, "This is what I can do for you."  And, his question was, "When can you start?"
Story_ID: 659114
Speaker 1: You met Philip Jones Griffiths, right?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Before, and he was associated with the--well, well, tell us about it?
Speaker 2:  	Well, Philip, Philip, he did 'Vietnam Incorporated' ['Vietnam Inc.'].  He was a part of Magnum Photo [Magnum Photos].  And, when I--I used to go and talk with a friend of mine who ran the lodging, temporary lodging.  So, I'm talking with him, in this guy with the silver, you know, these metallic cases and there's Life stickers all over the things, you know.  And, I said, this is a Life photographer, all right.  And, so, I had just come from the darkroom, the, the hobby shop darkroom and I had my, my prints with me.  And I said, "May I," I asked him, "can I show you my prints?"  And he, kind of groggy because this was late, I mean, or early in the morning.  It was about two o'clock in the morning and it was a weekend so, we, you know, we were out late talking.  He started looking at my prints and his eyes widened, which was really cool, you know, because he was really tired after that trip.  And it was like--and I got that nod of like, you know, this is good.  And he looked at it and he said, "This is good work.  You're obviously influenced by W. Eugene Smith," and I was at that time.  And--, "But I'd like to talk with you further. Can you come to Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam]?"  Because, you know--and so, yeah--so, my commander arranged for me to be able to go to Saigon to spend three days and talk with Philip Jones Griffith.  And, Philip fortunately had a lot of good advice for me.
Story_ID: 659115
Speaker 1: So when you got back to--I mean--(pause) since '72 [1972] were you living in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] by this time?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, no.  Well, in '72 [1972], yeah.  Yeah, '72 [1972] was when I moved to Philadelphia I think--yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, before you went to The Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] you, you had moved here or, or what?
Speaker 2:  	No, I moved here to work for the Bulletin.
Speaker 1: To work for the Bulletin.  Okay, so, you--so, why did you go to the Bulletin first, you know, or, or did you go to the Bulletin first I don't know.
Speaker 2:  	I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's just one of--
Speaker 2:  	Well, that was the thing.  Philip [Philip Jones Griffiths] said--told me, he said, you know, "At this point you can go to work for any newspaper in the country. You're good enough for that."  And, so, you know, I believed him.  My family was here, my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] was here, my brothers were here, and so, I thought, well, Philadelphia would be a good place for me to be at.  I haven't been with my family for a decade.  And, I'd looked around and I respected the Bulletin more than I did The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer], and I still think the Bulletin was a better paper than The Inquirer was and is.  And so, I thought, this is where I wanna work.  And, I called a reporter and asked her if I could come to the fourth floor and talk with her about getting a job.  And she said, "Well, come and talk," but I realized it wasn't she--I just needed to get on the fourth floor.  And I said, "Who do I need, who do I need to see that can assure me being a hired here?"  (Points) And she said, "George Packard [George R. Packard]."  So, I went over and I knocked on Packard's door, you know, because they had the cubicles.  And I showed him what I could do.  And I said, "This is what I can do for you."  And that's when he said, you know, "When, when, when can you start?"  And so, I had the job, but I said, "I'm out of the [U.S. military] service in eight months. I can be here in eight months."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, I also, I, I can't say that without undestan- without saying also that the Civil Rights Movement having really put a tremendous amount of pressure on industry at that time, that was one of the things that gave me the kind of guts to do what I did.  I knew they had no black photographers and I was--became the first black photographer for a major daily in this city.
Story_ID: 659116
Speaker 1: Beginning I guess with the assassination of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in '68 [1968] and all the racial tension that, that you were trying to quell in Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: There're a lot of major newspapers and institutions started trying to hire some black person (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Exactly.  And I kind of knew that, you know, I wasn't as sure of it, you know, you're never kind of sure what's going on at the time it's going on, at least I'm not.  But, I had the feeling that, that's what it was and I knew, I knew I had that in my pocket.  That was in my back pocket.  And so, I used it to--and the fact that I was good, that Philip [Philip Jones Griffiths] said I was good, you know.  So, I was, you know, I was assured of that.  So, yeah, so, I went to the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] and I chose the Bulletin and that's where I went.
Speaker 1: So, this is 1972 right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that was seventy--yeah, I started working there in '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, well, what was the routine like, did you like the rhythm of it?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.  That was great.  I turned professional then, I had become a professional photographer.
Speaker 1: Were you the first African American photographer there?
Speaker 2:  	I was the first African American photographer for a major daily in this city [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer] didn't have any, the Daily News [Philadelphia Daily News] didn't have any.  Of course, you know, The Trib did, but, you know, The Tribune [The Philadelphia Tribune] was the--is, is the black paper (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Story_ID: 659117
Speaker 1: How were you treated?  I mean, did the--
Speaker 2:  	You know, yeah, I was treated well.  And, I, I really loved doing the job.  It was exciting, I mean, covering baseball, covering--you know, covering sports on a regular basis, meeting the challenge of getting the shot.  Just covering every day mundane stuff and being able to make a shot that was good enough to make the front page.  I mean, the first--I made, when I first got there, I made a lot of front pages.  The sad part of it was, is was that we didn't cover the African American community the way I thought we would be able to.  I thought it was a matter of, of--well, they just needed someone to show them the way.  And that was not the case. The point was, is they didn't wanna do it.  There was just a tremendous resistance to changing what the image was of the African American community or any community that was non-white.  So, I don't think it's so much--I mean, I, I, I know it's, you know, it's a stereotypi- stereotype thing but it really is who did the newspaper cover.  And I challenged people sometime with the, with the multicultural--multicultural workshop that I did after that, after Vietnam.  And I said--I'd give them newspapers and I would assign them each a race, say, you're Asian, you're African American, you're white, and you're--you know, you're a woman, you're Asian, you're Indian [Native American].  Okay, find yourself in the newspaper.  It's very interesting.  Indians always come up with nobody (laughter), okay.  It's like there's nothing on the Indians.  Asians, maybe one or two, women, had a little bit more.  When I started, they were almost, they were almost like the Asians.  Whites, white men, white men, "Oh! oh!  Here we go," you know, (laughter) it's like the whole thing you see.  That was the culture, that's what they covered [at the Philadelphia Bulletin] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --and they didn't wanna go any further than that.  And it wasn't because they were ignorant of it, it was because they had no desire to move any further than that.  And, that was dangerous.  See, to me--and I think the thing is just too many--and it's not just when you ignore a culture but it's when you exemplify one segment as being premier.  That's dangerous.  That, that's cultural fascism.
Story_ID: 659118
Speaker 1: So, what were some of the, the photographs that you remember sh--I mean, some of your assignments that are the most memorable at least during this period of time?
Speaker 2:  	Ah.  The first one was Groundhog Day.  And, I had to go to the zoo and photograph the groundhog.
Speaker 1: They got Punxsutawney Phil.
Speaker 2:  	Punxsutawney Phil, yeah.  But we didn't use Punxsutawney, we used Suzanne [ph.] (laughter), okay.  And we built a little mound and we put the groundhog in it (laughter), you know.  That made the front page believe it or not.  The other--the funniest one was the hippo, and that was, that was really shortly after my arrival.  We had to do--I had to go and do a hippo that was born at the museum.  They're not normally born in museums in that time.  And so, the television was, you know, television was there, almost--a lot of the press was there and we were all trying to get a photograph of this baby hippo.  The thing that we didn't realize was that at the very beginning of life and shortly after birth, hippos don't come out of the water.  The baby hippos don't come out of the water for a few months.  And so, we were all trying to figure out how are we gonna get a photograph of this baby hippo.  Because all you would see every now and then was a little pair of nostrils that come up, breath, and they'd go back down.  Well, at that time I'm thinking I've gotta get a photograph of this because my, my job was dependent on this.  How am I gonna get a photograph?  So, I went around, and we had pretty free access because we were a press and I went around to the side, and a few people were there.  And so, I started talking to her and I remembered in Duluth, Minnesota every now and then, if you would talk to animals, they would react to you particularly the, you know, the apes.  So, I'm gonna try this on this hippo.  And I said, "Marie [ph.], you have got to go and get your baby.  If you don't, I'm going to lose my job.  Please, go get your baby."  And the television guys who were next to me and others, like this guy is crazy.  So, they left.  She went back in, she brought the baby back out about three steps enough for me to get a photograph, and then she turned around and went back in (laughter).  So, I'm the only one that got that shot 'cause I had the nerve to kind of talk to the hippo, you know.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  So--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, you know, then photographing, you know, Mick Jagger was an interesting story.  When Philly [Philadelphia Phillies] won their first World Series [1980 World Series].  It was an interesting photograph, I thought it was a very good photograph.  But it was kind of stolen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this around '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2:  	No, that would have been in 1980 because I--
Speaker 1: Eighty [1980], okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I was getting ready to leave.
Speaker 1: Those were the Phillies with Mike Schmidt and--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Larry Bowa and those guys.  And, I noticed that when Tug McGraw would always kind of come in to close the ca- game.  And I thought, he always does this and I thought, well, if there's a victory in that final game if I'm in over--shooting over second base, and if I can get a lens long enough to shoot over second base, shoot between Tug McGraw's arms, that's gonna be the shot.  So, I tested it, I had to test it and I knew I was, you know because I was leaving I could do a--I had a little leeway because--I did it, it worked.  The chief photographer came in, went through my negatives, found that--and I was only shooting it for a test because I wanted a shoot with--save it.  He found it and used it.  I mean it was a nice play, he gave me a half of page.
Speaker 1: Used it before the championship?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  And, wouldn't you know it, as soon as I did that all of sudden the Daily News [Philadelphia Daily News], The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer], and every other photographer is out there shooting over second base.  So, it just really kind of ruined, you know, ruined that, you know.  But, yeah, there were--but those were the--I mean, you know, I kind of love that story but there're other stories, you know, of photographing Mick Jagger and, and the fact that we were supposed to have two songs in the opening but we only had the introduction, which was about thirty seconds.  And his bodyguard, which was the guy who was about five feet wide (laughter) and he was like muscular, came over and said, "Leave."  And it was like, but, Mick said we could stay for two songs.  (Gesture) And, fortunately, I just really blasted so I ended up with getting a really, really good shot.  But, total luck.
Story_ID: 659119
Speaker 1: Covering MOVE the--when they were over on 33rd Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: This is the first crisis, right, with MOVE (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, that was the first one, yeah.
Speaker 2: What happened at this point?
Speaker 1:  	Well, I, I didn't know MOVE that well.  I, I, I had run into them, you know, and I, I'd visited the home, you know, the house where they'd lived.  And I'd went to them afterwards but, when they did the raid on MOVE, I did another shot and that was when the officer Ramp [James Ramp]--yeah, it was Officer Ramp was killed.  And I didn't, I didn't know what had happened, it was just an unusual situation.  I was in a position and I saw cops comings up crying.  And so, at that point, you don't know what's going on, you just know it's an unusual situation so you shoot.  You find out what's going on later on.  And so, I had a--you know, really good photograph of that--the only photograph of that situation.  And it was really the police reacting to hearing that Ramp had been shot.  But, it's those kinds of situations, I thought it was really exciting again until the very end when capital came in and this, this put out a business organization and they came in and they were going to close the newspaper [Philadelphia Bulletin] so everything became quite miserable.
Story_ID: 659120
Speaker 1: They were more interested in--(pause) they were just more interested in putting the paper out of business. And we weren't, weren't interested in making a good paper anymore.  And I couldn't, you know--and we, we mentioned a little earlier about staying alive.  And that's when, you know, one of my daughters it was the one who--Stephanie Camp, who's the historian but she was about thirteen or fourteen then.  And she would see me going to work, hating to go to work, coming home, never seeing, never seeing them because I was always afternoon.  And she said to me one afternoon, says, you know, I'm getting ready to go to work, and she says, "If you don't like to go to--if you hate your work so much, why don't you quit?  That's what you would tell us to do."  And, yeah, it is what I would've told them to do, you know, but, you know, you're, you're a husband, you're a father of two, you have a house, you have all this responsibilities.
Speaker 2: And she's what in middle school?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, middle school.  Yeah, but, you know, what's more important to teach?  And I--you know, that was a part of my argument.  And, and I knew they were going to close anyway so I, I didn't know if I was going to (unclear).  I just knew I, I needed to stay alive.  And I felt like physically, I physically felt like I was dying.  Because what I loved to do was, was no longer enjoyable to do.  It was--I hated doing what I, what I loved to do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	That's a bad feeling.
Speaker 2: So, so, how did you plot your way out of it?
Speaker 1:  	I wrote them a resignation letter, and in it I had found, I had found a quote about the Daily Mirror in, in London [England] when they went out of business.  And they had described themselves as a reflection of the daily--of the people of the world.  And so, my resignation letter was basically I know longer see the newspaper [Philadelphia Bulletin] as being a reflection of the world.  I see it as something that is struggling to survive rather than being a reflection of the people of the world.  And I can no longer be a part of that.
Story_ID: 659121
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm [HistoryMaker] Donald Camp, D-O-N-A-L-D, Camp, C-A-M-P.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	Twenty-eight, July, 1940, Meadville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2:  	I'm an artist, photographer, professor emeritus Ursinus College [Collegeville, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Ah, what is today's date, let me see.
Speaker 1: It's the ominous Friday the 13th I believe.
Speaker 2:  	I think it--oh, is this Friday the 13th?
Speaker 1: I believe so.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, excellent, man.  I missed most of my day (laughter).
Speaker 1: Friday the 13th, what year?
Speaker 2:  	Two thousand fourteen [June 13, 2014].
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	At my home at 4511 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And we are completing and interview that we began on, on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) The 11th [June 11, 2014].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the 11th, right.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Two days ago, on Wednesday I guess. On Wednesday.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 659122
Speaker 1: And we left off in the 1970s with, with you at the Philadelphia Bulletin.
Speaker 2:  	Correct.
Speaker 1: And, so the Bulletin is going through some changes but you were telling us about some, some of your more memorable photo shoots.  We talked about MOVE, we talked about Mick Jagger, Tug McGraw photos, the birth of a hippopotamus and some other things, but at some point, though you, you decide to leave the Bulletin.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the, the factors that caused you to make this decision?
Speaker 2:  	The, the Bulletin was getting ready to close.  They had brought in this--I guess you could call it a Romney [Mitt Romney] type company, and they're business was putting people out of business.  And, I--they made things miserable, they made all of us as miserable as they possibly could, so it was no longer a pleasure going to work.  I enjoyed my job, I enjoyed photographing, you know, it's, it's wonderful being a photographer to shoot fifteen or twenty rolls of film every week.  You know, and the challenge of getting the, you know, getting a really strong photograph, being on front page and, you know, that--kind of that competition.  And, you know, it was a sense of the competition but it was also just, hey, I'm making a photograph, I'm making a photograph that can communicate. Well they go to the point where they started cropping the photographs because of space and they have editors in position, a few new editors, who had no idea what a photograph was and how it communicates.  And so, they started cropping the photographs and as they cropped, I kind of started moving in closer to subjects so that they could use the whole photograph rather than continuing to crop.  And I got to the point where I could no longer make a photograph because I was in so close.  I remember one particular photograph where I noticed this, and they wanted me to photograph something very simple.  It was the Devon Horse Show, and they wanted me to photograph this young boy on, on a pony.  And it's very simple, you know, it's a very simple kind of thing.  So, I brought the photograph back and they, they just cropped the pony out.  And it was the photograph of this little boy that was extremely grainy and it had my name under it because we were given captions.  So, it was like, he can't, he can't make a photograph.  And I really--at that point, I really couldn't make a photograph because I was anticipating their crop marks.  So, there was no pleasure in making a photograph, there was no pleasure in going to work because everyone was just so kind of scared and miserable.  And then my daughter [Stephanie Camp], who was probably about thirteen or--twelve, thirteen, fourteen at the time, said, "If you're so unhappy, why don't you quit?  That you, that's what you would tell us to do."  And I thought about that and I thought about--of course I thought about being able to take care of them.  And I thought about--but I thought about the ramification of not doing something as a bad example to them.  And I thought it was more important that they realize that they do what makes them--really what makes them happy to work.  I think that was--I know that was more important because I do, and I taught them that work, work done in the, work done in the spirit of service is prayer.  It's that simple.  And, I couldn't teach them that it wasn't prayer, because I definitely wasn't praying to go to work.  And so, I quit and I started to go--I decided to freelance (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so.
Speaker 2:  	That's how I left the Bulletin.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1980 I believe, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: You're forty years old, 1980.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so, they gave you a going away party.  We have a picture here from it, we'll probably shoot it at the end.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: But the people who worked at the Bulletin were sorry to see you go.  But a lot of people were--had to go because it wasn't, it wasn't working out.  The Bulletin was getting ready to go down the tubes, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, how long was it after you left that the Bulletin ceased publication?
Speaker 2:  	One year.  I remember when I got the--heard the announcement, it was in the room right in back of me.  There's a little room where my dark room is, and I was there doing some printing, the radio was on and they announced that the Bulletin had closed.  And that was just about a year after I left.
Story_ID: 659123
Speaker 1: Now what did you have in mind? I mean, were you gonna go over to The Philadelphia Inquirer and get a job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --or Tribune [The Philadelphia Tribune], or--
Speaker 2:  	I try--I interviewed at the, the Daily News [Philadelphia Daily News].  I didn't wanna work for The Inquirer either, but I, I--the, the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] had a, an ethic about it.  We were accurate.  And I didn't wanna to go to The Inquirer because they had a sense of inaccuracy that I didn't wanna deal with.  The Daily News was kind of a rag, you know, it was called the daily rag, you know, it, it was a, a bit of yellow journalism but they treated their photographers very well, and so I thought I would go there.  And I was interviewed by [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone and the editor, and I didn't get the job.  And then it got back to me that Chuck Stone told someone that he needs to learn how to interview.  And, that's fine.  I don't know how--I didn't know how to interview then.  I still don't know how to interview, you know, but I do know how to take photographs.  That's what I know.
Story_ID: 659124
Speaker 1: So then, how did you--did you--now--when did it occur to you or did someone suggest that you pursue fine arts photography?
Speaker 2:  	Ah, well, yeah.  That's kind of what I always wanted to do, but then when I left I started--well, I have to make, I have to make a living so I tried freelancing.  And I, I freelanced for a couple of years, and then--but the thing was that I was working twice as hard taking the same photographs, with the same results, and so it was just extremely exhausting and still no contentment.  I did freelance for Ebony magazine and that was probably the only magazine that I did.  But there were other places that I would photograph, and it was just a business.  It's a business, I didn't like it.  I remember a few times I would do a job and give them all the photographs and try to get my second, final payment.  And they would present me with a check for less, and we'd end up almost in fights before they would give me the check for the, for the total contract, 'cause they would try to break the contract.  And, to me that was just totally--another unethical thing is I found myself being not just unhappy but angry, you know.  Again, that's not a way to work.  And so, I decided to get out of photography and do something practical like becoming an anthropologist.  And those anthropologists are going to understand, that we can laugh at this, because what I had found, because I had no degree, I was forty-two, you know, I was forty-two years old, had not--had some credits that I had from the [U.S.] Air Force, but really no college degree.  And, so I decided--I, I discovered visual anthropology and I thought, okay, well, let me become a visual anthropologist that's something practical.  And so, I spent a year at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] studying visual anthropology.  The thing that got me out of that--I, I loved it, you know, I really liked the, the images that we were looking at and studying how that was done.  But there were two things that got me out of that, that was when I started studying linguistics and during the midterm I kind of got my tongue caught in a position trying to figure out what were glottals and what were subglottals and all of that.  It made no sense to me.  And so, I stood up in the middle of the class and I said, "I'm leaving.  I just have to drop this class, I don't want to do this."  The other thing was that when I--I found that when I would do a paper, I would kind of physically wanna take it out of the typewriter, walk over to the wall, hang it on the wall and stand back and look at it.  That's not how you edit a paper.  And so, I figured I'm an artist.  That's what my family, you know, my brothers, my sister [Sylvia Camp], we were artists.  That's what I do.  And so, I made the transfer over to Tyler School of Art [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and became a forty-two year old, a forty-three year old student at that time with a group of teenagers.
Speaker 1: Now, now, so you left Temple for, for--(background noise) is Tyler a part of Temple?
Speaker 2:  	Yes, it is, yeah.  Tyler is--Tyler School of Art.
Speaker 1: So, so, you were, you were--now what is--I didn't ask you this and I should have asked you.  What is visual anthropology, what is that?
Speaker 2:  	It's the--really the use of photographs, still and, and film as a method of studying cultures.  For example, you might stu- you might place a camera in position to watch a village motion or you might put it in a supermarket to study the motions of people, or you might study the photographs of a culture.  For example, if you take someone's phot- family album and you compare that to a family album of another culture as to what kind of photographs you make.  It's just that kind of study.  It's really a fascinating branch.  But I'm so glad that I did that, that one year in visual anthropology (background noise) really started me thinking about photography in a very different way.
Speaker 1: So, did you do like field studies for that?  Did you go out and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, I didn't.  I didn't get that far in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So, the Tyler school--so you left the anthropology department basically--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for the fine arts department.
Speaker 2:  	Correct.
Story_ID: 659125
Speaker 1: Well, who were I guess your most influential teachers or, or were there any mentors there at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in those days?
Speaker 2:  	In visual anthropology, it would have been Jay Ruby, and he's one of the kind of founders of visual anthropology.  The--Tyler School of Art [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the reason I really decided to go to Tyler other than it was available as a college was there was a photo teacher there, a photographer there by the name of Will Larson [William G. Larson], who, who was doing some really complex work.  And I didn't understand a lot of what he was doing other than the fact that he was taking giant steps in the field of photography.  It was kind of like my sitting--and I talked about sitting in the club in San Francisco [California] listening to John Coltrane.  Well, looking at the work that Will Larson did in photography was the same kind of thing.  There was real depth to the work that I didn't understand but I knew I wanted to talk with him and study with him, because I felt like I could take photography in a direction that I hadn't thought of before.  And so, that was--I guess that was the thing I really needed.  A lot of the students there were, of course, wanted to get a position like I had left.  The reason I went was to study photography as an art form in a new way, in a different direction.  I knew I could take a good photograph.  That's easy.  But I didn't know how I could photography in a different direction, my direction.
Story_ID: 659126
Speaker 1: What was your--did--did you have like a thesis project or something?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: For--am I getting too far ahead, (background noise) 'cause I think we--you go into the M.F.A. program in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, I started the M.F.A. Program in '87 [1987].  Well, I mean, I had nothing.  I had--'cause I think I had maybe about fifteen credits for my twelve years in the [U.S. military] service at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], you know, because the University of Maryland does campus courses.  And, you know, so every now and then I would take a course in philosophy or something and those were accepted by Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But that's all I had.  I was terrified of college before that, you know.  I think a lot of it was left over from my high school days [at Camden High School, Camden, New Jersey], you know, those terrifying teachers that tried to destroy me.  And, to some degree I thought I was dumb.  I was just too dumb for college.  And so, when I started, it was really out of desperation.  It was just out of desp--there was, there were no other steps for me to take so I had to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 659127
Speaker 1: I mean--and there were a f- there were a few others that were really good, of course.  There was John Dowell, who was--he's a painter, printmaker, musician and now photographer.  But he's just a really good printmaker.  And, I saw--I used to watch him work and he worked in a way that I really admired.  It was the work ethic of John that I liked, and also, also the fact that he was very, he was beautifully subtle.  I mean he could make a white painting (laughter), okay, and he did a whole body of white paintings.  And they might have a little splash of blue or little splash of red.  And I--it's a, an aesthetic, it's an composition that I, I've, I've learned to appreciate.  Not everything has to be as pushy in a sense as I make my work.  John was really subtle, and I loved his subtlety and I learned from his subtlety.  So, yeah, I mean that was a part of--oh, yeah, and Winifred Lutz [Winifred Ann Lutz] was another one.  Winifred Lutz was sculpture, was a sculptor.  I did a piece on her just recently.  Winifred was a little lady, very soft spoken, and she did three dimensional design.  And, I needed to stand close to her, everyone needed to stand close to her just to hear what she had to say.  And, she was just incredibly encouraging because I never thought I could do a sculpture or a three dimensional design.  But I did, and I did them well.  And so, in a sense that first year [at the Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is almost like a basic training in art, that first year I learned that I could draw.  I didn't particularly like drawing so I never really learned to draw well, but I learned that I could draw and that I could paint and I could sculpt.  All those things that I didn't really like to do, I found out I could do them if I worked at it.  But, photography is the thing that I also--I learned to appreciate it, because I watched a lot of students try to learn photography and what I thought was easy I found that they couldn't do.  And, and until then I'd really only been around photographers who could make a photograph.  And it was there that I learned to appreciate that it's a difficult art form.  And it was from Will [William G. Larson] that I learned that it's also a philosophical art form.
Story_ID: 659128
Speaker 1: You were saying, I think off--I don't know if we were talking off camera about Roy DeCarava--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and his influence on your work. Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, well, Roy--had the chance to meet him a couple of times.  First time I met him was at one of his openings at a museum in New Jersey, and I went over to talk to him and it was the first time.  And Roy was not a big man, he wasn't a tall man.  And I went over to say hello and I couldn't speak.  But I'm six feet, and Roy is probably 5'6", 5'7".  And, it was like--I just could not speak.  And I think his words to me were, "Don't be afraid of me."  And then later on we, we talked.  And I went and got an interview from him and--I mean, we weren't friends but we could talk, you know.  And I learned to appreciate him in a very different way other than just as a photograph on paper.  Roy, and you know, Robert Frank was the same kind of thing.  I've never had a chance to meet him but his composition, his style, his sense of composition was also very much like jazz.  I'm not sure whether I would say jazz or blues, or--but his composition was his composition.  It was, it was like--he did shoot from the hip but it was almost like a really casual energetic conversation, whereas, Roy's compositions were just beautifully classic.  So, yeah, those, those are people who inspired me, you know, the way I saw things.  But, one of the compositions for Roy--one, one of the conversations with Roy and I told him I did a body of work that kind of was inspired by him and looked like his work.  But I--by that time I was on to something else and--but he told me, well, you know, "Don't do your--don't do my work do your work."  And, it was just further clarification that if you're gonna be, if you're gonna be, if you're going to be an artist, if you're going to be a serious artist, your images have to be yours, your, your art has to be you.  And so, that was, you know, what was critical there.  And then in '87 [1987], I started grad school [at the Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 659129
Speaker 1: In grad school [at Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you had a--I guess a thesis project or something?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was it?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, that was--you know, I still like the work--it--but it was--again, this was based on a part of a Baha'i prayer.  And that prayer is--a part of that prayer is: "Thus their superstitions have become barriers between themselves and their own hearts."  And I love that because what I tried to do physically was to set up a barrier and so I used comp- I, I, used appropriated images from newspapers, and they really are--they were based on superstition.  My choices of the images were based on what I think are superstitions and that is inferiority or superiority of race, inferiority, or superiority of gender, you know.  And so, I took these images and I, I, I copied them and then I printed them on mirror.  And so, when you saw the photograph, you could see, you know, you are here, then you had this image of something that depicted racism and then you saw yourself behind it.  One of the pieces was something that we assumed that I'm supposed to understand in one way, it was a diptych.  And on the left is an image of something someone called 'Dr. Claude Cunningham Tips His Hat' [ph.].  He was a delegate at the, at 1948 convention in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  I mean, he had a hat on and he's tipping it and he has cane and cigar sticking out of his mouth, and he's from Texas.  The way the image was made I was supposed to assume that he was this racist.  On the right was: 'Buxom Virginia Jack Swaffs Her Thirst,' and it's a buxom woman, you know, and she's got a bottle of soda.  Well, on the reverse of those images, the reverse on the back of that page, it was what the women's caucus was doing at the convention and they were talking about, "What are going to do with this terrible new weapon that we have?"  And they were talking about the atomic bomb.  "What are we going to do about women's rights?   What are we going to do about racism?"  That was the discussion that the women were talking about at the convention.  And so, I took those images and I flipped them and I photographed both sides, and so it's, it's Dr. Claude Cunningham [ph.] and Miss Virginia Jack [ph.] and then the text so you can see what was going on between a heart and self.  So, that was--those were just kind of a few of the images that I did for the thesis, but that was the foundation of it.  The beautiful thing about that also is, if the pieces are lit right, not only are you seeing self, barrier and self, but if it's lit right, it projects onto the floor so that you're standing in the image as well so it just envelopes you in that sense.  So, that was, you know, my thesis work.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1989, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Who is your advisor?
Speaker 2:  	That would have been Martha Madigan.  Will Larson [William G. Larson] left just shortly after I started the grad program and then Martha Madigan took it over, so she would have been the advisor.
Story_ID: 659130
Speaker 1: You were brought right into the university [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as a professor--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) same year you graduated.  So, were there any other black faculty in those days?
Speaker 2:  	Well, John Dowell, Whitney--Stan Whitney [Stanley Whitney], that was about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, out of how many would you say?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I think there were probably about fifty professors there.  I, I don't really know, but, yeah, they brought me in on that.  And I, and I also got a fellowship.  I was the first Future Faculty Fellow [Future Faculty Fellow Program].  And that I did because I was speaking--I, I--it was actually just a question.  We were at a, at a conference for adult students and a few people stood up and they were questioning about, about returning to college at a late age.  And so, I stood up and I probably gave a little short two minute lecture (laughter) rather than asking a question.  And, I think I ended with, you know, one day I realized I was going to be fifty years old and I was going to be fifty with a degree or I was going to be fifty without a degree.  And, I went back to campus and then I had a--someone--the dean called and says, "Barbara Brownstein wants to see you."  And she was the provost of the college.  And, she was provost of the university.  And so, I went to see her and she said, "It was beautiful what you said. You wanna go to grad school? We are going to give you a stipend and we want you to speak often about adul--for adult students."  What could I do?
Story_ID: 659131
Speaker 1: Dread Scott in Chicago [Illinois] who created the controversial flag--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --exhibit ['What is the Proper Way to Display a U.S. Flag?'].
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I started teaching I definitely used that.  I thought it was a powerful image, you know, it's a powerful piece of work.  And I keep--I always push my students to break rules, just break them intelligently.  Make mistakes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, so you served as an assistant professor at Tyler School [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art], at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for two years.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, for two years and I was the--was also on the future faculty fellowship [Future Faculty Fellow Program], director, I guess, which was a fiasco.  I'm not a director of anything (laughter).  Really, it's, it's just not my field.  I would go in and sit at my desk and it's like, what am I going to do here?  And, I would ask people what am I supposed to do, and I would, you know, I would go to meetings and we'd sit there.  And I would make suggestions having no idea whether they were any--of any value or not.  It was--I loved the teaching, I did not like the recruiting.  The recruiting part of it was terrible, and the being director of the future faculty fellowship was like just a real fiasco.  Bad move on their part, to be honest, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I'm a photographer, I'm an artist.  I'm not a director.
Story_ID: 659132
Speaker 1: Now you're producing work at the same time, so what kind of work were you producing then?  Well, I, I know you were working on a series that eventually became Dust, 'Dust Shaped Hearts' [Donald Camp].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, well--just describe that to us--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, I'm not sure--I guess I start--I did start to work on 'Dust Shaped Hearts' while I was at this school [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I'm not sure.  It might, it might have been after I left, after the two year contract.  I had another year to go on that, by the way, but they lost money and I think they were looking for (laughter) for a way to get rid of their director.  But, what happened on that was, at, at that point, they were talking about the extinction of the African American male as a species.  That just like--it was insulting.  First of all, you know, talking about me as a species was just, you know.  And the extinction of us--I mean we're into change, I mean, evolution, we're all changing.  But extinction of--and so, I, I--I kept, I kept trying to think about, you know, I mean, that, that was kind of burning in my brain at the time.  And, I don't often sleep during the day, almost never, but I think I, I was particularly tired one evening and I was lying on the sofa, television was on, news was on, and I woke up long enough to see a group of black men, young black men being paraded across the screen with their handcuffs on.  And I realized--and one of the things that I, I, I was very aware of--two things that I was very aware of.  One, was the power of the photograph, the power of the image to influence action.  The other was a photograph by omission.  And, by the photograph by omission, I can refer back to actually my childhood years and flipping through newspapers and the only photographs I saw of black people were of when they had committed a crime.  And, we were omitted from anything else.  Well, in a sense, that's a photograph.  If you have photographs of this, photographs of that, photographs of so and so, and then nothing.  It's a photograph by omission.  The other thing was that, if we were going to be extinct, I thought I needed to make a catalog, a record of who we were so that five hundred years from now people would knew--they would know what the people who looked like, who were, you know, who created this music, who created this fashion, who created this food, who did all--who, who, who made all these contributions to the world.  And at the time I had also gone to Israel and here I am sitting in the middle of the Mid East and I get on the bus and who do I hear but Michael Jackson, (pause) all right.
Speaker 1: Well, which one did you hear?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2:  	I don't remember which one it was, it was just, I mean, but, you know, you're sitting in the Middle East, you know, on a bus and they're playing Michael Jackson.  And, I, you know, I, I think that was, that was one of those--I also had an exhibition coming up.  And, although I liked the, the mirrors, they were heavy.  And, also, I thought I had already made that statement. I thought it was just kind of--they're beautiful images but not as direct as I wanted them to be.  They were very complex, they were, they were complex to understand and so I wanted to make it something simple, and I didn't quite know how to do it.  I didn't--I knew I didn't wanna do straight photographs because that's not what I felt.  And so, I thought that what I wanted to do was something that was more--what I wanted to do was something (background noise) that was more (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Time for cats to speak up I guess.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Something that was more feeling the way I felt about things as an African American male.
Story_ID: 659133
Speaker 1: And so, (pause) I really locked myself in a room.  Again, I was working up here, I had locked myself in a room over there and I turned all the lights out and I put on a, a tape of James Blood Ulmer, 'Are You Glad to Be in America,' which is really a screaming blues.  And, for four or five hours I just listened to James Blood Ulmer and 'Glad to Be in America.'  And in it, you know, he recites all these kind of terrible things that have happened to us in America, but it's like, well you're glad to be in America, 'cause you're superman.  So, I thought, what I need to do now is I need to make a photograph.  I need to abandon silver; the silver gelatin print because to me that was classical.  And I wanna make something that's more like blues and jazz.  I wanted to field holler more than anything.  And the thing that I knew, because I had really studied formulas, I knew the photochemistry backward and forward at that time because I studied, you know, textbooks.  And I could have told you at that point almost any, any place in there where a formula appeared and what it did, because I figured that's my palette.  A painter has, you know, he can put down some orange and red and, you know, he knows where, you know, what part of the earth that pigment is coming from if he really knows the pigment.  And I had to know my formulas.  Well, in there, I knew that there was a way of working with earth.  And, (unclear) okay, well, let me, let me work with earth pigment.  And I know the support for earth pigment could be two things.  Well, I, I, I suspected that it could be two things.  And one was egg tempera and the other was casein.  I first tried egg tempera but it was--it, it really didn't work.  I imagine, if I'd kept working with it, it would work but it, it--at that point, it didn't work. When I tried the casein, which is basically a milk protein, and I made the first ones from cottage cheese.  And you add, you add a chemical to it and it becomes like a glue.  And then you add the earth pigment to it, this dust, and you coat the paper and when it dries, it's light sensitive.  And I thought, well, this is, this is what I'm going to do.  I'm going to--this next show is gonna be these faces.  I did the headshots, I did the headshots because I grew up with head shots.  I mean, when I looked in the newspapers and somebody had killed someone, you know, stabbed someone, stolen something, that's when I saw a black man.  It's a headshot.  And, when the newspaper [Philadelphia Bulletin]--the one thing we got of everyone was a headshot.  But since it was that simplest thing, was the simplest form in the newspaper, because that's the first thing we did when you, when you went in was you sit down for a, a moment and they get a headshot of you and then you can go on and do something else no matter what you're going to do with that person.  It's the headshot.  So, that's the identity.  And so, I made these headshots unblinking, unsmiling headshots.  And I printed them with earth pigment and milk.
Story_ID: 659134
Speaker 1: It seems to me that there--that you shoot them from above with the light, I mean, under their features sort of--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is that how?
Speaker 2:  	No, it all depends, depends on the face.  The thing that, that makes everyone uncomfortable is that I'm about twelve inches to eighteen inches in front of you.  And so, I violate that space, I violate the personal space.  And that's critical.  So, you know, you have this camera in your face.  I'm telling you to stare into the lens, unblinking, straight on and, and I'll take one roll of film.  And that rule was implied--that rule was applied because at the newspaper, we couldn't take a whole lot of film, so it was one roll.  And, always with the existing light.  So, no matter what the light situation was that's what I worked with.  With the exception of one photograph, and I'll talk about that later if you ask.  But--
Speaker 1: And the purpose of getting so close is that you wanna fill up the frame with as much of their face as possible--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so when you blow it up it'll--
Speaker 2:  	Well, it was that and also going back to that point that I realized that at the end of my Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin] career I couldn't make a photograph because I'd moved in so close.  And so, I started to move back just a bit.  So, it was in keeping with my history in a sense, of recognition of my photographic history of the subject that I moved in close.  I moved in close so no one could crop (laughter), okay.  And, when I finished it, it was like I was really terrifying, because I had the show ['Dust Shaped Hearts'] coming up and I had to take the work to the gallery and I had no idea what was gonna happen.  Because nobody had ever seen anything like this (laughter), okay.  And, in a sense, all of a sudden everything I did started looking really ugly.  But, anyhow, I, I took it, I took it to the gallery and laid paper on the floor and I, I laid everything out.  And the gallery owner's like, "Wow!  These are beautiful."
Speaker 1: So, this is what gallery, which one?
Speaker 2:  	The Sande Webster Gallery [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It's just downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, when the show opened, I noticed two things.  One, was there were--because, you know, there was--some of my teachers came and some of my associates came, but I noticed that when the white women would come in, they were almost terrified because there's this wall of black men.  And so, a few of them told me that there was this kind of transition for them, so that when they came in, they admitted that it was kind of fearful for them because there were all these black men.  But, the longer they stayed the more comfortable they got because they realized that there was kind of a comfort in a slight smile.  Now, I don't--the smile is not there.  For me it's neutral.  I get it as neutral as I possibly can, so it's neither frowning nor smiling.  So, whoever views it make whatever--they make whatever they want of it.  And, there were a few people, a few African American women, they looked at the work and they just started to dance.  And, I--it's like, wow, this is, this is wonderful as an artist to be able to do that.  And I did it with dirt and milk, and paper.  That was a great feeling.
Speaker 1: So, that's an old--I know that's an old pigment tempera is--was used by--in the Middle Ages by artists and plaster, and fresco, is that it?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, well, casein is extremely old, I mean, it's twenty thousand years old.  The Chinese used it in their cave paintings.  And the earth, and the earth pigment, the earth pigment that I used comes from the area of France and northern Spain where the paintings of Lascaux [France], the cave paintings of Lascaux are.  So, you know, in a sense I'm working that history.  (Pause) So, yeah, it was, it was, it was really pleasing to have that, that kind of success with something that in a sense that I invented.
Story_ID: 659135
Speaker 1: Black women are dancing and white people are getting more comfortable with it.  But, now, is it a financial success the first--?
Speaker 2:  	No, still isn't.  It's slowly catching on.  My first reviews were really terrible.  I remember one reviewer, he just passed away a few months ago, but he was writing for The Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer] which was the only major daily that was dealing with art.  And, when he--I, I did a show with two other Guggenheim fellows and we showed, the three of us together.  And he wrote gloriously about the other two, and when it came to me his comments were, "And Camp [HistoryMaker Donald Camp] and his brothers who do things."  And that was it.  So, I think the difficulty that I have, had and still have is there's not a true understanding as to whether I'm doing photography, works on paper or a painting.  And so, a collector who's going to purchase--needs to categorize things doesn't quite know what they're buying or where to place me.  The other thing is, I do what can be called portraits.  I don't like to call them portraits. To me, I prefer faces because portraits come with certain expectations.  Faces liberates me to do what I want to with the image.  But, then again, it's still someone else's face unless it's a museum or a, you know, really a (unclear) museum.  They're not going to purchase in general someone else's face.  Now, they're, I mean, there are collectors but then they're in categories.  They collect photographs.  I'm not quite a photographer other than the fact that I work with light. That's my, that's my sensibility.  My sensibility is really I, I, I work with light and what light affects and how it affects it.  That's how I'm a photographer.
Story_ID: 659136
Speaker 1: There is a story about the name 'Dust Shaped Hearts' [Donald Camp] right?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: Comes from a poem?
Speaker 2:  	Comes from a book of poems, actually, from Robert Hayden.  And, in 1940 and 1941, he did a body of work called 'Dust Shaped Hearts' [sic.].  He hated it.  When he went back and looked at it, he thought it was very amateurishly done.  Robert Hayden--I, I think, you know, at that point, I was really kind of searching for a strong identity for myself.  And so, I identified very strongly with being a Baha'i, and Robert Hayden was a Baha'i.  And he was a Baha'i whom I, I admitted, he was poet laureate.  And so, I looked at that and I thought, you know, this is, this is wonderful the idea of dust because of the fragility of it and the ever, and the ever presence of it.  I mean, dust is just everywhere, you know, just there.  So, it's almost the power.  It's also very fragile, you know, you just kind of mark and it's very soft.  And I--that's a great deal of what I think he was talking about when he was talking about dust shapes in the heart.  My heart shaped dust took that--part of that phrase in honor of Robert Hayden and the fact that I was working with dust.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his poem is entitled actually 'Heart-Shape in the Dust' ['Heart-Shape in the Dust: Poems,' Robert Hayden].
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: And that, that's, that's the Hayden--for some re- I don't know what it was but seems like during this period there's like a renaissance of attention on Hayden.  I know he was featured at the black writers conference in Chicago [Illinois] in 1990 or '91 [1991] (unclear)--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: --time yeah, yeah.  And, [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti dedicated a poem, you know, a book of poems to Robert Hayden, you know, during this period of time.  So--
Speaker 2:  	Well, there were stories about Robert Hayden that I just loved.  And, I think one of the ones that I also loved--there's a story about Robert Hayden which I love.  And, it was after he passed away and they were going around the neighborhood trying to make, you know, to get a story about him.  And, I think it was the garage mechanic, and at the end of the questioning, the interview, and he said, "You mean, he was a famous man?  I thought he was just a really nice guy."  And I loved that because, you know, in the end of everything, I would love to be remembered that way, you know.  Sure, I, I, I'm working for legacy, for my images and as a photographer and--but, you know, it's wonderful being thought of as just a really nice guy.
Speaker 1: Tha--that's--I've never heard that story, that's a good--that's a great story.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Story_ID: 659137
Speaker 1: Who are some of the people whose faces you shot, that you've shot, you know, for your exhibitions?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me about some of 'em, I mean, and it's not like they're all like famous people, you know.  In fact, most of the people that are famous aren't recognizable necessarily in the photos.
Speaker 2:  	There's almost no one famous.  I mean, there are a few famous people, but the first ones were my brothers.  I mean, one of my brothers had come home from Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago].  He was dying.  And he came home because he was hurting so bad and they couldn't treat him there, and he didn't know what he had.  And, at the same time, that's when I was thinking about doing this.  So, I took the faces of my brothers as the first ones.  And, the one who was dying I couldn't really, you know, he couldn't stand up.  I, I did everyone and I asked him to come outside where there was a little better light because I was beginning to formulate how I was going to do these and I wanted to kind of get the best light I could.  And, he said, "I can't stand up."  And so, it was dark, you know, fairly dark, so I put this--the flash on my camera, the strobe on my camera and I had to straddle him and photographed him while he was lying down.  And so, that's the only time I've ever really used the, the flash.  And, during that session also, which is, which is--it's an interesting story, was that I had also taken one of the, the mirror pieces over so he could see it.  And he looked at the piece and his remarks were, "That's a beautiful composition.  Where did you learn composition?"  And I looked at him, because he was the one who brought his books home when he was in college.  And he sat down when I was about seven or eight years old and he taught me about composition, about the mass and weight of color and the (unclear) and that.  And I understood that and I remembered that.  So, I told him, I looked at him and said, "Well, you did."  And he kind of smiled and looked at and said, "You're damn right," (laughter), okay.  So, that was him, that was, that was Herbert [Herbert Camp].  So, I've done my brothers, I'm sorry I didn't do my sister [Sylvia Camp].  I was just never in a position that I could do him, do her.  But I did--I wanted to do my siblings, you know, the siblings of my father [Ira Camp, Sr.] in recognition of my family.  Bob Stewart, tuba player, Dave Burrell, incredible pianist lives here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2:  	B-U-double R-E-double L.
Speaker 1: Burrell.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Burrell.
Story_ID: 659138
Speaker 1: Andre Raphel Smith, who was the assistant conductor to the Philadelphia Orchestra.  Just recently, David Stephens, who is a blind sculptor.  He was, he was an artist all his life, he knew he was going to go blind.  And so, I mean, how do you, how do you continue sculpting when you're blind?  He just had an incredible show, will be on, I think it's a CNN show, in September because of one of his recent exhibitions.
Speaker 2: Interesting.  We interviewed Stevie Wonder [sic.], we were in his home.  And I came to the conclusion that we were--and we didn't know where we were going, but when we got there, all of his--all the art works were tactile, you know, I mean, there was a sticks of rings of sunbursts on the wall, there were--there was a rectangular piece with different size rocks in it.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Speaker 2: You could feel, and a bust of his mother [Lula Mae Hardaway] on the piano.
Speaker 1:  	Beautiful!
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I figured--'cause we were debating is this his home or not.  And then we said, well, it must be his home because all the art is the kind of artwork you have to touch.
Speaker 1:  	Beautiful, yeah!  So--I also did [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin.
Speaker 2: Right, now, that's--he's somebody everybody knows.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, John Hope Franklin is someone everyone knows and a wonderful, wonderful man.  I
Speaker 2: How did he get--how did you get him to pose?  Just ask him when he was around or what?
Speaker 1:  	I forget how all that happened.  I know I--the first time I really wanted to photograph him was he was being interviewed on--I forget the thing--it was--I forget the name of the show.  And, listening to him and his, his knowledge, his, his--not his knowledge about American history but his opinion in a sense about what was right and what was wrong in, in American history.  And so, I real- he's important to me.  And I think I probably started sending emails and I started sending letters, and I finally got permission somehow, I think that was it.  And so, when I finally photographed him, he was just such--he was this really kind man.  Showed me his orchids, showed me his library, showed me his presidential citation [Presidential Medal of Freedom].
Speaker 2: So, you went to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] to interview him?
Speaker 1:  	I went to his home at Duke--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yeah.  And he showed me around, you know, his library.  And the beautiful thing on that was he asked me if I was the father of Stephanie Camp?  And, I said, yes.  And he reached out on the shelf and pulls her book ['Closer to Freedom: Enslaved Women and Everyday Resistance in the Plantation South'] out and says, "Really good book."  And it's like, wow (laughter).  My daughter has made it, you know.  But, yeah, there are those--I do people who not necessarily that are famous.  I'm not interested in showing people who are famous, I'm not a celebrity photographer.  I, I--at that time, I made photographs of African American men.  And it upsets a lot of people, but I also figured that there was a, there was a black women's voice in photography that was very strong with [HistoryMaker] Deborah Willis and [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems and, you know, several others.  But, as far as black men went, I just--you know, there were probably other black men voices out there it's that I was a black man, and I felt like I needed to speak, I needed to hear, I needed to hear my voice heard.  Again, going back to Langston Hughes, maybe someday, somebody'll talk about me.  Oh, maybe it'll be me.  Yes, be me and myself ['Note on Commercial Theatre'], okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  Now this period of time I, I, I did an interview with [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --on Monday.  And, there's a show on YouTube where there's [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, Ron Steele [Ronald Steele], Useni Perkins [HistoryMaker Useni Eugene Perkins] and a woman [Nkechi Taifa]--I can't remember her name but she's in charge of the National Council of Black Lawyers [sic. National Conference of Black Lawyers] and they were discussing black male violence [on 'Our Voices'].  This is 1990 or '91 [1991] and the murder rate amongst young black males spiked by the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic was like unbelievable then.  And, Haki I think even published his book 'Black Men: Single, Obsolete, Dangerous' [sic. 'Black Men: Obsolete, Single, Dangerous? The Afrikan American Family in Transition']--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --or something like that around that period of time.  And, there was a lot of concern about, you know, this whole concern about black males' survival in this country.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, all of it seems to culminate in the Million Man March in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, I mean, it was like that kind of keen interest during this period of time.  I just wanted to point that out, now, and, so you're on the--you were thinking alike.
Speaker 1:  	Well, yeah, and that's--well, yeah, it's a, it's a--you kind of have to come to that realization.  So, yeah, that was--
Story_ID: 659139
Speaker 1: So you were awarded a Pennsylvania visual artist fellowship.  Now you--there seems to be just a--one--a cavalcade of fellowships that you receive one after another (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, are you, are you good at writing for fellowships?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	No.  The--I think my images, the images that I make are strong.  I'm not bragging, I don't like most of them until about maybe two or three years after I make them.  And then, when I go back to them then sometimes or if they surprise me, it's like, wow, that's good.  Oh, that's mine.  And then I almost feel ashamed of myself, and it also scares me because I really don't want to think that my work is good.  I think if I start thinking that my work is good then it kind of interferes with making good work, making work as strong as I possibly can.  Confidence is one thing, cockiness is destructive.  And so, when I see work that I, that I--of my work and it fools me into thinking that it's good, I think that's cocky.  That's dangerous.
Story_ID: 659140
Speaker 1: So, where--what were we on?
Speaker 2: These fellowships, they're--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: -- Pennsylvania visual artist fellowship, Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution], Pew [Pew Center for Arts and Heritage], another Pennsylvania visual, Guggenheim Foundation [John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) yeah, there were (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --National Endowment for the Arts.  I mean, these are almost like every year there's a new one, you know, a new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, there were the four Pennsylvania fellows, the Guggenheim which you can only apply for once, the NEA that was the last year that I got it, the Pew you could only get once.  Actually, I have two Pews but one was a fellowship to Rome [Italy] and then the Pew fellowship.  But, the, the one in--the NEA, the National Endowment for the Arts is probably the best example that I can give in that I don't--I'm not really a great writer.  I mean I, I write competently, you know, because it's critical, writing is critical.  But, I was told later on by someone who was on the panel at the National Endowment for the Arts that, as soon as they saw my images, I was the first one selected.  And a great deal of that has to do because they're looking at it much bigger than I make them, I mean, I make them big but they make them much, much bigger.  And, they were very powerful pieces.
Speaker 2: Okay, and so, these fellowships range, you know, fifty, sixty thousand dollars, you know, then you--so, so you're--have you been able to make a decent living as a, as a fine artist?
Speaker 1:  	That pulled me out.  Those fellowships came at just the right time because I'd had, you know, undergraduate school, graduate school, two years of employment as an assistant professor [at the Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] then back basically to being a, a surviving artist.  Selling an image here, selling an image there.  One, one really great year I made five thousand dollars, you know, five thousand dollars that's terrifying.  Fortunately, I had a family that helped.  My wife [Marie Dumont Camp] was working as a nursing assistant, not a lot of money there.  Both my daughters [Stephanie Camp and Dorothea Camp] were working, and they weren't contributing we didn't take their money but they were able to kind of--they contributed to their care.
Speaker 2: So, you didn't have to worry about them.
Speaker 1:  	I didn't have to worry about it.
Story_ID: 659141
Speaker 1: And I owned my home, which was a very fortunate thing in that, you know, you, you think about gifts in your life.  And, we were talking about this earlier.  Sometimes it not always someone who comes along and pats you on the shoulder and says you're really good, but when we moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--we'd actually moved next door to this house and the woman who owned this house was a dry alcoholic who would occasionally slip off.  But, she liked our kids [Stephanie Camp and Dorothea Camp] and we kind of took care of her, we made sure that she had food, you know, 'cause she was just a nice person.  Mary Buchannan [ph.] and when she wasn't high, when she, you know--she was a very good person, very kind person.  And she owed taxes on the house, she had owned this house.  She and her family had purchased this house in the '30s [1930s].  And she said, I want you to have this house.  Just pay off the taxes, give me a bit of money to move, you know, and we get another place, and the house is yours.  Well, you have a place to live and you own it, that's a great relief.  And the reason she said she did it she said, "I like your children, I like your family and I, I love your art."  And, when she was in the hospital, she had cancer and she was dying, and I went to see her and she said, would you bring one of the pieces that I had done.  She remembered it from, you know, fifteen years before.  It was a very early attempt at, you know, doing some experimental work.  So, "Could you bring that and hang it on my wall?"  And so, I did.  I took it over and I hung it on her wall and they called me a couple of days later and said, "You can come pick your piece up, she's gone."  So, yeah, I guess there is that person in your life who pat, pats you on the shoulder and gives you those supports you need.  That, that would have been, that would have been her.
Speaker 2: So, it's certainly a spacious house, a historic house it appears.  So, this is in what year?  When did you get your house?
Speaker 1:  	We bought the house in '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was a while ago, yeah.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah, yeah.  And, of course then no one wanted to live in this area.
Speaker 2: You know it is by the university [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is--they always kind of come back.  But, I don't know if you all knew that but--at the time.
Speaker 1:  	No, we didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	You know, and we moved when I got out of the [U.S.] Air Force and went to work for the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin].  I moved into the first apartment that I could find that was kind of close to work and it--this was all luck.
Story_ID: 659142
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the chronology here, 1995, you were named to the advisory board of the Creative Artist Network [Center for Emerging Visual Artists].  And so, you're, you're--one thing that, you know, people we've talked to that receive their M.F.A.--an M.F.A., doesn't it kind of prepare you for the ins and outs of the art world in a way that you wouldn't know if you weren't--didn't have one?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, because you're fellows, you know, you're fellow students and there're nine of us who went through [the Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, it's two years, two and a half years of discussion.  And, Will Larson [William G. Larson], when he started the--we started the class, his first class was you have two years to do your work.  And so, that meant for the first time that I could really experiment the way that I wanted to experiment.  We were, we were close as students even though they were generally much younger than I, I was, there was closer contact because some of them were in their thirties, I was in my forties.  And a few--we had comrades but we were able to kind of learn a whole lot more about the art world.  The difficulty again that--that I have is they were generally straight photographers.  They were working with what you see in front of the camera.  And I do make that distinction that you work with what's in front of the camera or you work with what's behind the camera.  And, by that I mean, you, your subject changes.  In other words, you're taking a narration or, or something that's defined in front of the camera.  Well, for me, the face is the constant for me.  And so, it never changes but what it allows me to do is to work from behind the camera in my dark room.  That--I never know what a print is going to look like, whereas, if you're working with in front of the camera, you know what the prints gonna be--look like.  It's gonna have this range.  If you're working in black and white, it's gonna have this gray range from dark, you know, pure black to a pure white.  That's what a good fr--print does.  But, what's in front of the camera for me is constant, I'm going to have a face.
Story_ID: 659143
Speaker 1: Now you have an artist in residence in--oh, you're hired as artist in residence and assistant professor at the college--at, at Ursinus College in Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Now, this is before we knew that Penn State [Pennsylvania State University] was in State College, Pennsylvania.  We thought it was odd that a place be called State College, Pennsylvania.  Nobody knew where--providing the average person doesn't live here, doesn't know where University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--I mean, Penn State is.  Not University of Pennsylvania but Penn State, the state college.  And this place is Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, Ursinus College in Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Collegeville?
Speaker 2:  	Collegeville is, is thirty-one miles from my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay, past King of Prussia [Pennsylvania], near Phoenixville [Pennsylvania], but in the other direction.  Those are just kind of, you know, local names.
Speaker 1: So, it's founded in 1869 and--okay, so it's a liberal arts college.
Speaker 2:  	It is a liberal arts college, and a great little college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did this appointment come about?  Did you--was there a--or did somebody see your work and then, you know, or did you go out and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) It was one of my students, actually--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--who was working there and he was--he wanted to go to France to, to study, and he had been working there a couple of years part time.  And so, he told the director, the department chair and gave me a call and told me that the--they needed someone to teach there.  And, of course at that point I was--I mean--the money kind of was okay because the grant money was one of those big things that was, that I was able to bank and invest.  So, you know, we weren't really too, too bad off at that point, but I did, I did need a, I did want and I did need a teaching position.  The one thing about teaching was really very funny, because I was thinking at that time I, I, I was trying to find--I, I felt like I needed a student.  I needed someone to pass some information onto.  And, the best way I can think about explaining it, because it was a bit more than that, is that it might be what a woman feels like when she wants to be pregnant but I, as a male, wanted to share some information about life, about living, about art with someone.  And so, I got a call from that student, Michael [ph.].  What is his last name? I forget his last name.  And they had--it was a part time position, so I went out to interview for the position and I got back home and as I walked in the house the phone was ringing, and they wanted to know if I wanted a full time position.  And I, of course said, "Well, I need to think about this for a moment."  I don't know why, I just thought that was kind of the correct thing to do is to (laughter) kind of think about it.  I didn't have to think about it at all really in practicality, I knew I was going to do it.  But, yeah, I, I was very lucky, I think, that I got that position.
Story_ID: 659144
Speaker 1: Now, did you teach--was it all fine art photography what you taught or what did you teach (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I taught photography.
Speaker 1: Okay, just straight up photography.
Speaker 2:  	Just straight up photography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, I didn't teach photography.  When I, when I first started teaching I called Will Larson [William G. Larson]. I mean--this interview is turning into a Will Larson interview. He's gonna love it, okay.  But, again, I called him and I says, "How do you teach photography?"  And he said, "Don't teach technique."  And that was his advice.  And so, I'm thinking, well, how can you teach photography and not teach technique?  And you give it enough thought you realize how you can teach photography without teaching technique, because it's really not about technique.  Now, I was also teaching the students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, wait a minute, now.  Let's go back to this for a second.  Okay, so, you're teaching photography, I'm a student, so do you teach me just basically how to use a camera or what?
Speaker 2:  	No.  What I, what I--well--
Speaker 1: Or, or what does he mean by not teaching, don't teach technique, don't teach style or, or how a--
Speaker 2:  	Everybody will probably come up with a different answer about how to teach photography without teaching technique.  What I did was practical for this situation.  I was at a liberal arts college, all students had to take an art course; 99.5 percent of them were not going to go on in art or particularly photograph in their lives.  And so, I had to give these students something using photography and using art.  And so, what I taught them were art principles.  And I taught them art principles beyond composition and technique, 'cause I didn't really care if they made a photograph successfully or not.  What I wanted them to do was to learn to take a risk, to learn to tell their story.  I would tease them, I said, "I don't want to see ducks on a pond, you know, because that's a good photograph.  You see it everywhere.  Get every calendar, you're gonna find a duck on the pond somewhere.  But I want you to tell your story, and I want you to risk telling me about yourself.  I want you to risk making bad photographs."  And so, the first semester, the first four or five weeks bring me bad photographs.  And be surprised how difficult it was or how difficult it is to make a bad photograph, because the first thing they wanna do is go out and imitate what is supposed to be a good photograph.  But, until you make a bad photograph, you can't get to the personal narration about who that--who you are as a person.  And, that's what I wanted them to do, was to be able to tell me their story.  Now, there was one young girl, for example, in a special project she wanted to tell the story of her grandparents who had both developed Alzheimer's simultaneously.  And so, she wanted to tell me that story.  And every week she would come in, she would shoot three or four rolls of film, make the contact prints, some enlargements, and we'd go through it.  Nothing would show the Alzheimer's.  It's, it's an invisible disease, especially in its early stages.  And so, we, we would look at several ways of trying to get to that point but every week she would come in with two or three rolls of film, four rolls of film, contact prints, some prints.  The whole semester went like that, no success, nothing visually successful.  But, she took risks that whole time and in really thoroughly examining a way of making those images.
Speaker 1: So, did she ever come up with anything?
Speaker 2:  	Nope.
Speaker 1: But she got an A.
Speaker 2: I don't grade on that success, I grade on risk taking and effort.  If you really work at it, and you come up with nothing, wonderful!  That's what I do.  So, yeah, it was to teach them about the value of risks, about the value of, of risking failure, about the value of failure.  And, I used art to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.
Speaker 2:  	So that's how you--that's how I taught without using technique.  Now, they, they did learn processing film. Yeah, that was fun.
Speaker 1: So, how, how many courses did you teach as a part of the faculty of Ursinus College [Collegeville, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2:  	I would do three and two every year.  And, I would generally do three or two in a seminar and then two.  And my course was very popular. I mean, I always filled the classes.  I mean, I always had to end up taking on one or two students who'd come begging.  I was, I was a very popular professor on campus.
Story_ID: 659145
Speaker 1: In the meantime you're on the board of trustees of the Institute of Contemporary Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --You're, you're still getting grants, let's see, until, well, you know--and, I guess you're still exhibiting too during this period of time, right?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I exhibit, yeah, I, I do exhibit.  Yeah, it's wonderful being able to exhibit.  Just had something in Austin College, Texas [Sherman, Texas], which is not in Austin [Texas], but it's a wonderful little place.  And so, I was able to go there and do some--do a presentation.  That was, that was an interesting thing.  Not only was it a one man show, but three of us, the person who was curating he's the--kind of the magician in residence there.  And, another magician who is a friend of both of us, and me, so we did a magic show in relation to, to the exhibition relating to the exhibition.  Okay, it was (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now, now, this is interesting but have you, have you combined, I mean other than, I, I assume in this case the show is separate from the exhibit.  It's just a--it was done for the opening but it's not a part of the exhibit (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, no, it was a part, it was in the gallery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	They pulled in chairs to the gallery and each of us did one piece.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what I'm asking is that, have you ever thought about, you probably have thought about it, trying to combine magic and art in a piece that you do.  I mean, I don't know illusion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --there's, there's a I guess like Escher [M.C. Escher] in some ways almost does that.  When you, you're looking at something but you're not--you're completely thrown off by what you're looking at in misdirection.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he does that.  And I'm sure there are other people that do that.
Speaker 1: It's misdirection, visual misdirection.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  Yeah, I'm, I'm sure there're other people who do that.  I, I like to keep them separate.  Magi- photography is my work and, you know, as I said earlier it's work in the sense that it's done in the spirit of service therefore being prayer.  Magic is the thing that I learned from, I enjoy performing it.  I, by no means, can do it as an art form not as seriously.  I know magicians, there are magician friends of mine who for them it's a serious art form.  And for me it's not.
Story_ID: 659146
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite magician?
Speaker 2:  	I do, yeah.  Yeah, probably Teller of Penn and Teller.
Speaker 1: That's the silent partner of Penn and Teller.
Speaker 2:  	He's the silent partner of Penn and Teller.  And I did the--I did a portrait on him or a face on him.  I'm still working on it, actually.  I have one that works and I don't like it at all.  But, I think I have a way of finally doing it, and it's one of those things I've been about and kind of printing and throwing away for six or seven years now.
Speaker 1: Now, he's from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right, you were telling me (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) He is from Philadelphia, yes.  The piece I did on him is 'Man Who Is a Good Son' ['A Good Son,' Donald Camp].  And the reason he's a good son was because he would leave Las Vegas [Nevada] every month for a week and come here and take care of his parents.  And we would try to get him out, and he was just, no, I'm here to take my parents shopping and to keep them set up in their home.  Because they were both in their late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s].  But the reason I love him as a magician is his work--he, he, he, he is a full artist, magically.  He's an inventor of illusions that I have no idea, absolutely none, how most of them work.
Speaker 1: So, that's the role he plays, 'cause I, I didn't really know the role he plays in the, in the partnership.
Speaker 2:  	He's the magician (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Okay. He's the thinker on that.  He's also done a couple of 'Macbeth' pieces.  Oh, I'm sorry, couple of Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] pieces, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where he actually speaks?
Speaker 2:  	No, no.  He's, he's designed them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --designed the set and everything.  And, well, 'Macbeth' [William Shakespeare] for example, when you see the three witches, it's like really magical.  I mean real illusions.  The stuff that Shakespeare describes, he illustrates it and, and I, I've not been able to figure out what he does, I just enjoy it.  So, he, he's just a real innovator in magic, brilliant, absolutely brilliant.  He does a ball routine, a floating ball routine, he just took it to a whole new level.  He's, he's a very subtle magician let's put it that way.  And, again, I appreciate the subtlety and what he creates is just really very great visually, beautiful.  It's not a trick, I don't look at him and see tricks at all.  I see what he does as being an art form that's beautiful.
Story_ID: 659147
Speaker 1: On the magic thing again, I know when I came in I was asking you about--I think you were telling me about Richard Potter, right?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah, Richard Potter was the first American born magician.  And, it's interesting because I belong to two national magical--magic organizations and you'd think that the whole thing began with Houdini [Harry Houdini].  But, really, Richard Potter was the first American born magician, but he was African American, he was black.  He's actually mixed, but, you know, in America at that time and up until recently and I guess even now he was black.  The--in fact, it, it's been really kind of almost a closed profession.  Now, there, there're a lot of African American magicians, you know, there was Black Herman and there are a lot of the African Americans who were making a living magically.  I could name a few here, I mean, there's Kevin Bethea, who's absolutely incredible, you know, he's a full time magician who's African American.  Chris Capehart, Randy Shine, all of these.  Randy Shine's a young--well, he, he's like forty now but he started when he was a young kid just in college.  Decided I wanna be a magician, and he's doing it.  But, not until next year will either one of the larger organizations have an African American president.  ICE McDonald, ICE Kenrick McDonald [Kenrick "ICE" McDonald], he was--next year he takes over the presidency.
Speaker 1: Of the?
Speaker 2:  	Of the Society of American Magicians, absolutely wonderful.  But the reason--part of the reason it came about and has thanked me a couple of times for it, was I wrote a letter to both organizations basically resigning from them.  As I said, I told them I was just tired of receiving magazines, getting information that excluded me.  And I could no longer pay for a membership or be a part of something which does not recognize that I'm a part of it.  The Society of American Magicians' response after that was to arrange for his--and he'd been working all along within the organization, but they wanted to elevate it.  So, I, you know, I admired them for that in a sense that it took a single letter to each of them to desire to make a change, and to make it.  So, it's wonderful.
Story_ID: 659148
Speaker 1: You retired from Ursinus [Ursinus College, Collegeville, Pennsylvania] in 2012, right?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2:  	Ten.
Speaker 1: Twenty ten [2010]?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, '10 [2010], yeah, 2010, right.
Speaker 1: So you were there ten years?
Speaker 2:  	I was there ten years, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Was it just time to retire or, or did you
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, it was time.  I, I, you know, I, I, I had gone there because I felt like I wanted to teach someone.  And I told my students when I left--and, again, to me this is critical in that I'd spent four years of actual work in my life.  And it was the last year of each job that I held, and I told them all that at this point I'm really no longer a good teacher for you because I don't like being here anymore.  I don't like teaching.  And so, when you reach that point where you no longer like the students that you're teaching, that's a pretty sad state and it's a dangerous state for both the student and the teacher.  I didn't have to stay there.  And even if I had, even if I had financially needed to be there, I would have probably arranged to leave anyway.  Just simply because I get--I don't like, I don't like my work being work.
Story_ID: 659149
Speaker 1: You've talked about it a lot and during this interview, but, but I haven't asked it formally but, well, what is your artistic philosophy?
Speaker 2:  	That's a--it's a strong question, and I've never really thought about an artistic philosophy.  I've thought about it in terms of projects.  I guess if I had an artistic philosophy it would be that art, art is a means of communication between hearts.  And you don't have to read it or understand the language, you don't have to read it or understand a, a verbal language.  It has its own alphabet, its own scripture, and you're able to communicate from one heart to another what one feels.  And so, if a woman is really a good artist, I can understand what it means to be a woman.  If I do my job, someone can really understand what it means to be an African American man if that's what I want to do.  And that's what I wanted to do for a while.  I wanted people to understand what it felt like to walk into the Philadelphia Museum of Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and see one big painting that represented you.  And that was 'The Moorish King' [sic. 'The Moorish Chief,' Eduard Charlemont] and that's it.  You're represented the--or you go to--I forget which museum did it, and they did a show on black men, and you go in and you look, and there's works by African American men and then there's Mapplethorpe [Robert Mapplethorpe] and his photographs of penises of black men.  That's sick.  That's a sick society.  And so, what I wanna do with my work is help people to understand that--how I feel and for me the earth and, the earth and pigment, the materials that I--the materials speak if you use them properly.  And I think I can make dirt and--what I call dirt and milk, earth and milk communicate what it feels like to be me.  And, yeah, you know, some women were upset because they really like the work ['Dust Shaped Hearts,' Donald Camp] and wanted to know if I was going to do women.  And I told them at that time, no, I'm--there are people who do women.  So, I do women now.  And, you know, there were white people who was, oh, why don't you do white people?  'Cause I do black men.  And lot of time I was kind of presenting it in a very militant way because I wanted it to be taken that way.  The same writer, the same reviewer who talked about my work as being, you know, "The Camp [HistoryMaker Donald Camp] and his brothers who do things," his last review of me was when I showed and I showed with Robert Frank.  And his work--Robert Frank's work was downstairs, mine was--mine were upstairs, and it was called a portrait show.  And his response to my work was upstairs are the real portraits.  And then he went on at length about my work.  But near the end it was, "But now Camp is doing white people and women."  When I began doing black men, I intended to do black women and white women, and black men and white men, and Asians because to me I started the whole project because people were leaving me out of the human race.  And I just a, I just wanted a place at the table, and now I've reached a point where I've got my own table.
Story_ID: 659150
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you wished you had done differently?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) Not really.  You know, sometimes I wish I had gone to, gone to New York [New York] and tried for The New York Times instead of the Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin], but then I also realized that if I had done that I'd probably still be shooting the newspaper images because they, you know, they use the images so well.  And so, I'd've been a--not now, I would've probably retired.  But I would have retired as a straight photographer.  Everything I've done has come because something else has failed.  And so--and I've tried to make up for it in some way, I've tried to adapt, I've tried to change my materials and me.  It's this kind of moving (gesture), and that to me when I look back on it is what has made my life a lot of fun.  When I left the Bulletin people were upset, family was upset.  How can you leave a good job?  My brothers were upset (laughter), okay, how could you do that?  They didn't understand that I felt like I was dying every day when I went to work.  So, no, there's, there's--no, no there's not--there's nothing I would change.
Story_ID: 659151
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point--I know you're still doing new things, but what today would you consider to be your legacy as an artist?
Speaker 2:  	That I've kind of liberated work behind the camera, work being accomplished behind the camera, that I've made a social connection to photography that is critical to the 19th and 20th century.  And that is the recognition of the equality of--gender equality and racial equality, and that those, those--that's the work that I want to be seen.  I, you know, I, I--if anything, people will--I hope they'll pull my work out and they will see wonderf- beautiful images of people and understand that race was not important to me, but it was important to me.  That gender was not important to me, but it was important to me.  But that I've tried to recognize the importance of all, of all of that. The--(pause), yeah.
Story_ID: 659152
Speaker 1: What are your future plans? What do you--do you have a project or an idea, artistic idea, that's just burning and you wanna see that reach fruition, you know, in the near future?
Speaker 2:  	The--you know, I, I retired I guess four years ago [from Ursinus College, Collegeville, Pennsylvania] so I'm just really getting into retirement, whatever that means.  For me, retirement only means that I don't have to teach anymore, that's what I'm retired from.  Plans?  My wife [Marie Dumont Camp] and I have a few more years I guess that we'll be able to travel, so, you know, we love to cruise so we take a couple of cruises, go visit my family--my wife's family in France when we, when we want to 'cause that's one of the nice things about not teaching is that you can travel when students are not traveling and it's cheaper.  Been struggling, a part of it, a part of the struggle was the Teller piece ['A Good Son,' Donald Camp].  I said I'm not happy with the piece that I did or the pieces that I've done and I've finally figured out a way of doing it and it's, it's, it's interesting.  It's some very small technical changes, a different way of approaching the order of making the image that I think will work on not just Teller, but give me a whole new area of ways of investigating and making these images.  I, I would get bored if I just continued to make image after image the same way.  And I think that's another reason I started working with the image behind the camera rather than in front of the camera.  One, I'm more of an introvert, I, I kind of love going to my dark room.  I, I go to the dark room and it's--that's my area of battle.  So, this new way of--this, this new order of getting to the image I'm really looking forward to playing with that.  And I'll produce a body of work, if it's successful, and I'm pretty sure it will be because if it's not successful on the first one, or I should say, if the first one is a failure then I will learn from that and make a second one.  And, if that's a failure, I'll eventually have something that I can think is a part way success, and I'll put it in the box.  And, when that's finished when I get tired of that, I'll take a break and probably write.  I, I, I need to title some of my pieces better, get some stories with them.  I'll possibly do that.  Other than that--I, I, am teaching by the way.  One of the, one of the areas here has a need for adult teachers.  It's a Main Line Art Center  [Haverford, Pennsylvania] and a friend of mine there, Amie Potsic, who is this incredibly strong woman, really brilliant, wants me to do a couple of courses there a year which is really fun because I go in twice a year and I do two or three hour--three or four hour courses.  I would like to have more exhibition visiting professorships, where I could go in and do a three or four day workshop about, about personal--really making your images you, okay.  How, how, how to get, how to get to self in that image.  Or how to get beyond the standard content, how to use the form to make your statement.  So, that's kind a what I would like to do and have been doing it so far.  That was what I did in Texas at the, at the university there [Austin College, Sherman, Texas], at the show that I had at, at the Main Line Art Center and that's what I did.  I'll have some other shows, there are a few things that I'm working on now forward--in other words, you know, I do show.  I like showing.  I like talking, obviously.  I love, I love teaching new ideas, I love kind of the debate about what, what images are.  But, other than that, I, you know, I, I just intend to go visit my brother [William Camp] who's in Atlanta [Georgia].  I wanna see him, spend some time, love spending time with my wife, love spending time with, with my daughter [Dorothea Camp] and my grandchildren, and my friends.  You know, we have an artist dinner once a month at this point.  And we all--there are several of us, we meet in a restaurant and we argue and we tease, and we laugh and we discuss art just enough to get a tax deduction, (laughter) okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-now are--
Speaker 2: We have fun.
Story_ID: 659153
Speaker 1: Are you a member of any of the--I mean a formal arts organization like the National Conference of Artists or any, any of those?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I was a member of the Society for Photographic Educators [sic. Society for Photographic Education] for years, but that was when I was teaching.  And I founded the multicultural caucus in that.  That got me in a lot of trouble too, because I think the black caucus at that point thought that I had stolen the black caucus for the multicultural caucus.  And that was just a misunderstanding, because both black caucus and multicultural caucus should have continued to exit because they're two different things.  But, mostly at that point, you know, at that point, I, I, I--since I'm no longer teaching, I'm no longer a member of that.  I don't feel a need to.  But, no, I think that's about it and I, I don't intend to join anything else.  I intend to do my images, work on my images, think about my images, and enjoy my life.
Story_ID: 659154
Speaker 1: Now, now, you alluded to your family.  I know you, you had two daughters.
Speaker 2:  	I had two daughters, yes.
Speaker 1: And, we talked about your marriage [to Marie Dumont Camp]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, way, way back when.  Did, did your parents get a chance to see you become a newspaper photographer?
Speaker 2:  	My father [Ira Camp, Sr.] did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, my father was living here when I was working for the newspaper [Philadelphia Bulletin].  My mother [Martha Erving Camp] never did of course because she died when I was twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, my father was quite proud.  You know, it's--it was another one of his sons, the youngest one, had achieved something in life.  I knew that, that was our family.  We had to succeed, but we also had to love what we did, and I loved photography.  He knew that I did, and so, when I started working for the--for a major newspaper, he was quite happy and proud of me.  He never did really understand--I never really did get a chance to show him the fine art that I was doing.  He passed away while I was in graduate school [at the Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and so he never got a chance to see some of the--what I, what I really wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Your--your daughter that passed away recently, Stephanie Camp, is of interest to many African American historians and, and women scholars as well.  She wrote about the African American--the experience of African American women in slavery.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, many people know her name from that.
Speaker 2:  	Brilliant woman.
Speaker 1: And your, your, surviving daughter [Dorothea Camp], she's a--she's into--
Speaker 2:  	My surviving daughter is--she's a homemaker in the most serious context of the word.  She's homeschooling two boys.  She, she was never in a sense as adventurous as her sister. Her sister always was ready to, ready to leave home, could not wait to leave home.  And the other one, we kind of had to keep pushing out of the door.  And so, she enjoys being home.  And she, and she does what she loves to do.  And she does it very well.  There was an interesting point though between the two in that my father always pushed--my mother and father pushed us to do what we loved, and I pushed my daughters to do what they loved.  But I had a real--they both gave me a hard time in that I thought--I had one daughter who was a feminist and, you know, I in a sense was a feminist because I believed in, you know, equal rights and I believed in, you know, women--the necessity of women being educated and--but the other one I thought, whoa, she needs to do, to do more with her life.  And I didn't realize she needed to do what made her happy in life.  I eventually learned from both of them in that sense, because I had to learn to leave my one daughter alone to do what she loved being in life.  And being the father of a feminist is not easy, because you go through the period of you being the enemy.  And she learns from that, but while she's learning I was learning, you know.  That's what it's about.  I think that's what the relationship between--I'm not gonna say mother and child because I don't know that.  But I know that relationships between mother and father, in particular, mo- fathers and daughters is about learning from each other.  And I learned from both of them.
Story_ID: 659155
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we have not asked you that we need to touch upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2:  	Did we talk at all about the association of black journalists?
Speaker 1: We did, yeah, we did last time and I know you were telling us that [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone gets credit for founding it but he was the founding president, but other journalists--well, well go ahead and just, just kind of recap it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and make sure we get it.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah, 'cause I think it, it's really critical because there were a group of six of us--six or seven of us, [HistoryMaker] Joe Davidson--well, Sandra [HistoryMaker Sandra Long Weaver] was a part of it too, Lauren Murray [ph.], Sam Pressley [Sam W. Pressley], and there were about six of us at the-se- Evening and Sunday Bulletin [Philadelphia Bulletin].  And we were the ones who really started the association of black journalists in Philadelphia [Philadelphia Association of Black Journalists].  And I think before the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], I think they got the idea from us.  But, it was grassroots, and I think it's critical that people understand that anything of value really is started by the people who need it, the grassroots.  It's not started up here by the Chuck Stones or anyone else, it was started by us young photographers and writers who said, "This is what we're afraid of.  We need to protect ourselves, we need to make a way for us to advance, and we need to risk our jobs for doing that."  And that's what we did.  It hurts when all of a sudden, you're eliminated from that history.  These, the story about Chuck Stone, how did Chuck Stone become the president, is an interesting and also slightly funny in an ironic way in that we had decided that we needed to kind of a figurehead with some power, that was not--that was unafraid of the, the newspapers, the heads of the newspapers.  And so, we thought about Chuck Stone or Claude Lewis.  Claude Lewis was the managing editor at the, the Bulletin.  We chose Chuck Stone because he had a kind of a large visual image because there were kind of people, criminals who were surrendering to him.  Said, okay, well, let's make him president.  And so, we invited him to the meeting that we were going to hold election.  It came up to the point where we started discussing it and Chuck said, "Well, I don't wanna be president."  We had already decided beforehand that every vote--all of our votes were going to Chuck.  So, when they counted the votes, all the votes were for Chuck Stone.  Not minus one, Chuck's vote, but he voted for himself.  Which was fine, that was not the--you know, we all had a good laugh.  Even Chuck laughed, I still remember Chuck laughing at that as well.  That was good, but he didn't create it.  It was the, it was a small group of us who did that, and it was not Chuck.  Chuck served his purpose and he served it well, and I don't wanna take that away from him.  I think he probably negotiated between the association of black journalists of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and national to get that moving.  And that's of, that's of value.  Reggie Bryant [Reginald Bryant] is often the person who is considered the person here who did it.  Reggie Bryant did not do it.  We were the ones who were the--instigated, we were the ones who were the movers on that and Reggie Bryant was actually more trouble than anything.  He boasted that--at one of the meetings he got into a fight with Sam Pressley in his own house.  That's nothing to boast about, that's nothing to take credit for, all right.  There were a small group of us and none of us are named.  And that's not right.  To quote Langston Hughes, "You done taken my blues and gone" ['Note on Commercial Theatre'].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is there anything else?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) No, I think that's it.
Story_ID: 659156
Speaker 1: My one last question (background noise) is very similar to legacy but a little bit different. It's more personal.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2:  	(Pause) I really--that, that nice guy thing is really tempting.  I would like to be remembered as that nice guy, but I wanna add something on and then maybe Robert Hayden would have added it too.  But, I wanna add on that, he was a nice guy but he really made some beautiful, beautiful images of the human race.  (Pause) That's how I'd like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you.  I think you may have succeeded. All right.
Speaker 2:  	Thank you.
