Story_ID: 260918
Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's Debra, D-E-B-R-A, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N, Chase, C-H-A-S-E [HistoryMaker Debra Martin Chase].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten, October 11th, 1956, Great Lakes, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a motion picture and television producer.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 31st, 19--2005?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home in Los Feliz, [Los Angeles] California].
Story_ID: 260919
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: The first one that comes to mind is red licorice.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: That figures (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: All right, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I, I, I I'm a huge traveler so I, I, there's not one in particular.  I love to go everywhere, so--.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Again, what comes to mind is--this is a--in the business context, don't jump over the dollar to get the dime.
Story_ID: 260920
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask you about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Robert Martin] side.  Now we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Beverly, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, Marie, Barber, B-A-R-E-R,--B-A-R-B-E-R, Martin.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 9th, 1936, Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Really not that far.  My grandmother [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber], who was, thankfully is also a HistoryMakers, is from--was from New Orleans [Louisiana].  And I seen, I vaguely remember her mother; she died when I was quite young.  Grandma [Albertine] Mason, I don't remember her first name, and I've seen pictures of my great-grandfather [Jefferson Mason] who was very, you know, he was Creole, he was very fair skinned and he died, I don't even think my mother knew him, I mean he died very early on.  So--and that's really as far back as I go, it, it, it's really, you know, my grandmother and her brothers and sisters that I'm most familiar with.
Speaker 1: Okay, I believe they, your grandmother's family came to Chicago around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When she was thirteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: So that's--she was born in 1904, so whatever that, you know 1917--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventeen [1917], yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they came up, my Uncle Jimmy [James Mason], her brother had come up ahead of her, he was the only boy in the family to look for employment that you know traditional situation and there were other relatives and friends that were here and my grandmother and her family came up shortly thereafter and, you know, made their way.
Speaker 1: I think the story is your great-grandfather died I think and--in New--in Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's what I'm saying, I, I, he--my mother didn't know him and we--he's--it's like we found this picture in recent years and that was the first time I had seen, I, I assume my mother had seen pictures, but, it was a big deal when we found the--this picture of him.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I believe also--I mean they were struggling when they first came--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely, and my grandmother, you know, didn't continue with school and they were workin', you know, seamstress and what everybody had-- you know--whatever work they could get to make ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, any stories from that side of the family that are passed down that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know, it's funny, not, not really.  Not really just more the sense of, the, you know--on the one hand, you know--but even when they talked about the struggle it was still in the context of it was a loving family, it was a supportive family, my family's extremely Catholic so the church is all, is very much a part of our history. And so they're not stories told about bad times, they're stories told about, you know, this is--this is how our life evolved.  And, yeah, and there was a lot of love.
Story_ID: 260921
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Beverly Barber Martin] talk about growing up in, in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: My mother was--is the youngest of her family.  In fact, I was born into the house that she, you know, grew up, basically grew up in, in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  My, my grandparents [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber and Vaughn Barber], my grandmother at the time owned an apartment building, a three flat, and we lived on the second floor.  My grandmother lived on the, on the first floor so--and she was a--my mother was a quiet and shy girl.  She had two older sisters and an older brother and she, you know, she was very much the baby of the family.  So she didn't like--you know, stories about how she couldn't go out and play and, with the other kids 'cause--trying to keep her, you know, nice (laughter).  My, my grandfather, her father, who actually I never met, died when she was fourteen and there're lots of stories about how wonderful he was, pretty--like a man ahead of his time who, I mean he was a porter for the railroad who loved opera, who loved to read, who would--at--really had like an insatiable thirst for knowledge and culture and, and very much handed that down to, you know, his children and, and they to us.  And he died--it, it was like--say--it was one of those things where, you know, it, it, he didn't go to, it was one, I, I, I remember a lot of our family history's like they should have gone to the doctor, like had they gone to the doctor earlier and I think a lot of that was time and place.  I'm sure just with, you know, black people in general we didn't, you know, we didn't go, we didn't trust, we didn't--so he died--he was like in his early fifties and, and obviously this was very difficult for my family.  My grandmother had been a housewife and mother and she had to go back--go to work.  She got a job--I'm not sure exactly what her first job was, it might have been something different, but quickly thereafter she went to work for Cook County [Illinois] as, you know, some, clerical, clerical administrative position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think it was department of forestry or something like that--
Speaker 2: Something like that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and, and I remember, you know, and as Chi--you know, Chicago the patronage system, she would have to get out and campaign for the alderman or whoever she was asked to and I would go with her.  We would go out door-to-door there in Englewood and so, I spent a lot of time with my grandma, I was very, very close to her.  I'm probably the oldest--I'm the oldest of her grandchildren and the only daughter---the only girl.  So, and, like I said, for the first six years of my life I lived upstairs so we did a lot together and I have, you know, very fond memories of just spending time with her.  And, and it's funny you said--I don't think she really handed down stories of past family history until much later in life when I started asking more questions an, I'm kinda the keeper of the photographs for the family because, I, I, you know, I have the interest.  It was more talkin' about--'cause we had this huge extended Catholic family, you know, in and around Chicago and the New Orleans [Louisiana] connection so it was always like keepin' up with what they were doin' what this one was doin' and this one's husband and this one's child and, you know that's what I remember, sitting at the table, sittin' out on the back porch and just hearing about Ricca [ph.], and, you know, Mary [ph.] and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, so.
Story_ID: 260922
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Beverly Barber Martin]--well, she, she was raised in Chicago [Illinois], did she go to Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother's a retired professor at the--from the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So she taught at Kennedy-King [College; Woodrow Wilson Junior College, Chicago, Illinois] and [Harry S.] Truman [College, Chicago, Illinois], she taught early childhood education developmental psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay and, okay, let's see, any, any good stories from your mother about Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I got tons of sto--stor--what about her life?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my mother married when she was eighteen.  She married her high school sweetheart [Martin's father, Robert Martin] and my grandmother [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber], the stor--as the story goes, my grandmother gave her a choice between paying for her wedding and paying for her to go to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and she got married.  So in her brother's and sister's mind--my uncle's a lawyer, my two aunts, you know, one of whom is now deceased, you know had gone to Teachers College of Chicago [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and had master's degrees from Northwestern and so my mother kinda always felt like she was the, you know, kinda black sheep of the family for (unclear).  And I was born two years later she--when she was twenty, our birthdays are two days apart we're both Libras.  So when I was twelve--my mother always kind of took a course here and there and when I was twelve my parents separated and my mother went back to school full-time.  And got her B.A. and then got a scholarship to the University of Massachusetts at Amherst [Amherst, Massachusetts] and I was fifteen years old we're living here in Southern California and she packed up three of us and we drove across country and we arrived in Amherst [Massachusetts] which was, you know, quite different from Southern California and she got a master's and, you know, went on to work on her doctorate.  So--and at the time it was like, well, this is our life, you know, but it, it was, you know, in retrospect, huge, huge think for, you know, a woman alone to--and without a lot of money, you know, just to have courage to pick up and, and do something pretty radical, you know, for her future.  So I know that, that has influenced all of us, all this being my brothers and I in terms of ded- you know dedication and, you know, sacrifices that one has to make sometimes in order to move forward.
Speaker 1: Okay now how, how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Two brothers, Eric [ph.], who is four years younger than I am and Chris [ph.] who is ten years younger.  And, and they're good guys.
Story_ID: 260923
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Robert Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's May 6th, 1934 in Chicago [Illinois] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's side of the family, how far back can you trace the Martins?
Speaker 2: Less (laughter), which is--you know an, and I think part of that is--I mean I really, it's like I know my grandparent, or I knew my grandparents [Mildred Martin and Theodore Martin (ph.)].  My grandmother passed away, his--I don't know if I was in college or I think maybe when I was in [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and it was before the time in my life where I started to take an active interest, you know, in, in the family history.  An, and frankly, I mean, we were always much closer to my mother's [Beverly Barber Martin] family just as a, as a practical matter you know, not that we, that I didn't love my grandparents and, you know, but we just didn't spend as much time with them.  And my, my grandmother was, I guess--I, I, I don't, again, I don't--I'm not sure what she did before me, but she was a Christian Science practitioner it's really--it was her life, and that's how she made her living and, and my grandfather was just a character.  He was this--I, I always thought he looked like David Niven, you know, he was (laughter) just had that same--just he, he really physically resembles him and he was just a character, you know.  He drove a Cadillac and he had a few wives, but he ended up back-I think he and my grandmother were married like three times, and, you know, I remember one day he showed up and he had a little rocking chair for me and he won a little piece of the Irish sweepstakes and he was just a character, you know.  He was loveable and a bit of a scoundrel.  He didn't talk about family history that just wasn't, you know, he was busy talkin' about when he knew Redd Foxx down in the clubs and, I mean, you know, he was that kinda, you know, guy.  So--and I--my dad doesn't know 'cause I've subsequently, you know, asked him questions.  I know my grandmother was from Cleveland [Ohio], you know, I'm not sure where the mi--you know, from whence she migrated.  So, big holes there and at this point his brother passed--there were three kids, he had a sister and a brother.  His brother passed away last year and he's the only surviving member of his family, which, you know, was, is pretty traumatic for him.
Speaker 1: So he's still in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, he's here, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's here, okay.
Speaker 2: --lives in, he lives in Orange County, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 260924
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Beverly Barber Martin and Robert Martin] met?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.  They were in high school, they were in Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] together and, again, they were both very shy and my mother, you know, she--you know--she-- you know, she'll--overweight and kind of lost--kind of blossomed late in high school.  My father's a good looking guy and I think they just kinda found each other.  I'm sure it was her first boyfriend, you know.  And, married--'cause there was--there's never--there wasn't--the big story for me, and this is you know, cutting  years in the future is that, you know, my parents divorced, I mean it wasn't ac--it wasn't acrimonious, but it wasn't, it wasn't totally mutual and when she took us to Massachusetts they stopped speaking to each other.  So really for like a good ten years they really didn't speak to each other and my law school graduation was the first time they were together again, now they're like, the best of friends, I mean you know, you cut--I mean like literally it's like I tell--call one parent and tell them something and, you know, an hour later I get a call, "Oh your dad just told me you did so and so and so and so".  Which is-- it's lovely it's, it's, it's, it's, it's--they're able to--I don't know it's lovely.
Story_ID: 260925
Speaker 1: What did your father [Robert Martin] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Policeman, he started out at--with the Chicago Police Department [Chicago, Illinois] and when I was six he took the exam here in Los Angeles [California] and in Oakland [California] and, I can remember late at night hearing my parents discuss which, you know, where we should move.  They had been out here when he was in the service; he was in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps], which is why I was born at Great Lakes [Illinois] at the [Great Lakes] Naval Hospital [Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Center, North Chicago, Illinois] there.  And they lived in Long Beach [California] and in my dad's mind, he made up his mind right then he was coming back to California.  So, they decided to come to Los Angeles and they decided to move to Pasadena [California] because at the time it had the best public school system in the State of California, and so that's where we ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so he stayed, he became--he was--I think he was the sergeant when he retired and he actually went on and he got his bachelor's [degree] from Cal State L.A. [California State University Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]
Story_ID: 260926
Speaker 1: Who do you, take after in terms of your parents [Beverly Barber Martin and Robert Martin]?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mo--my mother's family. I, I, I'm more outgoing and, and spirited.  I mean--not that my mother's not--I mean she's lovely, she's a lovely you know, very personal engaging person but I'm a more spirited.  So, I, I definitely take after my mother's family.
Story_ID: 260927
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Sigh) Yep, there on--well, it's funny I was four when my brother was born and I remember that evening very clearly.  I stayed--my father [Robert Martin] had two maiden aunts who--it was like a family apartment building there in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and the aunts, it was the two aunts and my uncle and aunt lived upstairs and then there was Uncle Aud who'd come back from the war, you know, like not quite--.  And he lived down in the basement (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that, now that's a--seems to be--
Speaker 2: A common--
Speaker 1: --yeah, you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) very common.  That, you know, and particularly that kinda just, I mean look, it's happening today too in--we're, we're better equipped to at lea- recognize it at least not that necessarily we're dealing with it better but yeah, every family kinda has one of those--
Speaker 1: Yes, we had one too (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I would go--so my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] was working at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], she was a secretary at the University of Chicago and I would--they, they took care of me, they were my caretakers and it was lovely because my--I, you know, they had no children of their own so I was like the princess of the, you know, (laughter) of the whole house you know.  And my aunt who lived upstairs was a teacher and so she would read and work with me all the time and they would cook my favorite chicken and dumplings and whatever.  So anyway, I, I remember moments from--It's funny I remember moments from their house a lot.  I remember the night my brother was born was the night that [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was elected and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty [1960], yeah.
Speaker 2: November 5th, 1960 [sic. November 8, 1960], and so I can remember waking up and my aunts telling me that, you know, I had a new baby brother and that John Kennedy had been elected.  So I was four years old and I can like--so I can remember campaigning with my grandmother [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber], I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For Kennedy?
Speaker 2: No, this is the--like the aldermen or, you know--.  I can remember being in the backyard with her, I have a lot, I, I have a fair--probably about four years old is where--and they're not complete memories but they're flashes or, you know, moments.  I can remember being out in the backyard on one of those great warm Chicago [Illinois] summer nights catchin' fireflies, you know, my grandmother sittin' on the porch and there was a woman next door named Mrs. Magbee [ph.] who had this garden, the whole thing was a garden and there was an old car and I used to go sit in that car with her grandson and we'd pretend we were driving to Disneyland [Anaheim, California].
Story_ID: 260928
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois] or here [California]?
Speaker 1: Well, both, you know.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they're both different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can, yeah; you can contrast them if you like.
Speaker 2: (Sigh) You know, Chicago--I mean in retrospect it was that, that, South meets Midwest, you know, lotta people there from the South and--God, I can remember on Ra- Racine [Avenue] where you caught the "L" [elevated train] going there and there was this shop where they had live chickens in the window, remember that, and you'd go in there and pick your chicken and they cut--I just thought it was so horrible, you know, and we had to walk by there every day, you know whenever we were going to the "L."  I remember the different--at that point there was that--the East or the Midwest was much more formal so I can remember, you know, putting on gloves and hat to go downtown to the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] to go--just even to go shopping--
Story_ID: 260929
Speaker 1: We moved here when I was six to Pasadena [California] and then eventually to Altadena [California], it was right next door.  And the worlds were so different because, you know, I mean, Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] , I, I, today still is all black, whereas California, or, or, my life in California was like the opposite.  The--we got here and I was in the third grade and I went to Washington Elementary School [Washington Elementary STEM Magnet School, Pasadena, California], which was pretty fairly mixed and then we moved to Altadena primarily so that I could go to Loma Alta Elementary School [Altadena, California] which was like the best elementary school, you know, public elementary school in the best school system, public school system in California.  And I was like the only--there were like three black people, I mean I was the only black person in my year of my grade.  And, there were barely even any Asians or Hispanics.  I mean it was a very white elementary school and that--and I went to school--I was, I was in the gifted program and I basically went to school with the same core group of kids all the way through high school because we were in--we were in--we were in like the, the, whatever, you know, the, the special class in the elementary school and then that became like the, you know, whatever, the gifted class at the junior high school and then at the high school.
Story_ID: 260930
Speaker 1: Okay, how would you describe yourself as a little girl?  I mean, what were you like and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: I, I was a happy little girl, I was a voracious reader, that--I mean, that was my thing I wasn't--it's not--I, I'm such a--I, I'm very coordinated but I wasn't like the athletic child.  I was overweight as a child too, which was a big thing for me.  But I had lots of friends--I-I-I had lots of friends I was very social but I was also a loner, I mean it's, it's, it's a, you know, juxtaposition, I still have some of that today, but, but I read voraciously I mean would read all summer and I was very sensitive, I didn't have a thick skin.  And I was very inquisitive, very, you know, ve- wanted to learn about everything and--but, but happy child.
Story_ID: 260931
Speaker 1: Did you like music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Always liked music but I loved movies and television.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad [Robert Martin] is the biggest, to this day; he's like the biggest mo- movie and television buff that I know.  He knows, he's seen everything, he remembers everything (laughter), he, you know, so I grew up in a household where we watched movies all the time, we talked about 'em.  I would go to the--I would, I truly was that kid who would go to the movies on Saturday and sit there 'til my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] came to get me and drag me out (laughter).  I, I just thought they were, you know, there was--that was, you know, they were magical.
Speaker 1: Now did you watch a lot of old movies on television?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head) Uh-huh, uh-huh, yeah, no, the old, old black and white, the, you know, the big st- Audrey Hepburn and Katharine Hepburn and Bogie [Humphrey Bogart] and you know, my father to this day is like, "You know they don't make movies like they used to you know."  So we--and my brother is actually--we've all--I'm--my brother Eric [ph.] manages movie theaters.  I mean he's the vice president with Century Theatres and then my youngest brother started out in the movie business, I got him into the, the camera union on Rodgers Hammerstein [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II], 'Cinderella' and he did that for a few years and he just decided it's too much of a hustle so he's moved on into, you know, business ventures.  But we've all, you know, we were all influenced by it.
Speaker 1: Okay so did--did you have favorite movies when you were coming up, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, as a, as a child my favorite movie was 'Mary Poppins.'  So, you know, for me to work with Julie Andrews was like unbelievable (laughter) it was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This comes later, but it started with 'Mary Poppins' huh?
Speaker 2: I love 'Mary Poppins' I mean I, I would--I mean I think that I, you know, look, truth be told I really want--I didn't really want to be an actress and in fact when I was ten years old, and I remember this, I wrote, I hand, you know, hand wrote a letter to Walt Disney.  And I say--and I you know--wish that you know we still had the response.  And I, I just remember saying that I was a ten year old, you know, Negro girl (laughter) and that I very much wanted to be an actress and you know what did he recommend or whatever and I remember that I got this very nice typed response saying basically, stay in school and anything's possible.  And I think, you know, I mean, I didn't know anybody anywhere near the movie business, God knows I didn't know anybody who was an actor, you know, it just was all very foreign to me, my people were, you know, teachers and, you know, lawyer or why don't you be a doctor, you know, education was like a big deal in my, you know, entire family.  So, I--but--you know, I used to take--put the 'Mary Poppins' soundtrack on and over and over and over and dance in front of the mirror and sing and I mean I still to this day know all the words to all the songs in 'Mary Poppins.'  I just thought that was the most amazing movie.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you watch, 'The Mickey Mouse Club' when it was on television?
Speaker 2: I don't remember 'Mickey Mouse Club,' I don't remember really watching that. I might have missed 'The Mickey Mouse Club.'  Because I don't think it was on when I was com--'cause I would have watched it (laughter).  But, I rem--you know, I just--I grew up on 'Father Knows Best,' and, of course, '[I Love] Lucy' and, what, 'My Three Sons' and all those good shows 'bout morals and values and '[The] Donna Reed Show.'
Story_ID: 260932
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean my family's very Catholic.  And so I went to Catholic school, let's see, I went to [Nicholas] Copernicus Elementary School in Chicago [Illinois] for kindergarten, there in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].  And then in the first grade I went to Our Lady of Solace [School, Chicago, Illinois] in Englewood, and I'm sorry I misspoke before, and then--we moved out here in the second grade I went to Washington Elementary [School; Washington Elementary STEM Magnet School] in Pasadena [California] and the third grade I started at Loma Alta [Elementary School, Altadena, California].  So, but I would go to catechism class  every Saturday, and I had real issues with the church, even as a child, I mean, I, I just as I got older and started questioning because I reme- you know when I was--you know, it was still the traditional church of Mass in Latin, you know, no, no meat on, on Friday, women had to have, you know this--that--really stringent tradition, excuse me, but as I got a little older I just wasn't, I wasn't comfortable with, you know, it was a sin to go to a church of another religion.  That, you know, Catholics, we were taught Catholics, you know, they were better than other people.  Our religion, we know, it just--.  So, when I was thirteen years old when you make your Confirmation I made, I made a deal with my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] and I said, "Look, I will do this but I'm not going to church anymore."  And, you know, I, but it was--I, you know, I just said, "I'm not," you know, that's what a confirmation is, it's you becoming--being acknowledged as an adult and of an age to make your own decisions."  So, that was--and I didn't go to church, I mean, it became like a, you know, a badge of honor (laughter) for me I'm not going.  And just the pol- you know the politics of the church and (sigh) you know, people, poor people with too many kids not, you know, but it's a sin to use birth control, it just, you know--.  So I did not go to church--and for my grandmother [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber] it was just, you know (laughter), it was a big deal.  But until I got married and I wanted to be married in a Catholic Church for my grandmother, my husband [HistoryMaker Anthony Ray Chase] was not Catholic, he was Baptist, I was staying in Houston [Texas] at the time and you know, got in an argument with the priest because we, you know, over--because he, we went in for counseling, well I went in for counseling--whatever, whatever, you have to do and he chastised me for not being a, you know, a true Catholic as he said, and he--you know as I told my story he said, "Well I can tell, you know, you're just doing this for your grandmother, you don't really deserve to be married in a church."  So I went off on him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --(laughter) because I said, rather than ask me, this is the problem, rather than ask me why I, you know, particularly from a family background where it, it, you know, it's such a big deal, why I become estranged from the church you attack me, it--that's the attitude that has pushed me away.  So, I ended up storming out of there and I met a lovely Jesuit priest who facilitated our getting married in a church.  And, and, and then sub- subsequently in recent years made my peace with the church.  I go now, not every Sunday, but I go, you know, a time or two each month and it, it has place in my life.
Story_ID: 260933
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I--literature or reading.  I love to read, I mean, I have always loved; I love to read, so--.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the library a lot or did you have a collection of books at home?
Speaker 2: Both, I mean I would whe--there was--there were a few summers in there running where I won the, you know, by far the book, you know, the summer reading competition and I, I just, you know, I love to read.  I love; I like to write, you know, I was a good writer.
Speaker 1: Did you read mostly fiction or did you read (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fiction, I loved story--I love, you know, I loved romance, I love mystery.
Speaker 1: I think I read somewhere that you like to read biographies.
Speaker 2: I love biographies, that's since I've gotten older though.  But I, I'm like a biography freak.  I read and watch, you know, like I love the biography series ['Biography'] on A&E.  'Cause I just think it's so interesting how people get to or achieve what they do and you--and, and, I think the thing you realize is every life is filled with joy and tragedy and success and failure and I--it helps you keep your own journey in perspective, I think.
Speaker 1: I think you'd like doin' what I'm doing now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, I'd love just to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA):  (Telephone ringing).
Speaker 2: Is, is that gonna be a problem?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, we're okay.
Speaker 2: No, maybe not more than what you're doing now (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, I would, I would love it because it's just, you know, people are fascinating.  People when they tell their stories, you know.  It just--life is a rich thing so, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay, but in those days you were reading mostly fiction (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Nodding head) Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --did, did, what kind of things would you write?  Did you, did you, write your own compositions and--?
Speaker 1: I remember I wrote this story about--we had to write a--I as in the, I think in the seventh grade I wrote a short story about, it was like a fable about smog, how smog was created and it won the--I won the first prize, you know, in the writing composition.  I, I just--I've always been a good writer.  I, I'm, I, you know, I guess it just comes from, you know, reading and having a very active imagination.  I mean, one of the problems I find now that I'm, I'm a buyer is that I don't--that you know kids don't read anymore, it's all visual.  And so I, I do believe that the quality of the writing has gone down just in terms of the screenplays I see and the books I read, they're just not, they're not as imaginative on the whole.  I have a very active imagi- I used to sit--I would spin stories in my head, I would--and I didn't realize that's what I was doing, you know. I, I, I just, that's--I kind of, there was a part of me that lived in that kind of, you know, imaginary make-up stories in my head world.
Speaker 2: Did, did you have friends that also were writers or friends that would critique each other's work or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Shaking head) Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: --look at each other's work?
Speaker 1: (No audible response). (Shaking head).
Speaker 2: So you kinda like isolated in terms of your writing?
Speaker 1: (Nodding head) That was my--yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you share your stories with--I mean were they just for school or did you write things that you didn't know?
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to--I mean, mostly for school, 'cause writing's not--it's not an easy thing for me, it's not like, it, it, it, it doesn't, you know, I, it's in--'cause I'm kind of a perfectionist too so, just--now I don't write like, you know, I, I, I, I've never kept a journal for a long period of time or something like that, but, so, not a, not a lot of stuff just on my own.
Story_ID: 260934
Speaker 1: When you were a kid in grade school or high school were you aware then of the--what it takes--I mean of the, some of the people it takes to make a movie?  I mean some, some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had no idea.
Speaker 1: --some people never think about who they are--
Speaker 2: No clue, no clue, no clue (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I'm tellin' you, I--this was like, this was as far away as--I mean I was the (laughter)--I was gonna say as far away as being a rocket scientist but JPL [Jet Propulsion Laboratory] was in Pasadena [California] so I knew kids whose parents were rocket scientist, you know, and, and, and, you know, diplomats and whatever.  I just know I didn't know anybody in the movie business.  It wasn't something--it was, you know, far away, out of your reach, just didn't, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you have a sense of who somebody like Alfred Hitchcock might be or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, no, I mean I knew, yeah--
Speaker 1: --or you know, what his role might be in a movie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I knew, yeah, I mean I knew the directors and the actors and, you know, the scree- you know the obvious stuff, but I didn't know, I didn't really know what a producer did.  I didn't really--you know, or the editor or the d- you know, I mean I didn't really know the--I didn't know what the process was by which a movie comes together until much later.
Story_ID: 260935
Speaker 1: What was your social life like in grade school and high school?  Did you have a lot of friends?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head) I would say I was--I mean, I've always been very outgoing and I also think, you know, my parents' [Beverly Barber Martin and Robert Martin] marriage was not the happiest marriage so there was always a lot of tension in my house, like they didn't talk, it wasn't like, you know, they--you know, they'd argue, but it wasn't like they were huge arg- but it was just kinda like tense all the time so, I spent a lot of time at other people's houses.  And, so I had a lot of friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was int- and again it was--I think what--the--it--I mean of the many things that I am very grateful to my family for they never set boundaries for me, they never--so it's like, I mean--and I'm, I'm sayin' this I'm in this like all white community, like I said, I was like the only--and they--it, it wasn't any, there never any like, "Oh those white kids," or "oh tho--" and I --so I never thought about--I, I didn't, I really didn't see race at that point.  I mean it was kinda like, you know, you know, and part of it I think was also because, you know, I mean I had frie- everybody liked me, you know, and, and it wasn't an issue because I was the only one, you know what I mean?  And I was, you know, did really well in school, was, you know, articulate and, you know, you know what I mean?  So, (cough), that reinforced my sense of--I, I never thought about I can't do or, or, you know, there're limits on me because I'm black or I'm a girl or anything like that, it just--they didn't come into play.
Story_ID: 260936
Speaker 1: --There're two teachers that I swear I'd like to find.  The one was when I was in, in, elementary school, was the fourth grade.  In the third grade I took up the viola but what I really wanted to do was play the flute.  And you couldn't do that 'til fourth grade and I went to go talk to the music teacher and he told me that my lips were too big to play the flute.  And I was so embarrassed and so ashamed I didn't tell anybody, I wanna, I would love to (laughter) find that man.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know.
Speaker 2: --so you can instruct him about anatomy (laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: And also just the damage, who--I could have been a great flautist, who knows, you know what I mean?  It could, you know, it could have changed my life.  And for him to be, you know, just ignorance you don't do that to a child, so.  But they're ver- and then there was one other time when I was in high school and I was in Massachusetts and that was a whole other story.  But I--I mean, we'll get there but it was a whole turning point for me 'cause I was like miserable in Amherst [Massachusetts] and I decided I couldn't take it any more (laughter) and I graduated early, I graduated in the eleventh grade 'cause I just was like, there's no way I'm spending another year here.  And so I was late on everything I hadn't taken my SATs, I hadn't, 'cause it was like February and I was like, that's it, I'm, I'm like outta here.  I just could (laughter) not do this, and I went into the guidance counselor and, you know, there again I'm--now I mean I'm basically straight A student, have been.  And he's,--an, an, no, you know, I mean, no whatever, my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] went there, but he's like, he says, "Well you know you should really apply to the University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts]."  An, you know, great school, but I'm sayin', I, you know, I'm a straight A student are your white straight A students who come in here, you know, you're, you're pushing them to the Ivy Leagues or the, you know, the Seven Sisters or whatever, why are, you know--and I just kinda washed my hands of him and did it myself.  But I was older then.
Speaker 2: Those are, those are experiences I think a lot of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in--
Speaker 1: And that's why, you know, they're so dangerous because unless you, you know, again--at that age I had wherewithal, you know I was basically like, screw you, this is my, you know, I know what I,  you know--but he could, again, he could have changed my whole life.
Story_ID: 260937
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in high school activities in Massachusetts when you got there, were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mis- I was miserable (laughter) no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was like--it was like--I mean I went from Southern Ca--I did--you know, in the last few years of high school I'd gotten cute, you know (laughter), like I lost weight, I had the good boyfriend so (laughter) I was like--had been on 'Soul Train,' you know, I was like, you know, I was like gonna be a, you know, cheerleader and, you know, had my fingers crossed about homecoming queen.  I mean I was, you know, and I showed up in Amherst, Massachusetts, where half the kids went home, half the kids were a university kids and the other half like went home to pick apples after school.  I mean it was, you know, that kind of rural--it was a university town in a rural setting.  It was total culture shock, you know, and in my mind I'm thinkin' we're moving to Massachusetts, it's the home of the Kennedys, you know, they voted for [George] McGovern, I mean, you know, like--and ver----not, you now--didn't know, I mean, I, I, I, I, nev--it', it, just--I was so out of place and there were maybe, I don't remember--the high school had, I wanna say it had like 1,500 kids, somethin' like that.  There were like thirty black students, most of them had checked out emotionally and socially.  They were like, you know--because it was like righ- and it was--'cause it wasn't and embracing environment.  And ha- half of those student were with the ABC [A Better Chance] program so they were really--you know, at least they had each other they were livin' in the house, they were really, you know--and the other ones were like that would sit in the bathroom and get high just to like get, you know?  And like I said, I was used--I just wasn't used to--I'll never forget this girl I, this white girl had, we'd gone out to the movies or something together and you now, really hit it--and I'm not--I, you know.  And she called me afterwards and she said, "You know," and she was very sincere, she says, "You know, I'm just so happy to be getting to know a black person."  And I'm like, "You know, this is not--I'm not" (laughter), you know.  It just was like--I just was--it was just so--.  So what I ended up doing was--and my, and my--so my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] was there in graduate school I started hanging out with my mother and her friends 'cause they were, you now, I was more compatible and, and I and I just like started reading, I mean I just like threw myself into, into books and studying and (sigh) 'cause I was like, well shit if I'm stuck here I might as well, you know, you know, make it, make the time useful.  And I just read--and it was it 'cause it was--so it was a really interesting year because I, I just, just was like kinda went off on my own path and I would go to the library at, at, U Mass [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] kinda every night 'cause it was--there was no crime, no noth--you know you could walk home at ten 'o clock at night and, you know, it's nothin' gonna happen.  (Laughter) So, I'd go sit in the library and I would just read and I would, you know, just knowledge, just in that, you know, feeding kind of the--but I was miserable.  I just--'cause it was like no, you know, socially, whatever, and somethin' happened that February, I, I, I I, it was like, I wa--it was a build up to it but I think the, the, the that straw that broke the camel's back was some--I'd left my purse out in the gym and somebody stole my wallet.  And it was just that thing that makes you snap and I went home that night and I was like, "I'm out."  I'm like, I'm not, I cannot stay here (laughter) another year and do my senior year and I had no--and I didn't really have a place to go--
Story_ID: 260938
Speaker 1: I had spent the summer with my grandmother [HistoryMaker Irma Josephine Barber] and had, had gotten into a little trouble, they, they--you know, so it was kinda like I knew if I, at that point in time, I was fifteen, but I was like, you know, a mature fifteen.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of trouble did you get into--
Speaker 1: You know like, we, you know, we took the car and went to the Michael Jackson concert, you know, we weren't suppo- like I, I, think my girlfriend was fifteen and half, she had a permit, I didn't have any--you know I couldn't drive.  But like we told we were at--for some reason we weren't supposed to go I don't remember.  Certainly weren't supposed to take the car, but we said we were at the other one's house, you know, (unclear), but you know, I mean, I, in retrospect clearly you know, you understand, but you know, we lied (laughter) so it's like, and, oh and I went to some party.  There was this guy--I was working, I was, I had a job with the city [Chicago, Illinois] that my uncle had gotten for me, so my--I was living with my grandmother and we would--took the "L" [elevated train] to work every day and it was great.  It was really, it was that--it was the lovely summer for us, and it was this guy who was like thirty and I was like (laughter) I thought was so fine and my uncle, when he gave me the job said, "If I here that you are anywhere near this guy you, you know, you gon be in trouble."  So, of course, he gave a party I went to the party, you know.  Had a great time and then I actually think my uncle came to the party and we had to slip out or somethin' you know.  So, that, eventually somehow they found out about that, so you know, it was like stuff like that, you know, adolescence stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, not big trouble.
Speaker 1: Not big trouble.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But enough so that, you know, I, I, they, they, in particularly my family, which is very, you know, it was like, "Deb's [HistoryMaker Debra Martin Chase] outta control" and my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] had like fueled the fire 'cause I think I got sent there for the summer because she thought I was, I was, outta control.
Story_ID: 260939
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating had you--did you know what you wanted to pursue as a, as a career?
Speaker 2: No, I just wanted to get the hell out, I mean there was no--you know, so--.  I was all--I mean I, I ended up-- I mean I was interested in journalism, I was interested in politics, I was interested in movies, but I didn't--that seemed like the far, the most farfetched.
Speaker 1: So where did you college app- I mean, what college did you decide to go to and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what happened was I was--I hadn't taken my SATs and I was--missed all the application deadlines.  So I went to the colleges nearby, like Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts] said that I was too late, that I could apply for January.  Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] said I was too late and Holy--Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] said, you know, we'll consider you.  And so they basically accepted me without my SAT scores 'cause they didn't have 'em.  But I just went in, I mean, I was, I was very sincere I was very sincere, I was desperate and I had--I had enough credits, I mean it wasn't like a whole credit issue.  So, so I went to Mount Holyoke.
Speaker 1: So, so you graduated in what year, what it--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], so I, I was sixteen, I started college at sixteen.
Story_ID: 260940
Speaker 1: All right now what was Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] like for you, this is a, this is a all-girls school right?
Speaker 2: In South Hadley, Massachusetts.  Again (laughter) it was like--but it's like what, it was what, you know--I mean.  So, well, you know what, but-- here's the thing, I, I left like every weekend and went to, you know, met people at different colleges and was--went to Boston [Massachusetts] and went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and whatever and, and I would study during the week.  So it was like this bifurcation of, you know, academic and social.  And, an in, an at the end of my freshman year I transferred to Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and I withdrew and I packed--cause I was like at South Hadley, you know.  And they called me three weeks before I was supposed to show up at Palo Alto [California]--'cause I was on full scholarship the whole time and they said they had run out of housing on campus for transfer scholarship students or whatever and I would have to think about maybe like, you know, living in somebody's house in exchange--you know, getting a room in somebody's house an, an--I didn't have a car, I didn't have any money to get a car I was like, you know what this not gonna work.  I mean, that's not you know, my, it, it's not gonna work (laughter) so, I, so I went back to Holyoke and they have a twelve college exchange program with all the other Seven Sister schools and the other little, like Williams [College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] and Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] and so I went to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] my junior year.
Story_ID: 258564
Speaker 1: So you studied your last year at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: My junior year.
Speaker 1: Your junior year, okay, junior year, all right.  And had you decided on a major at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a poli sci [political science] major, English lit [literature] minor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I figured I'd go to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, that does sound like a formula (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or journalism, the summer after my junior year I worked at Newsweek an internship at Newsweek in New York [New York] and I worked on the--I'd had a column in the [Mount] Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] newspaper [Mount Holyoke News] and I was like a contributing editor and so I was really thinking about a career in journalism and I spent the summer at Newsweek and I spent a month in the movies and television section, which was like, you know, for me a dream job with Jack Kroll and Janet Maslin.  And then I was on the national desk--I was in the international desk and I remember I was there, you reme--during the raid [Operation Entebbe] on Entebbe [Uganda], remember that?
Speaker 1: Yes, right and Uganda, right.
Speaker 2: And it was the, the Israelis were being held hostage, it was--and Newsweek goes to press, I think it's Saturday night, Saturday night they go to press for the national, international, so you can be--it's up to the minute as possible.  And we had gotten on the phone with-- there was a--Dora Bloch was the name of the woman who had--she had choked and they had taken her out and we, we had talked to her family and the discussion was made that night that, there's no way these hostages are goin' anywhere and they went to bed--they put the--they put the issue to bed and the next morning everybody woke up and the Israelis had gone in and, you know, rescued the hostages, except for Dora Bloch, we never hear from her again.  Which was a thrill--it was just, it was great, it was like a great summer, you know.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they made a movie ['Raid on Entebbe'] about that--
Speaker 2: Exactly, that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Idi Amin was in the middle of it--
Speaker 2: Right, but, as much as I loved the dra- that summer, I realized that--I, I, you know, I got to be friendly with all these journalist who were like thirty years old and peaked, you know.  It's kind of like where do you go, you know, from Newsweek you know.  Maybe you go to The New York Times, wherever, but they were all kinda frustrated and, you know, everybody's trying to figure out what they were gonna do for the next--and so I just--it, I think that's when I really made the decision that I was gonna go to law school if for no other reason than to--well, than to, then to maximize my options, which was the key phrase.  And to give myself a security blanket, so to speak so that I, if I wanted to go out and try something more avant-garde I'd have something to fall back on, you know.
Story_ID: 258565
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers at Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] or, or at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Robert--
Speaker 1: --Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: --Robert Weisenberg [ph.] at Holyoke, who's a youngish poli sci [political science] professor that I liked a lot, we just really, you know.  He was good people, we just really--I mean I just liked him a lot.  We didn't keep in touch but he was, you know, he--I think I--and I took a few classes with him and he was, im- important.  I think I, I, I'm pretty sure I did--I am sorry, don't remember--I think I did my thesis with him too, my senior thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay, anybody else?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't like a, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so no real mentors or anything like that in school or college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in, not in school, I had, had some, I've always been fortunate in having some great, really fortunate in having great mentors.  And, you know, I, I, hope that I am passing that one, you know, that pay it forward thing 'cause I think it's really important, but there was a woman, I--my January, the January term of, I guess my sophomore year I worked in [HistoryMaker] Senator [Edward] Brooke's office in Washington [D.C.] and his chief of staff was a woman named Fran Farmer, who's like fabulous as a--you know.  She was, she'd gone to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], she was just, you know, dynamic and smart and really terrific and I think I, I, oh God, she--we, we, never actually connected but she called me, we were trading calls or trying to reach each other a few years ago and she was like the ambassador to one of the smaller African countries, it's maybe like five or six years ago, but anyhow, so she, we just, she was a mentor for me.  And we, you know, kept in touch and she's the one who led me into the Newsweek job, she helped me get that and we just stayed in touch and--.  So I also spent a summer, I think that next, the summer after my sophomore year I worked for the Department of HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], well it was then HEW and so we, you know, kept up that summer and--so yeah, Fran was, Fran was important when I was in college.
Story_ID: 258566
Speaker 1: When did you decide you were going to law school?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I, my, my, I had a boyfriend, my, my significant boyfriend in college was a student at Harvard and--Law School [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And so, and it was in--so my junior year that I was at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], I kinda lived at the law school.  So, you know, it was in that moment where I was like, well I could do this, you know, I mean I, you know just watching him and everybody else.  So, but, but what I decided to do was take a year off after college because, you know 'cause I was a year ahead of myself in school and I, I wanted to breathe, I mean I wanted to, you know, like kinda.  And I came out here to Southern California to stay with him, he was a lawyer here.
Speaker 1: So this is '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: This is '77 [1977] and actually I worked, he was a lawyer at O'Melveny & Myers here in Los Angeles [California] and I worked as a paralegal at O'Melveny.  And I did, I purposely did not apply to law school my senior year because I knew that if I got in the temptation would be to go immediately and I thought it was important for me, like I said, just to breathe.  To get out and, you know, do some--live some life.  And, and, and going into that year, I mean I only--I applied to a couple of law schools because in the back of my mind I was like--'cause I didn't really wanna practice law, which was affirmed by my job at the, at the paralegal (laughter) at O'Melveny, which I was just like, oh my this--not, you know.  But I had a great--got a--had a great mentor there, a guy named Don Miller, who was the head of, he was like one of the, like the head of the corporate department and he was this tall, tall, you know, good looking, older, republican, he was kinda like Clint Eastwood, republican, you know, big, firm lawyer.  And, and he called me into his office one night and he had this huge corner office and at the time O'Melveny was representing Alyeska [Pipeline Service Company], the whole Alaskan pipeline thing, and they were, they were making, it was like they made a bundle off of it and some--many of the lawyers, big percentage of the firm's resources were allocated towards that and so he needed to put on this huge conference to bring together experts and their lawyers and, you know, in preparation for the trial and so he, he asked me to coordinate it for him.  And, so, we got to be really good friends 'cause I was in, you know, in and out of his office, because you know, he's a big deal, so I was in and out of his office all the time and he just really took a liking to me, and vice a versa I, you know, I just, you know, we'd sit up at night and he'd talk to me about life and you know, and experience and you know.  And so, the first couple, first day or so after I got to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] there was this letter in my box in my mail box from the dean of students and said, "You know, would you please come to my office (laughter) as soon as possible."  And I was like, "Damn, what did I do (laughter) I'm in trouble already I didn't do anything."  Oh I think I missed--I know, I know what it was, I had liked not gone to some of the, the I didn't go to the first couple of days, some of the orientation stuff, I, I just didn't go.  And so, I so, I was like, you know, like (laughter) like after me already.  And, I, I, showed up and he said, "You know, Don Miller called me and told me I need to take care of you and so if you need anything, you know, 'cause Don is an old, you know, old and dear friend, and you know, and if likes you, I like you and, so if you ever need anything you know, don't hesitate to come."  Which you know is like huge, you know (sigh).  (Whispers) I forgot how I got on that.  Oh, I, oh, so, so, I--'cause I was thinking in the back of my mind I might go to film school and I, so I applied, I only applied to couple law schools so I was like, you know--.  And then, I chickened out on film school 'cause I had just said, you know--'cause I, you know, I had discipline, you know my parents [Beverly Barber Martin and Robert Martin] didn't have any money I had just--I had to know that I could take care of myself that was really important and I, you know, I knew with a law degree that I could, you know I could always put a roof over my head.
Story_ID: 258567
Speaker 1: Okay so Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], now this is a, you know, that's pretty tough place for most people, but, how, how-- what, what did you--how, how did you like it?
Speaker 2: I, I did not like law school.  I loved the people, I actually had, you know, I, you know, I just found, it, it--and part of it was the, the conformity thing for law school.  It's like you know, they sit you down and it's like we're gonna break you down and build you back up in our image and--.  You know and at that time it's--this is what 1979 so there were--women were maybe a fourth, maybe a third of the class.  There--my class was five hundred people there were sixty black people, which, which was a huge number.  I didn't really wanna be a lawyer, I mean I just (laughter) you know I just--but I, it, it--but I loved the people I, I just, I, you know, I found everybody--I just made--'cause even the nerdiest person had--was some--there was, you know, if you got to know them there was something really interesting.  Everybody had an interesting story getting there, you know, and they knew about some--I mean it was just a really eclectic and great group of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You just have to imagine that it would be a lot of bright people there you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah and everybody, and, and, and also they looked for somethin' some little, you know, thang, you know, just that made you stand out, you know, just made you a little different, you know.  So, I still, I'm still keep up with a lot of my classmates from law school and I think there's a, there's a, you know there's a bond between us 'cause we were all just like, that first year of law school was rough (laughter) I mean there's no two ways about it, you were just like broke down, you know.  I remember there was a moment where my, my, my, best friend the first couple of years of law school was a woman named Niki [L.] Hutchinson and who was a very--very much a fashionista, you know, she was, she, she came from a very wealthy family and, you know, and there was one-- I had been up all night, 'cause those were no computers, you know, you typin', carbons, and makin' a mistake you're, I mean, you know, that hardcore and I was up all night and she came to get me to go to class and she took one look at me and she closed the door she was like this, "You are not going out in public." (Laughter) I was like, you know, 'cause I had just hit like, you know, you just don't care anymore you're so miserable you know.  But, but you know what, I use it every day.  The legal knowledge I use every day it has served me very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm very glad that I went to law school, I'm glad, and I'm glad I went to law school over film school because, certainly as a producer, you know, the deal is so much a part of the business and, it, you know, my legal skills are invaluable.  And, and, and, and equally as important it has, it has provided me with security in that, you know, this is a tough business and, you know, there, there are a lot of people in this business that will do whatever they need to do to protect themselves and, you know, get ahead and all that and you know, for me it's like, you know what, push come to shove I know I can feed myself and put a roof over my head.  You know, so, I don't have to, I never felt like I had to do anything that I wasn't comfortable with, you know.  I didn't have that desperation that a lot of people have because they feel like, "Oh, my God, if I don't make it I have nothing to, I have nothing I have no place to go I have nothing to, you know, what am I gonna do."  Well what, what, you know, whereas, you know, I, I, knew I could eat and that, that's a big deal.
Story_ID: 258568
Speaker 1: Were there any mentors in law school, anybody that, any teachers that really stu- really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No one?
Speaker 2: I didn't really engage with the teachers.
Speaker 1: A lot of people say that, you know, I, I don't think I've interviewed anyone who went to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] that, that felt that they had a real (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, you know--a couple of friends that had, but by in large it's a very much like we're God and you aren't (laughter), you know.  And, and you are beholden to us and it just di- I was not, it, it, I just--particularly coming from, you know, Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] which was small and intimate and, you know the whole environment was designed to encourage you to learn.  You know, I could call the professors up at night, at home and ask questions and you know it was just a very, you know, kinda warm and fuzzy environment.  Whereas this was, you know, look to your left, look to your right and you know, one of you is gonna be gone by the end of the year kinda thing, you know.  It just didn't, you know. So, no I really didn't.
Story_ID: 258569
Speaker 1: I liked practicing law, I didn't love it.  But I liked it better than law school because it was, it was, you know, it was, it was more real.
Speaker 2: Now, now where did you first practice when you--?
Speaker 1: Well, I went the summer after my first year of law school I worked for Kirkland & Ellis [LLP], which is a big--actually a, a--one of the biggest Chicago [Illinois] firms, in their [Washington] D.C office.  And then after my second year I worked for Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett [LLP], which is a big New York [New York] firm.  And then I, I, went with my, my, my ex-husband [HistoryMaker Anthony Ray Chase], I moved to Houston [Texas] and I worked for a firm called Butler & Binion, which is like the third largest law firm and then, eventually spun off to a firm Mayor, Day & Caldwell [Mayor, Day, Caldwell & Keeton LLP].
Speaker 2: Okay so you got--did you get married while you were at Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: In Houston.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, right after law school?
Speaker 1: (No audible response). (Nodding head).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right.  So you were in Houston at Butler and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Butler and Binion--
Speaker 2: Binion, okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --B-I-N-I-O-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then Mayor, Day and Caldwell, M-A-Y-O-R, Day and Caldwell.
Speaker 2: Day and Caldwell?
Speaker 1: Day, D-A-Y and Caldwell.
Story_ID: 258570
Speaker 1: Now did you like practicing law after you went out and?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Uh-uh, and I was doing, you know--and in Houston [Texas], I mean that's a whole other, I don't know if we're ready to go there, but you know Houston was the whole, I mean, my, my ex-husband.  His name is [HistoryMaker] Anthony [Ray] Chase, had gone--like I said we went to Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] together, he went you now, he was like a Harvard guy and he wanted to go home and at the time Houston was like, booming and I was like, I'm a gypsy why not, venture, whatever and we got down there and again I was out of the cycle I didn't, you know--was, was gonna go back to Simpson, Thacher [& Bartlett LLP] in New York [New York] and then--I was really late and we actually went out--so I was late interviewing with the firm, so whatever.  So his father [HistoryMaker John Chase] is a big deal down in Texas, he's a great guy--great man, he was the first black graduate of the University of Texas [at Austin, Austin, Texas], he had a [U.S.] Supreme Court case, Sweatt vs. Painter [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] in 1952 that predated Board Ed--Brown vs. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] of--do you know him, did you guys talk to him?
Speaker 1: Yeah we interviewed him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, so that's my, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's, he's an architect as well--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, that's exactly right, so, you know, so I got down Houston and I'm, you know, with Tony and so they're like, "Well you know, obviously you're gonna get hooked into the politics."  So I got my first job was in, as a--in public law at this firm [Butler & Binion; Mayor, Day, Caldwell & Keeton LLP] and it was, and it was a little boutique within the firm, very small where it was two former city attorneys and, it was two former city attorneys, Jonathan Day, and Bob Collie, maybe it was just, I always thought there was one more partner, but maybe it was just the two of them and like two other associates.  And they, you know, it was kinda like they figured that the combination of, of--'cause I was like the third--unbeknownst to me, I was like the third black person at a law firm in Houston, a major law firm in Houston, it just, an, an, an, you know, it's like 1981 which is, it, I, I, it, just was kinda mind boggling for me, you know.  And so, I got to be pretty close with Jonathan Day, he was he's a good man, and he was--and they were--they were lovely, the firm was lovely to me.  I mean they, it was, you know what I found is that, the, the ways in which you make being, being, black and female work for you, you know, is that you, you accept it.  It's like, okay, look, it's gonna be harder for me but once I prove to you that I can do this it makes it, it make it that, it makes it special, 'cause, 'cause you don't know anybody, you know, so--.  So they were great, I mean they had me--I was like the poster child of the law firm, you know, 'cause I got it and you know, we did good work and we got along great and they were, you know, good men and my, you know my family and, I was just--.  And so I, and, and (laughter), so the reward is more work, so I would--my hus--my, you know--did you talk to Tony too?
Speaker 1: Not yet, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you interview him--
Speaker 1: --he was on the schedule but something happened and it didn't take off--
Speaker 2: Well Tony was the first black investment banker in the State of Texas in 1981, again, like, inconceivable, but, so, I, you know, it just got, it's like after two years I was just working like a dog, I kinda had no breathing space, you know, it was just the political thing, we were doing social.  I was working all hours at the law firm and stuff, so it--so I, I, I, left.
Speaker 1: You just left?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head) Uh-huh, I mean I just, I figure, it, it, just wasn't how I wanted to lead my life.  I had no time to think about what I wanted to do and it's kind--if I didn't--I just knew I'd keep going, you know you get caught up in it and you just keep going and, you know, I mean I had the, I had the--for once in my life I had the luxury because, you know, he, he, I was married and my husband was, you know, gainfully employed, just to take a breath to think about what it was I wanted to do.  So, I, you know, I went in and I told him I was leaving, you know.  And it being Texas they was inconceivable so everybody was like, "You pregnant? Tony want you to stay home?" you know, and I was like, "No, I just need to, you know, breathe."
Story_ID: 258571
Speaker 1: And so I took a year and I, ostensibly I was a freelance writer and I wrote for magazines like, Texas, not Texas Monthly, but the one, that, the, Houston City Magazine kinda like the L. A. Magazine [Los Angeles Magazine] or Chicago I did a lot of those stories, some of the airline magazines and I don't know, what else.  And tried to figure out what I wanted to do with the rest of my life.  Which for me was hard to do and I always want--you know I was always--so I was running after whatever little movie stuff.  You know, people always say, "Oh they make movies in Houston [Texas]," well you know, I, I was running after whatever little movies stuff was, you know, maybe brewing and I worked a little bit with a P.R. [public relations] person.  I did a little bit of everything, you know, and then finally it was like, okay, I need to go back to work and I decided not to go back to the law firm [Butler & Binion; Mayor, Day, Caldwell & Keeton LLP] because I thought maybe my hours would be better and I went to work for Tenneco [Houston, Texas] as an in-house lawyer there.  I did that for about a year and a half (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: T-E-N-N-E-C-O.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's a big--I assume they're still--it's a big oil and gas company.
Speaker 2: What year is that?
Speaker 1: This would be--we left in '85 [1985] so this would be like '83 [1983] to '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And, and at least I had, you know--I mean it was more, it was more of a, you know,--more nine to six so I--at least I had some time to--like I said, to breathe.  And, and I worked for a lovely man, he was so great, his name was oh, he had been the general council of Newport News Shipping [sic. Newport News Shipbuilding], which they owned at the time.  And he was, he was the, like number two legal guy.  So he ran the day-to-day.   Oh, I can't remember his name, but he was--and he was from Virginia, kind of a cracker, and hired me 'cause it was, you know, right, you know, it looked, you know?   I, I was, I--it looked good, I had all the right, you know--and we just got to be really good friends.  I'll never forget when I left, 'cause I left from there we moved to New York [New York] and he told me, he said, you know, just, really he said, how getting to know me had changed his perspective on, you know--like I, I was the first black person he'd ever really gotten to know, you know, 'cause he'd been over at the, at the, at the shipping yard, you know.  A lot of the employees were black but, you know, he didn't know them.  And how, he, well--what was it he said, he said that from now on he would approach--I, I, I, don't exactly remember how he said it, but he said from now on he would approach black people differently because he would, he would--now knew it could, like basically be, like have a re--he would (laughter) have rapport, you know, they could be a Debra [HistoryMaker Debra Martin Chase] or Tony [HistoryMaker Anthony Ray Chase].
Story_ID: 258572
Speaker 1: You all moved to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: --eighty-five [1985] okay, okay, so you continued as a lawyer in New York?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Much to my dismay.  I went to go work for a Wall Street law firm.  I tried to get a job at a corporation and didn't, you know, didn't.  And, so I went to go work for this Wall Street law firm, I worked like a dog for si- I was there for six months.
Speaker 1: Who did you work for?
Speaker 2: Stroock & Stroock & Lavan [LLP, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Struck, how, how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: S-T-R-O-O-C-K, Stroock again (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Lavan, L-A-V-A-N, they're a Wall Street firm.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a Dutch name, is that, what that is, Strook?
Speaker 2: It's, I mean it's Jewish, it's a Jewish law firm, could be Dutch.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so how long did you work for them?
Speaker 2: Six months, I worked thee six months and th- (laughter) during those six months I barely had a day off and finally I got a call--I had interviewed with Avon Products [New York, New York] before I took that job and they didn't have anything available and they called me and asked if I was still interested and I was like, "Oh God yes."  So (laughter) I, I, left I went to go work for Avon.
Story_ID: 260941
Speaker 1: We left off with you at Avon [Products, New York, New York] I believe, right?
Speaker 2: So I worked at Avon as, you know, in the in-house counsel for three years.  And during that time I separated and divorced from my husband [HistoryMaker Anthony Ray Chase] so, you know, it was kinda the first--'cause I got married right, right out of law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was my first time, you know, free, single, no--I didn't have a mortgage, you know, kinda the, the responsibilities that I had assumed pretty immediately after law school.  So I figured it was my time to figure out what I really wanted to do with my life you know I was approaching thirty and I figured I had time to make a change but I needed to do--if I was going to make a change I needed to do it then.  And I got very involved--Mickey Leland, who is a congressman out of Texas, the really good friend of mine, his wife Alison [Leland] is, still a close friend of mine and Mickey, I told Mickey I wanted to get--'cause politics is all--for me a lot of it was narrowing down, you know, 'cause a lot of different things I was interested in and I kinda was always, you know, tryin' different things and I knew I needed to figure out what that one thing was I was really going to commit to and go after it.  So it was the '88 [1988] presidential election (cough) and I told Mickey that I wanted to get involved and so he put me in touch with some people and I ended up being on the New York State and national finance committee for the [Michael] Dukakis campaign.  And I, I was a delegate to the [1988 Democratic National] Convention [Atlanta, Georgia] and it was great 'cause I got to know a lot of the political people in New York [New York] and when the campaign--I did a lot of fundraising, obviously I was on the finance committee.  I also started to meet some people in the movie business for the first time.  So, when the campaign--like had Dukakis won I probably would have taken a job in Washington [D.C.].  But since he didn't and there was some talk, I, I, had a sense they were gonna approach me, [HistoryMaker] David [N.] Dinkins was running for mayor [of New York, New York] and they were gonna approach me about taking a position in his campaign and I remember I went out to dinner with a really good friend of mine and had, had, also worked in the campaign and we were both trying to figure out, you know, what we were, what the next step was and it was at that dinner I made up my mind that what I wanted to do more than anything else was make movies.  And that this was my window to try to see if I could do it and I needed to take that chance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now why, why did the Dinkins dinner trigger that--
Speaker 2: Well, because we were talking about whether or not, you know, I should take a job in his, you know, campaign and, you know, that would lead to (unclear) something in his administration if he wanted, you know, kind of continue down that political path and it just kind of, just doing the soul searching it was, and I knew, and again I knew this was a, this was that critical moment for me.  Where I needed to make a decision about direction and, and go for it and I just said, you know, if I go down the political route (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Off camera noise).
Speaker 2: (Sigh) That it was my time, it was my time to go for it that if I, you know--so, and that what I really, really, really wanted to do more than anything else all things being equal and, you know, was to make movies.
Story_ID: 260942
Speaker 1: So, for the next year (laughter) I, you know, that was my job.  I mean I was working at Avon [Products, New York, New York] but my other job was to, 'cause like I say I didn't know--I knew that I wanted to make movies I didn't know who did that, I didn't really know how the system worked.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So I, I, I, I, talked to everybody I knew who was in the movie business.  I talked to anybody who they would refer me to just as much as anything; gathering information and I read everything I could get my hands on.  I went to seminars, I just kind of studied the mov- read the trades every day, just studied the movie business and how it worked.
Speaker 2: Now is there anything going on then that inspired you to get involved in the--I mean, were there any movies or any projects goin' on that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I all--
Speaker 2: --said well this is, you know--
Speaker 1: No, but I all--
Speaker 2: --these projects are so wonderful I wanna be a part of a project like this or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I always had loved movies more than anything else; I mean I'd been talking about this forever.  Everybody who knew me knew that in my heart of hearts I wanted to make movies--
Speaker 2: This is 1989, '88 [1988]--
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], '87 [1987], no, '88 [1988], '88 [1988], 'cause right after (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: --the presidential election, yeah, '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, interesting during that time period the first black woman movie pro- I don't know if she was the first but the first one I ever heard of was Suzanne de Passe, directing, she, she, produced 'Lonesome Dove' for--.
Speaker 1: TV, yeah.
Speaker 2: TV, and I was really surprised Suzanne de Passe, especially--you know, you expect black people to be makin' black movies and that sort of thing but this was like a great project and great movie.
Speaker 1: Larry McMurtry, yeah
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it, it was a black woman in charge of this and I was like, kinda taken aback.  Were you aware of that at that time?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I mean I'm sure, I mean I, you know, she won an Emmy [Award], so yeah, you know.
Speaker 2: I think she won it in '89 [1989] I think, but she was work--had been, you know she was--they were talkin about her being a producer I think in '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: I know, it just, it was one of those put up or shut-up moments in life where I just, it's something that I'd always dreamed about, I'd always talked about it, I, you know, and it was, it was just that I, I, I just knew that this was my time to do whatever it was that I was gonna do or, you know--.
Speaker 2: Okay now I asked you earlier when you were a, when you were a kid you really didn't, you weren't really aware of what a producer did, or, you know, some of the other functions of making movies but when did you first become really aware of, of what some of the other roles were other than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During that year--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when I studied the business and how it was--I knew I wanted to make movies, I knew I wanted to be--come up with the ideas behind, you know, to, to, come up with the ideas for movies.  And so, that year I did my research and I realized that it was producers and studio executives who really did what I thought I wanted to do.  And so and it took me, you know, so and, and I started looking for a job.
Story_ID: 260943
Speaker 1: --Where did you look first, you know?
Speaker 2: Well I figured my sellable skill was my legal skills so I started applying to legal jobs and I--and the funny thing was I went, one of my--actually the friend, the girlfriend that I'd had the, the, the, dinner with where I'd kinda made the final decision she had a sister who worked in human resources at Columbia Pictures [Culver City, California] and she arranged for me to have a meeting with the general counsel at that time there was a New York [New York] general counsel and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] general counsel.  And so, the meeting was it--she--she was running late and I was in her office and she had a document on her desk that talked about this new like internship, professional internship program that the head of the studio was starting to bring people from other disciplines into the movie business and teach them--Victor [A.] Kaufman.  And so when she got back to her office I said, I said, that's what I'm interested in, you know, 'cause I, I, what I really wanna do is, you know, is, is make movies, I don't really wanna be a lawyer, you know.  And so, she, you know, she was like, you know--it paid no money but you got to--it was a two year program and you basically they were grooming you to be a studio executive.  So, I, so I ended up, you know, being accepted, I was a few years older than everybody else in the program 'cause a lot of people had been out--had been in the workforce for maybe a year or two but they were coming from all disciplines, business school and some other lawyers and investment bankers and you know, various things.  And, I'd been out of school maybe five years at that point, six years, so I was a little older.  And there were, there were only two classes, they discontinued the program after the sec- after my year, no maybe there was one more class, anyhow it liv- it only lived like two years.  And I think it was three years, anyw- it was short lived (laughter) two or three years, you know. And I--and like I say--I, I,--and my first interview for the program was with a woman named Ally Brecker [ph.], who was--so it must have been I was in the second year, she was in, in the first year and we really hit it off.  She was a lawyer, she was a J.D. master's [degree] from film school and she's like we can laugh--she's one of my oldest friends in the business and right now she's executive vice president of Paramount [Pictures, Los Angeles, California], you know.  We've been, we've come up the ranks together, one of my other, one of the other guys in my, in my class, Doug Belgrad is the co-president of Sony [Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California].  Who else, there were a couple of other most of the people I, I, I've lost track of but there was like a core group of us that really, you know, stuck with it and, and, and look out for each other.
Story_ID: 260944
Speaker 1: I got in and right after I got in they called me I'd got a job as a lawyer for, for, for Paramount Television [Los Angeles, California] and I--my responsibility would have been 'The Arsenio Hall Show', at that time when Arsenio [Hall] was like king of Hollywood and it paid a lot more money (laughter).  And I just, I tell--you know it was just--I said, you know what--and, and--this isn't, it's not where I wanna be, it's not where, you know.  I, I have the opportunity to try and get out of law and, you know, crossover and it's gonna be a little painful (clears throat) this is my time to do it, if I do it now I'm never gonna do it.  So I just said, I'm a go for it and I went and I and I--my first job was as a, a, it was a, as a lawyer but it was great because they were short staffed, I worked for a great guy and he was just like, "Go," you know, "Do."  And so I was able to learn the business side of the business, you know, how the deals are put together and whatever.  And I actually spent a--just ended up spending a year in the legal department (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is where at, at--
Speaker 1: Here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at Columbia Pictures [Culver City, California] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At Columbia, okay.
Story_ID: 260945
Speaker 1: Right after I started, Sony [Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California] bought Columbia [Pictures, Culver City, California] and, you know, Gubers and Peter [sic. Howard Peter Guber] was brought in, it was, you know, the whole face of things kinda changed and the--and a guy named Frank Price was brought in to Columbia Pictures to head it up.  And Frank had--in retrospect Frank was one of the last of the kind of great old style studio bosses.  This was his second time at the helm of Columbia he had also been, he'd been head of Universal Pictures [Universal City, California], he'd been head of Universal Television [Los Angeles, California].  He had movies from 'Gandhi' to 'Ghostbusters' to 'Kramer vs. Kramer', you know, prolific and so we went, so we had this luncheon and I ended up getting seated next to him and so--and Frank's a very, you know--by Hollywood standards, conservative.  You know, always wore a suite and a, you know, and a button down shirt and very, you know, trim and, and, again, by Hollywood standards a bit reserved and so we, you know, we started talking and, and, really hit it off.  He's, you know, great guy and he had a project that he had brought into the studio with him that was based on a book that was set at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was like on a Thursday (laughter) and so at the end he said, "You know what, I'd really love for you to take a look at this book and, you know, just kind of share any thoughts you have about it, 'cause I really like this project a lot."  So, I, that weekend, you know, closed (laughter) myself off in my apartment, read the book twice, made my notes.  And I called him first thing Monday morning and I said, you know, "I had a chance to look at the book over the weekend, you know, whenever I'd love to come talk to you."  So I went up a few days later and told him my thoughts about the story and, you know, and we had a really good session and I--we kept in touch with each other and eventually he brought me up to be his executive assistant and that was my big break.  And so--and for a year he, he just wanted me to learn, you know.  He was at a point in his life where he was--he knew he was creating his, his, I mean creating his legacy was already secure but he was extending it, you know.  And so I went with him to all of his is meetings, I read scripts for him, I was just, you know, kind of was a trouble shot on, you know, issues and most importantly he let me ask any question that I wanted to ask.  So we would sit in his office at the end of the day and I--you know, I said, "Well I don't understand why did you buy that, why didn't you buy that, you know, why are you marketing this movie in this way," you know, and he would answer, you know.  He'd give me--he wanted me to learn, so at the end of that--by the-after about a year there was a, basically a coup at the studio and Guber Peters wanted to bring their guy in Mark Canton from Warner Bros. [Burbank, California] and it was really ugly, it was really messy, it dragged on for months.  It was in all the newspapers and the trades and stuff and, but finally it, it turned out to be real and Frank was, you know, bought out of his contract and I never forget, 'cause I had had my, you know, I was ear to the door when he was in there (laughter), you know, listening to everything and so the day that it was announced, not announced but that, you know, he officially told us, I mean I was just in tears.  Me and his, his, secretary of like thirty years, whatever, you know we were both crying, "It's so unfair, it's not right." And you know he looked at me and he said, "You know what, I love this job.  This job has been, you know, running the studio has been my life I would not leave this job unless they forced me" he (laughter) and he looked at me and he said, "But you know what, it's also like I just won the lottery."  I mean they paid him like an unbelievable amount of money it was just a ridiculous situation, so, at the eleventh hour before he signed his contract he gave, he put me on contract at the studio as a, as a director of creative affairs.  So I have officially transitioned from a lawyer to a studio executive.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year is this?  This is in--
Speaker 1: This is, nnn--this is, '91 [1991], I think it's '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: So, and, you know, and it was, it was a tough situation because I was his girl and as I, and, and, you know, you know how these things are, totally political environment.  So I, I would say it was like I was the lone democrat in the republican white house, I mean, you know, it was all new people and they were all suspect and they didn't want me--it was just, you know (clears throat).  And actually I remember saying to him, I said, "I don't wanna stay I wanna go with you."  'Cause he was starting, you know, his production company again and he said, "You know what, you need to have this credential, you need to have worked at a studio, you need to have been a executive at a major studio that will serve you best, you know, in your life."  And, and he was right, you know, so I was there for like six months and I finally kinda made my peace and gotten through the worst of the, of the, of the political problems.
Story_ID: 260946
Speaker 1: True story--it's a Monday and I'm goin' to the commissary to go to lunch and I see Denzel [Washington] coming out of the TriStar [Pictures, Culver City, California] building 'cause he had a deal there at the time and, you know, I never go up to stars or, certainly at that time because, you know, you never know how they're gonna act and stuff.  And literally it was this voice in my head that said, "Go introduce yourself to him."  So, I walked up to him, I, you know, introduced myself.  I said, "Look, I'm with Columbia [Pictures, Culver City, California] I know you're with Tri-Star, if you ever have any projects you know, you might want to talk about just let me know" and he said, "Great, I'll come over and talk to you tomorrow."  I was like, oh, you know.  So, went to lunch, he went on and after lunch--at the end of lunch I get this call from Doug McHenry, who, Doug McHenry and his partner, who, the late, unfortunate, George Jackson were two of the first big black producers in Hollywood.  They did 'New Jack City' they had started a company for [HistoryMaker] Quincy [Jones] at Warner Bros. [Burbank, California], I mean they were real, you know.  And I'd known Doug since his days at, at, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He was the, one of the best friends of the guy I'd dated forever so Doug used to sleep on the couch and, you know, he was a really good friend.  And so, he called me and said, "I just hooked you up."  I said, "What are you talkin' about?"  He said, "George and I just had lunch with Denzel and he sat down and he said that he had just split up with his manager, his longtime manager, who had also run his production company and that he was looking for someone to run his company and George and I both said we know the perfect person and it was you."  And I said, "That's so wild, you know, I just met the man, you know, an hour ago" (laughter).  And, and, and he said he said the same thing, you know.  So, sure enough the next day I get this phone call, you know, in the afternoon, "Are you gonna be in your office for a few minutes?"  "Yes."  He slips in we spend like an hour and a half talking and turns out like one of his best friends from college had helped me get my job at Avon [Products, New York, New York] 'cause he had gone to school with, with Alison Leland and it was just one of those--and we just had the same vision about what we wanted to do.  And so, you know, a week later he offered me the job, I started working for him, I worked for him for almost five years and, and learned an incredible--we kinda grew--in, in, many ways we kinda grew up--we, we, we--it was a critical time for both of us professionally.  We both grew, you know, when I first started working with him he had his Oscar [Academy Award] for 'Glory,' 'Malcolm [X]' was in the can had not yet been released.  He was a very well respected actor but he wasn't a big movie star yet.  So I was there during that whole period of you know, 'Philadelphia' and '[The] Pelican Brief' and 'Crimson Tide' when he really, you know, became a, a, big, big movie star.  And we--I guess I learned a lot from him just looking at things through the eyes of, of a great actor.  You now, it's about character, it's about story.
Story_ID: 260947
Speaker 1: Our first company production was 'Devil in a Blue Dress' and then we did, we, we--the first thing that I hands-on produced was a documentary ['Hank Aaron: Chasing the Dream'] on Hank Aaron for TBS and I did it with, he and I did it, you know, we produced it with Mike Tollin and Brian Robbins who had subsequently become like huge, this--they were starting out they hadn't done anything, they're like huge TV producers now and movies they just did 'Coach Carter.'  And it was, you know, it was like a great experience it was really Mike and I, you know, day-to-day.  And we interview--anybody who was alive at that moment who of any significance in the history of Major League Baseball, we interviewed.  So, Mickey Mantle, Sandy Koufax, Willie Mays, you know, Bobby Bonds, Stan Musial, I mean, everybody 'cause everybody liked Hank.  And, the piece, you know--I was just proud of it 'cause, I, I, I, thought it turned out great and Hank was proud of it most importantly, I think, because he'd gotten a bad rap in the press about his attitude when he broke the record and the thing that made me--'cause I'm not, I'm not a sports person but then--I'm not a sports person, I don't really follow sports but to me there's nothing like a great sports drama because it's a--it's the individual whatever.  And so the thing that made me wanna do it more than anything else it was a, a Sports Illustrated article about that time in Hank's life and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Off camera noise).
Speaker 1: --when he hit the ball that put him over the record, over Babe Ruth's record, his mother [Estella Aaron], as he's running around the bases his mother immediately ran onto home plate and so when he came around to home plate she embraced him in this bear hug and everybody was like, "Oh, isn't that fabulous, you know, his mother was so proud of her son."  His mother was like, "If they were gonna kill him they were gonna have to kill me first."  And it just, I mean it like brings tears to my eyes, just you know, and I'm like saying to myself, you know, this is what racism in this country is all about.  Here's this man who embodied the American dream, you know, came up from nothing and you know, and is great, and is, is, is, trying to realize, you know, his full potential as a human being and he has to be worried about being killed, you know (emotional) sorry.
Speaker 2: And he received like thousands of threats (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He received more individual mail than--more pieces of mail than any other individual in the history of the [U.S.] Postal Service at that time and most of it was negative.  You know, "Nigger, what makes you think that you are better than Babe Ruth." Or you know, so the last year as he was pursuing the record he had a body guard twenty-four/seven they took his kids and put them, you know, they took him away from his family and kinda brought the daughter home from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and, you know, you know.  So, anyhow, so, and understandably he had been very bitter about all--just, you know, so I think, I know that what--that--through the documentary people started to understand why he had been bitter.  And, it, it's like it, it took a weight off of him, you know, 'cause he's a proud man and he's not, he's not a, a, verbose--I mean he, you know, he would never have true--really ex--explained it fully, you know.  So anyhow--and then, you know, to my surprise we got nominated for an Oscar [Academy Award], we got nominated for an Emmy [Award], we won a Peabody Award, I mean it turned out to be a really, just a great experience all the way around.
Story_ID: 260948
Speaker 1: And then I started up in 'The Preacher's Wife' which is a remake of 'The Bishop's Wife,' which is the Cary Grant, Loretta Young movie.  And, Whitney Houston came on board pretty early on, so I got to know her and her camp and, and, and eventually you know, as Denzel [Washington] was going from movie to movie to movie he was less interested in producing, I was kinda coming into my own as a producer and she was wanting to start a production company so I ended up segueing over and we started a company at Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] together.
Speaker 2: You, you and Whitney Houston?
Speaker 1: (Nodding head) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 260949
Speaker 1: So before we leave Denzel [Washington], you, you were involved in 'The Preacher's Wife'--
Speaker 2: 'Preacher's Wife,' 'Courage Under Fire' and 'Devil in a Blue Dress' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --those are the three that I was involved in that he starred in.
Speaker 1: Now this next series of projects, now you, you went, you, you formed a company with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Partnership, yeah--
Speaker 1: Whitney Houston, right and you all worked on--I know this one--wonderful project that everybody was talkin' about in those days was, was the 'Cinderella' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we did, we did Rodgers and Hammerstein's [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] 'Cinderella.'  Which I'm--was really happy with, really, I mean I think it was so hard, it was really, really (laughter) really hard to do.  And, we were partnered with Craig Zadan and Neil Meron who went on to--they did 'Chicago' the movie.  And all--and Chris Montan who is now head of music for [The Walt] Disney [Company, Burbank, California] worldwide, this really great group and it was so hard.  We just would--at-every day we would be like why is this so hard, but it hadn't been done before, I mean, at the time it was the most expensive two hour movie ever made for television, it was a musical, which you know, and the multicultural casting was-- you know, people--once we got it--th--it, it was hard to get going you now, people didn't quite know if they wanted--so I mean every piece of casting in there is a story, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of the cast members and how were they--
Speaker 2: Well, it's Brandy, Brandy as Cinderella.  Whoopi Goldberg played the queen.  Whitney obviously played the fairy godmother.  Bernadette Peters was the stepmother.  Victor Garber, now of 'Alias' fame played the king.  And, Paolo Montalban was the prince, Jason Alexander and Natalie Desselle and Veanne Cox were the step sisters.  And it was just tough, it was tough it was gru--we, we always had, you know, a day late and a dollar short and, you know, but I think we all knew that we were doing something really special and, and it was, you know, I'm very proud of it.
Speaker 1: I remember it premiered on a Sunday night right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it was big, it was huge, it was big it was a big hit and--I just for me there was a moment I, I, you know, 'cause I had loved, I grew up on the Lesley Ann Warren version of 'Cinderella' and when it--in those days when one waited for something to come on once a year, you know, I was right there at the TV and I just, you know, I kept saying all along what it would have meant to me as a young girl to have had Cinderella be black, huge.  But, it, it was also, I think the--not just the impact it had on children of color but that it had on white kids.  Because--I--there was a moment that we were doing the ballroom scene and a woman came with her two kids, a white woman, with her two kids and the oldest daughter was maybe eight years old and, you know, here we have Brandy in this beautiful dress and you know, gorgeous and this very handsome Paolo in this suit and lovely music and they're dancing around and (unclear) and when we cut the scene the girl, you know, tugged on her mother and she said, "Mommy I wanna be Cinderella, she's so beautiful, I wanna be Cinderella."  I started crying because this girl didn't see--it wasn't black, it wasn't Asian, it was like just, you now, a girl--a fabulous girl, you know.  Just breaking down all those barriers or, I remember I did a radio interview once and this woman came on and she said, you know her son, who's ten or twelve years old didn't wanna watch it 'cause she said, he said, "Cinderella's not black" and you know, she got very upset with him, so she said, and he ended up watching it and at the end it just totally transformed how he looked at things.  Of course she could be black you know.  So yeah, it's a good one.
Story_ID: 260950
Speaker 1: What other projects did you all work on?
Speaker 2: Well, '[The] Princess Diaries,' I mean 'Princess Diaries' was you know, I got--after 'Cinderella' you know, and having been identified with, by that, with what I call wish fulfillment and empowerment product, female wish fulfillment and empowerment product, I got a call one day from one of the agents at William Morris [Agency; William Morris Endeavor Entertainment, Beverly Hills, California], which is my agency and he said, "I just got this manuscript in and it just sounded like you."  And he gave me the two lines, you know, ordinary girl finds out that she's really a European princess and I was like, "Send it over right now, I will read it tonight, that sounds like me."  And I, you know, I was like, ooh, this read--I was like this great.  And, he next day I said, you know, give me to weeks to, to, to sell this thing and, you know, and he did and [The Walt] Disney [Company, Burbank, California] bought it.  It was one of those times where they had--it was a new head of Disney and so--and they had kind of cleaned house on the project so they really needed movies.  It was just one of those things where it kinda--'cause you know movies take like, it can take forever, I mean I have a movie now that I'm hoping to make this year that I've had for fifteen years (clears throat).  But they needed product, they knew while girl--while there's still the general wisdom was still that you could make a movie for boys and girls would come that a movie just for girls wouldn't, wouldn't work at the box office.  Disney had made 'The Parent Trap' a remake of 'The Parent Trap' a couple years before that had done quite well for them and had done a lot of business in DVDs.  So, they figured, this is a good piece of business and, and my mantra with my two executives, my two executives at Disney from the very beginning was, "What if we can get Julie Andrews to play the grandmother and what if we could get Garry Marshall to direct it, wouldn't that be awesome."  And we just--that we--and you know, my agent also represents Julie so we slipped through the book early on and da-da-da, and it all came together
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is we're back to 'Mary Poppins' (laughter).
Speaker 2: Listen, we, we shot, we shot a lot of 'Princes Diaries' on the same sound stage on the lot that Julie had shot 'Mary Poppins' so at the end the company dedicated that stage to her, they had a big ceremony and I'm telling you it was one of those moments where I'm sittin' there and I got Annie's [ph.] on this side and the [Richard M.] Sherman's, you know, who wrote all the, all her songs, are on this side of me.  Dick Van Dyke is hosting, he and Julie are like singing, you know, couple a songs from 'Mary Poppins' and I was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know, I was just like, oh my God the little girl in me is like, this is unbelievable that I'm sitting here.  You know, for me, I'm tellin' you, wearin' that record out, you know, singin' those songs in front of the mirror to sittin' here, it's great, that was the journey.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did the, how did the movie do?
Speaker 2: We did, we did good.  The movie was a hit.
Speaker 1: Right, and there was even a sequel ['The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement'] right?
Speaker 2: We did the sequel this year, which did very well as well.
Story_ID: 260951
Speaker 1: As the producer do you have like final say so over who's in the cast (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the studio does, 'cause they're paying the money.  Unless, well it's, it's, it all--look it all varies according to what the players are, because I mean I say that in most cases, but you know this is--when you have a director like Garry Marshall who, you know, is an A, you know, big time director at the end of the day Garry's gonna get what Garry wants.  So, so he, he would make the final decision on that movie ['The Princess Diaries'].  On, you know, I just finished this movie for Alcon Entertainment [Los Angeles, California] and Warner Bros. [Burbank, California] called, '[The] Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants' it will be out in June, where it was more, this one was more that (clears throat) the director and I pretty much cast the movie but the studio would, you know, had to, had to bless it, you know.  I mean, they would, it was one, we had one where we had a real dis--one role we had a real disagreement about it and it kinda, you know, it played out it was quite the battle and actually won in the end--well they didn't, they kinda caved.  It was--they--well they were--they--but we didn't--it didn't--it's a long story, it's too long for this, but anyhow, it was more of a, you know, workin' together.
Speaker 1: Well how--I hate to ask this 'cause, well I don't 'cause I think we have to ask this, but it's people can learn how to do this by reading and goin' to school but how do you as a producer then, I mean how, how do all these, these, producer comes up with a concept, you know, for a, for the movie and then makes sure it's , it's, it's a, there's a director, an there's cast and all the elements are there is that what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean I look for material that I think will make a good movie, that's scripts, books, I do a lot of books, I like books, magazine articles, original ideas and then I will sell it to a studio.  In this case, I, you know, I have a company [Martin Chase Productions] at [The Walt] Disney [Company, Burbank, California] and I have a first-look deal at Disney which basically means in exchange for paying my overhead they have the right to look, have a first look at whatever I'm doing and then they will--then I find a writer, but again, you know, they need to like the writer, you know, 'cause they're paying the check, but you know usually you know you're--.  So I find the writer, I work with the writer in developing the script, then I look for the director and I work with the director, cast it.  I mean, you know, now I'm doin'--you know, on 'Sisterhood,' I been doin' marketing and publicity.  But you wa- you know but it's a--you know and when I say that it's not me, I mean if you're Jerry Bruckheimer--it's all about, you know, you know, Jerry--and they're very few producers in this business that have that kinda clout but Jerry Bruckheimer is certainly one of them, you know Jerry is making the decisions about the marketing and you know, I'm heavily involved.  But it's not my check--I'm not writin' that check so at the end of the day it's like anything else in like he who, you know, had--hold--has the goal, makes the rules although, you know, as, you know, as I, I have, as I've been doin' this for a while now and my track record is pretty good I'm getting more and more, you know, room.
Speaker 1: So with, with success comes clout (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (No audible response). (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: --and some--but it may not be control but it's clout at least.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you ain't writin' the check, you don't control unless, like I said, unless, you know, you're, you, you're at that, you know, top.
Story_ID: 260952
Speaker 1: Tell us about 'The [Sisterhood of the] Traveling Pants' movie, now that's, that's an intriguing title but I don't know what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I love this movie--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the movie turned out, I'm so, so proud of this movie and it's based on a bestselling book by Ann Brashares.  It'll be out June 3rd [2005].  It's about four girls who have been best friends their entire life and they, for, for the summer they are split up to--they go to different parts of the world and they each have a very important life experience.  One faces death for the first time, one falls in love for the first time, one comes to grip with the death of her mother, one confronts a divorced parent and on the eve of their departure they find a pair of pants in a vintage shop that magically fits all of them perfectly and they decide to share the pants as like a symbol of their friendship.  And, and it--it just--movie turned out great.  I'm really happy.
Story_ID: 260953
Speaker 1: What other projects are you working on that are coming out?
Speaker 2: (Sigh) I mean I've got, you know I always say I'm superstitious so I always say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay--
Speaker 2: --but you know--but I have a television series on Lifetime called '[1-800-]Missing,' we just--we're starting our third season and Vivica [A.] Fox stars in it, Mark Consuelos  that's been, you know, an that's been--I spent, I've spent a lot of time in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] (laughter) the last couple of years launching that show and, and it's, it, I, again I'm proud of it, I think it's a really good show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm doing a, I am doing a, I did a little movie for the Disney Channel called 'The Cheetah Girls' that ended up being this huge big deal, based on a series of books by Hyperion [Books, New York, New York] and it stars Raven [Symone] and two of the girls [Adrienne Bailon and Kiely Williams] from the, this, singing group 3LW, Sabrina Bryan and the soundtrack which [Walt] Disney Records did not want to touch ended up being platinum plus.  So all of a sudden there's a--so we're doing a sequel ['The Cheetah Girls 2'] to that this year, which is exciting 'cause I love 'Cheetah Girls.'  And, a few other things, gotta couple of other movies on the, on the bubble here, puttin' 'em together.
Story_ID: 260954
Speaker 1: You do a lot of script reading and, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (No audible response). (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: --and listening to people call and that sort of thing, how do you, how do you, you know, screen folks or do you, do you do that or do you wanna do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have too, I just don't you know, I don't have, I don't have the resources, you know to--
Speaker 1: (Off camera noise).
Speaker 2: so, you know, lot of it is you, it, it, you start to develop a sense of who, you know, just like they, if they know the gam- because there's so many people in this who don't really understand the business 'cause it's hard to, you know, so you look for people who, who have some kind of track record so at least you know, you know, whether you ultimately like their idea or not that they understand the basics of the business kinda they'd be in the ball park of what you might be looking for, might, what might realistically work.  And then you just always, you know, you just, I'm just always thinking and looking.  But I usually, books are have been very important to me, you know, from 'Devil in a Blue Dress' to '[The] Princess Diaries,' '[The] Cheetah Girls,' 'The Sisterhood [of the Traveling Pants],' because you know what you have and you know what works and what doesn't work.  You know where the story needs to be improved and if you get lost along the way you can go back to it.
Story_ID: 260955
Speaker 1: I've heard people say that there aren't enough black writers in the, in the, in the film industry or on television and just, just kind of a--that seems to be like a big lack, I mean, do, do you have a sense of that?
Speaker 2: No, it's a problem because there's so few black movies made.  I mean, and it's very hard, I mean it, you know, the business has been pretty segregated in a one way--on a one way basis.  It for some reason it was like, you know, black people only did black movies, but white people could do anybody's story.  And, I think it's, it, in the '90s [1990s], you know when there was kind of--a, a, short lived renaissance of black films it was an argument made by a lot of black filmmakers to carve out that territory.  Like you know white people--and you know, true, some of it's true, not, I don't think necessarily totally, but you know, white people can't understand our stories so we need to only tell our stories.  Well the problem is Hollywood makes, traditionally, makes very few black movies every year, this has been a good year, this, nineteen--, you know, two--why do I keep saying nineteen--(laughter) 2005 has been a great year thus far for black movies.  You've had, 'Hitch' which is huge, you've had 'Coach Carter,' you've had, the, the, Ice Cube movie, 'Are We There Yet?' and there's one other movie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Diary of a Mad Black Woman'?
Speaker 2: 'Diary of a Mad Black Woman,' it, you know made for like three, five million dollars.  It's like, you know, so, so--and that's what I'm say--this town at the end of the day is about what makes money, you know, and heretofore most black movies had a, had a ceiling of like $40 million, it was like that was the market.  And so, your budg- so there for--and the assumption which we're still fighting, which 'Hitch' is obviously disproven, is that there's no forum for a black movie which is, which I don't believe but it becomes a self-fulfilling prophesy because if you can only make a movie for $12 million and you know, and it's a very specific story how, how you gonna--and, and they don't put any effort into marketing and distributing it abroad because they don't believe it has potential, how you ever gonna find out.  What I do know, 'cause you know, is that when I travel around the world everybody listens to black music, everywhere, everybody listens to black music, so I can't believe that, that there's no correlation between music and the films, it's just about, you know, what kind of films.
Story_ID: 260956
Speaker 1: One of my, one of my, my, my proteges in this business is a woman named Shonda Rhimes who I am incredibly, incredibly proud of, she was, when she was at [U]SC [University of Southern California School of Cinematic Arts, Los Angeles, California], in graduate school in screen writing she was my intern at Mundy Lane [Entertainment, Los Angeles, California], I got her, her first writing job on 'Hank Aaron[: Chasing the Dream]' I got her her first job in the industry, she's gone on, she wrote the '[Introducing] Dorothy Dandridge' movie for Halle [Berry], she wrote the Britney Spears movie, 'Crossroads.'  I hired her to write '[The] Princess Diaries 2[: Royal Engagement]' and she just became the first black writer to create an hour long network drama that debuted last Sunday, 'Grey's Anatomy' in the slot after 'Desperate Housewives' and did great.  But it's 2005, but it's not a black piece, you know.  And I think what I decided, 'cause, God knows I, I, I was like beating my head against the wall all these incredible African American stories need to be told.  And I was just, I just kept getting like not--'cause there's so few slots, I mean people are like willing, you know, make maybe one and so I finally said, you know what, I'm gonna take a step back and I'm, you know, obviously not going to not make, you know, these movies but I need to build myself up as a producer, I need to get in the mainstream and, so I'm gonna go after somethin' that's you know, ain't about color, it's about business.  So '[The] Princess Diaries' for me was a huge breakthrough.  And it was--and, and frankly it was a breakthrough for, you know, kinda, the business because it ain't a black movie, you know.  And people, when, before, particularly before the movie came out would say, "Well, you know, did you ever think about making it black?"  And I would, you know, I'd be like, why?  The stories about a girl who finds out she's a European princess why would I think about, you know, it's like just daring them to say, well, because you're black, you know , and you know, I lived in the world, we all live in the world like everybody else.  A good story is a good story, you know, I, I don't wanna be (clears throat) limited, you know, nobody's tellin' [Steven] Spielberg or, you know, any of these other guys that they can only do one type of movie, why should I be the limited to that.  And it's been helpful.
Story_ID: 260957
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: You know, I mean it's, it's, it's education.  It's, I, you know, an I, I tell you who I really--obviously 'cause this is part of what I deal with every day that are, I worry about the girls.  Because I think that the images held up to girls, and I don't mean to sound like an old fogey, 'cause you know I'm, but in the music and the vid- you know the sexualization of girls is so damaging to their self-image.  I want our girls, I mean, to be strong and self-confident and, and, and able to love, you now, politically we have huge issues because we been so marginalized where our political clout has been, you know, totally negated, I mean we have a president [President George Walker Bush] now that's been elected twice and, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Without our votes--
Speaker 2: At all, like, you know, he didn't even go to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetin' this last time.  He was like, "I just, you know, I'm not goin'."  So we need to figure out how to play the political game much better.  'Cause otherwise we're, I mean, obviously politics has always been very important for us, to us, I mean you know, part of the voice of any people.  And we, we've just lost power, ground.
Story_ID: 260958
Speaker 1: So I went to a breakfast a couple weeks ago for [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama, I do believe he's the model of the new African American politician in that he's very pragmatic, he's very, he's very practical.  It's not a, it's not a soapbox, you know, what I--the most comforting thing that he said was, he said, "Look I came into the [U.S.] Senate this year with a lot of fanfare and a lot of attention and I needed to take a step back and be about the business of being a junior senator so that I earn my credentials within the body, and I--and so I'm playing a long term game as opposed to a short term game in the spotlight."  That's somebody that's gonna be around.
Story_ID: 260959
Speaker 1: What you just said a few moments ago about what you're doing, you plan to be around too in a similar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, yeah, I mean, it's funny I remember, you know I, and I think you make that choice.  You know, there, it's, it's choices that you make along the way and sometimes you take the harder road, it's not jumpin' over the dollar to get the dime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know and I remember, I remember there was a moment where, you know, it was that point in time where Wesley [Snipes] and Denzel's [Denzel Washington] careers were parallel, they were kinda right at the same point and I remember the day his agent called me up and said, "Wesley just took this money--this movie and he's making more money than Denzel."  And I'm just like, you know, "I don't wanna tell Denzel he's gonna be so upset" and you know.  And, and it wasn't a good movie, but it was, it, and you know, and he looked at me and said, "You know I'm in this for the long haul," you know.  And any career, any career, I mean it's defined by the choices that you make and, yeah, and I can, you know, and it, and it becomes very obvious in this business you can see people who kinda squandered their capital by doing things that didn't--don't' hold up, were kinda piece, pieces of fluff or may be not good.  And you, and you know its harder for us we don't get the chance to fail like other people do, we just don't that's the reality.  And, and not that you aren't going to, you know, stuffs gonna, you know, stuff, I mean, stuff can go wrong for any number of reasons but I think for me I try and set out--I set out aiming for greatness, I may not get there all the time, but hopefully if I aim for greatness (laughter) if I, If I, fall short I'm a fall short at good, you know, as opposed to somethin' I'm embarrassed about.
Story_ID: 258592
Speaker 1: As you were saying, you're, you're in this for the long haul, you're trying to be a, a long term force in the, in the movie business, I guess, right, is what you're really saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what, I just wanna make good movies, at the end of the day, really that's what I care about, so, you know, so, I need, so to the extent that in order to make good movies I need to, you know what I mean, I mean it's not, I'm not, it, it, It's really for me about the, the opportunities to create the product as opposed to, you know, I wanna be, you know, powerful in Hollywood, whatever.  Yes, it, it, you know, whatever (sigh) whatever, influence I have, you know, is just helpful for me to do what I like to--you know, what I wanna do.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know you had--I, I forgot to mention this but I,I read that you were, were kinda disappointed that you didn't get a chance to make a Dorothy Dandridge movie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my biggest disappointment in, since I've been in Hollywood, without doubt.
Speaker 1: Okay, somebody just kinda beat you to the punch on that one right--
Speaker 2: No, they would, no, the lesson--well, I had the book by [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle, which is the definitive biography on Dorothy Dandridge.  Donald and I'd become very close friends, I, you know I just adore him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's a genius.
Speaker 2: --and I set it up with [The Walt] Disney [Company, Burbank, California] and you know, Whitney [Houston] at the time was attached to star in it--I can't tell--I try--I, when I was working with Denzel [Washington], when I first got my hands on the manuscript of the book and I went to TriStar [Pictures, Culver City, California] and I said, "You know, here--this--an, and I--and Halle Berry's the perfect to star in the movie."  I mean she is, she was, you know.  So, but nobody would make a movie with Halle Berry and so, set up with Disney, they, nobody really knew who Dorothy Dandridge was, they didn't really care about her it just didn't, you know, and a movie, historical movie about a black woman did not smell like commercial to anybody.  I went to every studio in town before the whole thing was done and I--so it got put in the turnaround at Disney, I was determined--it was like I was determined to get this movie made.  I so believed in it and final--I was turned down by every studio and during this period I'd heard that, Halle had gotten the HBO--had gotten this book by her manager who actually had come to me to try to sell it to me.  And I did--I had Donald's book so it was like I don't, I don't need it, you know.
Speaker 1: It's another book on, on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --Dorothy Dandridge?
Speaker 2: --but it was like his book--it was just the--it was the manager's book on how, really like on how he was so important to her and whatever.  And Halle ended up optioning that and, you know I know she started HB--doin' HB--but we all--but we were taught because, you know, she wanted to do a feature if she could, but nobody would believe that she could, she was--star--be the, the star of a feature and finally I went to Scott Rudin at Para--was that Paramount [Pictures, Los Angeles, California ]--at the time major, major producer and, who had been interested in the book, initially and I said, "You know, okay lets partner on this," and he said, you now, "Great" and he said, "But Halle Berry cannot star in this 'cause she can't act."  So (clears throat), it took forever to get the deal done and you know, by the time we finally (laughter) got the deal done they, they were in pre-production on the HBO movie.  And so, and she did a fantastic job and it was a role that she was meant to do and I sent her some flowers, you know, afterwards.  And she called me and she was like--you know, 'cause I said, I said, you know, I said, "Just wanna let you know, you, you made Dorothy really proud."  And she said, she said, she's, I , I, really, she's a good--she's good people that Halle and she called me, "You know, you know, I know how hard you tried and so coming from you it means a lot."  And I said, "You know, that's very sincere," so.
Story_ID: 258593
Speaker 1: This question I, we, we, may come back to this project by asking this question but when you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing you wish you had done differently?
Speaker 2: No, I'm telling you Dorothy Dandridge (laughter) is my big--'cause in retrospect I should have gone to HBO, I, you know, 'cause it was like I was determined, I wanted to break the barrier with the feature and, and prove that you know, a movie about a black woman starring a black woman could be commercial, you know what I mean.  Yes there had been, you know, 'What's Love Got to do With It' but it was more contemporary.  I mean the thing is they didn't know who Dorothy Dandridge was; I mean they being, you know, Hollywood.  So it was a hard sell and in retrospect what I should, I should have just gone to HBO myself, early on or, or gone to, you know, one of the networks and done like a big event, you know, musical movie.  But, but I didn't, so.
Speaker 1: Was there any discussion about Lynn Whitfield's Josephine Baker movie ['The Josephine Baker Story'], I mean is she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but that's why HBO did it, I mean that's why HBO was interested because they'd had that big success with Lynn.
Story_ID: 258594
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point what would you consider at this point, and you're still very young by our standards of interviewing people (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --what would, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, you know, by all accounts, you know, I, I'm the first black woman to have my own deal [Martin Chase Productions] at a major studio [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California].  Which, again, when, you know, it's not like I set out to--it just kind of evolved.  I, you know, again, it, but, it 'cause for me at the end of the day I got into this to make movies that I'm proud of and that I think are good and have value.  You know, like I say, I could have stayed practicing law and made a very comfortable living in, you know, (clears throat) so, you know and it's been tough, it hasn't been easy.  (Sigh) So, I just, you know, I, it, it, it, it's funny people say, "Well what part of the process do you like the best?"  Honestly, what I like (laughter) the best is when the movie has turned out great and that, and I know--and peop- and I know that I'm impacting people positively.  You know my little '[The] Cheetah Girls' movie, this movie, turned, you know, is--has ended up becoming like a cult thing I mean it is like by far the most successful movie in the history of the Disney Channel.  These little girls, their mother's tell me they have seen the thang literally like twenty, thirty times, they know like me and 'Mary Poppins,' (laughter) they know every word to every song and every dance step and they love it.  And I think that, I, I, what greater reward is--because it's a good--has good values, has a good message, it's about, you know, friendship and, and, and empowerment and, and going for your dreams and not being afraid.  That's all stuff that's really important to reinforce in everybody.  So if I--and I honestly think, you know, and there's nothing like it for girls of color.  I mean this is like a multicultural, you know, it's Raven [Symone] and one's [Adrienne Bailon] Latin and one's, you know, but, (unclear) you know, girls of color don't have images like this by in large.  So, I'm thrilled that I can, you know, make my contribution.
Story_ID: 258595
Speaker 1: What do your parents think of all this, I mean they, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My dad [Robert Martin] is like seventh heaven (laughter).  It's like he goes to all my premiers he is, he's very proud, I mean they're both, they're very proud of me and they've been incredible supporters (clears throat).  But my dad in particular 'cause he's the movie buff, I mean he just is like, you know it's like--.  And, now my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] was a little bit harder (clears throat) when I first started.  She was like beside herself, she was like, you know--"Given up the--you know you're a lawyer, big firm, big corporation, you making some money here you are Hollywood it's Sodom and Gomorrah, bad, bad values, bad morals, everybody"-- and she just was, it was like she refused, you know, extremely smart woman who would refuse to grasp what it was that I actually did.  And then when, my, you know, products started comin' out she was like she (laughter) she's like, okay so, and now she's very proud.
Story_ID: 258596
Speaker 1: Is this the kind of job that, that, that you're like a one or two success, successes or failures away from, I mean, I mean, if, if you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's tough, you know, yeah--
Speaker 1: --a couple failures would you be, you know, going back to legal practice or something or, or how do you--
Speaker 2: Or certainly, I mean, I don't, it, it's tough, it's always precarious.  I mean it's never, you know, I mean I think, it--there's never any security which is the hard thing about this, there, you know, what I, and, what I've realized is, it-- you know, again, there're about five producers in this business who have some security.  One because they made a ton of money, they, you know, they got more money than, you know, whatever and because they have, you know, over a long period of time a long track record of movies that have made--been successful and made money.  So, and there's never been--a woman in that group.
Speaker 1: Any kind of woman right?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  In that group, I mean there've been some women, you know there're some women who have--some white women who have, you know, who have had some, you know, you know, (unclear) some successes and--some, hey, you know, so on a persona--at this point for me it's just about getting security so that I don't, so that I don't have to, so that I'm okay, so that you don't have to think about, you know, going back to practice law.  I mean it should be, you know, at this point in my career this is; this should be the end game.  This should be until I, you know, decide that I don't wanna do--I mean I've invested enough in this that I, you know, hopefully will be okay.
Story_ID: 258597
Speaker 1: Now is there, is there anything that we have not asked that you think that, that, that you want to address or 'cause I know we can't ask everything, you know in an interview, but is there any, anything that sticks out that you wanna talk about that we haven't talked, asked you?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where do I wanna end up?  What, what, where I want to end up, I tell you my, people--and they laugh at me when I say this, but I want to end up in Italy, in a, in a, in a, in a nice little house in like, you know, Tuscany [Italy] or Umbria [Italy] with, you know, friends and family comin' in and out and you know, little garden and writ- I've always wanted to write a book, a fiction book, I've never (unclear) that's one of the things I haven't done, I like to write a book and you know, go for long walks and cook pasta and, come back, you know, come back here and do something.  You know 'cause I do believe, I do believe that politics are important, that we, you know, that we, we could--I, you know I love politics as a--but I, they're important and, but not, not through all this full-time.
Story_ID: 258598
Speaker 1: Last question we is similar to legacy but a little bit different and it's this, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: In gen- remembered in general, as a person of grace.
Story_ID: 258599
Speaker 1: This is the summer of 2003 it's me and my grandmother, [HistoryMaker] Irma [Josephine] Barber and it was the--our big family reunion, Chicago [Illinois], New Orleans [Louisiana]. And she was honored, she was ninety-nine years old and this was supposed to be a prelude to her big 100th birthday party which she did not live to enjoy and I was very moved.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's this one of my favorite favorite, favorite, photos it's my grandmother when she was nineteen years old and I just thought she looked so beautiful (sigh) I know.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my mother [Beverly Barber Martin] on her wedding day and her with her sister, Barbara [ph.], my aunt and my godmother who was her maid of honor and Barbra, no longer with us, but that was a beautiful picture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It is, it looks--.
Speaker 1: Me, with my, my boyfriend at the time, when I was nominated for an Emmy [Award] for 'Hank Aaron[: Chasing the Dream].'
Speaker 2: This was, I, when I turned forty I gave a huge party in New York [New York] at a, at a art gallery in Soho [New York, New York] and I invited like 250 people there all my friends.  I just wanted to celebrate and thank everybody for their support and friendship over the years so, on the starting left, that's Yaharia Rodriguez [ph.] who's of [Washington] D.C, myself, Charles Simpson [ph.], he's like one of my very, very, very, very, best friends who's a lawyer in New York, Eric Randolph [ph.] who's a doctor in Atlanta [Georgia] and Sheila Hopkins, oh went to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] together adore her and Usan Palsy [ph.] the director.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Usan Palsy right?
Speaker 2: Probably about four years old with my Uncle Aud at the house where I, my maiden aunts took care of me when, when I was little.
Speaker 1: Now how do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: A-U-D.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is from the, the production of Rodgers and Hammerstein's [Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II] 'Cinderella' and it's me trying on the glass, the glass slipper with Jason Alexander and Paolo Montalban the prince.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: These--this is a picture taken at a restaurant in Chicago with my aunts and uncles who I love dearly.  And from the left it's my Uncle Wesley Dillard [ph.] who passed away last year. My mom, to my right is my Aunt Shirley Dillard [ph.] and my Uncle Vaughn Barber [ph.] and they have all been, had a hand in raising me and keeping me going.
Speaker 1: This is me, this past, this past Christmas I went to India and Nepal and when I was a little girl I used to dream that I lived in the Taj Mahal [Agra, India] and I kept a picture of the Taj Mahal on my wall and so (laughter) I was, you know, I was there two and a half weeks and had an amazing trip but I was all about getting this picture of me at the Taj Mahal, again and this was like a girlhood dream come true.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: '[The] Princess Diaries,' Julie Andrews, Garry Marshall, Whitney [Houston], Annie Hathaway [Anne Hathaway] and me.
Speaker 1: Three cute women and I don't know who the other guys are.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Tthis was from the premier, oops (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This a picture I just love, it's from the premier of 'Cinderella' and it was a really, really magical night and I, I think that this picture captures that and it ran actually in Variety and I, I, got a copy so it's Brandy, Whitney, Neil Meron, myself and Craig Zadan, they, they were my producing partners on this--on that movie.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is prior to you birth there.
Speaker 1: Yes this is my parents' wedding, oops, this is my parents' wedding picture and it's my Uncle Vaughn, my grandmother, mom, dad [Robert Martin], his--my grandmother, my paternal grandmother, Mildred Martin [ph.], and my Grandfather Theodore Martin [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay that's the last--.
Speaker 2: And that's my grandmother, Irma Barber and my grandfather, Vaughn Barber who, I never met.
