Story_ID: 71131
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the producer and interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  With me is Scott Stearns, the videographer.  Can you please state your name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Jacob Hudson Carruthers, Jr.  That's, J-A-C-O-B, H-U-D-S-O-N, C-A-R-R-U-T-H-E-R-S, J-R.  That's what you asked me?
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's it.  Can you please give us the date and--today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 13th, 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we?
Speaker 2: You're at my house.
Speaker 1: And the address is?
Speaker 2: It's 7700 South Luella [Avenue], Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February the 15th, 1930.
Story_ID: 71132
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we ask some questions here.  The following questions are People Magazine-ish, as such, but, we always ask these to try to relax you.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried catfish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: It doesn't exist in Chicago [Illinois] (laughs).  Spring in most parts of the world.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Dark green.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Lift up your heads, downtrodden and discouraged Ethiopians, and listen to this marvelous story told of your ancestors who wrought mightily for mankind and built the foundations of civilization true and square in days of old."  Drusilla Dunjee Houston, 1926.
Story_ID: 71133
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your parents' names?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Jacob Hudson Carruthers, Sr.  My mother's name--maiden name was Marguerite Taylor.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are the names of your siblings?
Speaker 2: James; Carol, sister; Riley, a brother; and Andrew, a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When were you born and where?
Speaker 2: I was born on February 15th, 1930, in Dallas, Texas; Dallas County, Texas.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit about your ancestry; your--both sides of the family?  Could you, if you can?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, I have a pretty good genealogy starting with my great-great-grandfather, George Carruthers, who was born in 18, 7 [1827?].  And his son, who is my great-grandfather, was born in 1856.  They were both enslaved.  Then my grandfather, who was born in 1876; my father, who was born in 19, 2 [1902]; and then me.  That's the paternal lineage.
Speaker 1: Excuse me or just--where were they from, I mean, what part of the country did they live in?
Speaker 2: They were from Navarro County in Texas.  My great-great grandfather founded a community that still exists today called Pelham, Texas.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that.
Speaker 2: P-E-L-H-A-M, Texas.  It's located near Waco, Texas.  And the first three generations, my great-great grandfather, my great-grandfather, and my grandfather lived in Pelham all of their lives.  In my father's generation, quite a few of the people in the community left and went other places.  But we still call Pelham the homestead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Pelham [Texas] is an all-black town?
Speaker 2: It's an all-black community.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How big is Pelham?
Speaker 2: Now, I would say they're only about seventy-two people living in Pelham.  At its peak, there were probably two hundred.
Speaker 1: Most of the people were engaged in (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --Farming.
Speaker 1: --farming.
Speaker 2: My--all of my ancestors through my grandfather were farmers.
Story_ID: 71134
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't know much about my mother's side of the family in terms of the longevity of it.  My mother's grandparents came from Alabama.  They were--the--her grandfather was named Henry Taylor.  I don't know what her grandmother's first name was.  But they--after Emancipation, they were Taylors by--my great-grandfather was a tailor by profession, and he took the name Taylor.  I don't know what his name was--his slave name was, but he took the name Taylor, because he was a tailor.  And somewhere in the 1880s, he and his wife moved to Houston, Texas, and established a tailor business; a tailor shop and he accumulated a lot of property and became relatively prosperous.  My grandmother on my mother's side, I don't know anything about her ancestry.
Story_ID: 71135
Speaker 1: Can you tell me then--back on your father's side, can you tell me what your father did for a living and if it was related to occupations that his father or his ancestors had?
Speaker 2: No.  My father left the farm against his father's wishes and went to school.  He worked his way--he went to college.  He worked his way through college by playing in the Negro Baseball League.  But he got his degree from Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia] in theology and became a Methodist minister.  And all of my life he was a Methodist minister.
Speaker 1: What position did he play, and what team did he play for?
Speaker 2: He was a pitcher, and he played for the "Ar-Kansas" [Arkansas] City Oilers.  You would call it Arkansas City, but in those days they called it "Ar-Kansas" City, which is in Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he goes to Gammon Theology Seminary?
Speaker 2: He went to Gammon Theology Seminary in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: G-A-M-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So he's a United Methodist?
Speaker 2: He's a United Methodist.  Now, it's United Methodist.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: At that time, it was just Methodist Episcopal when he joined it.  But later it--united with several branches and became the United Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: And did he start his ministry in Pelham [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No.  He started his ministry in Dallas [Texas].  His first church was in Dallas where I was born.  And he went from there to Denison, Texas; and from there to San Antonio, Texas; and from there to San Angelo, Texas; and from there to Fort Worth [Texas]; and then from there back to Dallas; and then from Dallas he went to San--to San Antonio; and then he went to Lockhart, Texas; and that's where he retired at the age of seventy-two.
Speaker 1: So how many times did you move when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man (laughs).  About eight--about eight times.  That's with his years with the Methodist ministry.
Speaker 1: Well, was it difficult to get adjusted every time you moved?
Speaker 2: Well, after the first--after the trauma of the first one--the big move was San Angelo [Texas].  I started the elementary school in San Angelo and stayed there from '36' [1936] when I started the school until '41' [1941].  And I formed some very, very good friendships, and I really felt abused when we had to move from there.  But after that was over, I didn't have much of a problem, although I always developed friendships in every town that we moved to.
Speaker 1: But did it affect your education any to move around so much?
Speaker 2: No.  I did quite well in school.  I was always, you know, at the top of whatever class I went to.
Story_ID: 71136
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us something about your mother.  What did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a housewife, and she was a lady of much sacrifice.  She lived for us, her children, and she did everything in the world for us; but she was a housewife.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so what was your family like?  I mean, was it a stable family or was it (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and father divorced when I was five, so that--a bit of instability.  And my sister and I stayed with my father until, oh, we were about twelve, thirteen; and then we moved to Houston [Texas] where my mother was living, and we stayed there.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, we were--you said that when your mother and father split up you were five.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when I was five.  And we stayed with my father.
Speaker 2: You stayed with your (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: My father.  Yes (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: That's Carol?
Speaker 1: --for the first--Carol--for the first several years.  And then we went to Houston [Texas] and stayed with my mother, and I finished high school in Houston.  In the meantime, my father had remarried and had two other sons.  My mother remarried, but there were no more children from that marriage.
Story_ID: 71137
Speaker 1: Now, you have some interesting childhood stories.  I know I've heard some of them before, but as--what stories from your--or what stories from your childhood really, really stick out in terms of developing your character as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know so much about character, but one experience that I'll never forget was when I was about twelve and I was on a bus, I got on a bus in Houston, Texas, to go to Sunday school one Sunday morning, and I--at that time, you know, they had segregation, and the custom was that if you got on the bus you could sit in any seat as long as you didn't sit in front of a white person.  So when I got on the bus, there was nobody--no customers on the bus.  When I got on the bus, I sat about the middle of the bus, and I flipped the racial sign to "colored" right in front of me.  And I sat there until we got two or three stops down the way, and a white lady got on, and she came and sat on the same seat that I was sitting on.  And the bus driver told me to move.  And I told him that I was there first.  And he told me I'd better get up.  And I told him I was here first and there were plenty of seats in front.  And so he got up, picked me up and threw me off the bus literally.  That--I don't know how much that shaped my character, but it taught me a lot about the way things were in Texas in the early 1940s.
Speaker 1: Now, there's another story I remember of you with a new pocketknife, I think it was.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Another experience was my father sent me a little pocketknife, a little souvenir.  It wasn't as large as my little finger.  And I had it--I kept it in my pocket all the time because I was very proud of it.  It had a pretty little shell casing.  And I was in--downtown in Houston [Texas], and a policeman walked--a white policeman--walked up to me and said, "Boy, give me that knife out of your pocket."  And I pulled my little knife out.  It wasn't over three inches long.  And took the knife and said, "What you doing with this knife?"  I said, "My father gave it to me."  He said, "Well, I want to tell you what we do with niggers with knives."  And he stuck the--he opened the blade and stuck it in a telephone post and then broke it off and gave it back to me.  And said, "Now, that's the only kind of knife we allowed a nigger to carry."  And that, of course, was another lesson in how things were in the South in those days.
Story_ID: 71138
Speaker 1: Now there's--there're also--I remember too some political lessons that you said you learned in San Antonio [Texas] in some of the communities you stayed in, that you had, like, three major populations, at least where you were (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  San Antonio was the beginning of the West.  Texas is really two states.  At least it was in those days.  We had East Texas that we called West Mississippi, and then West Texas which was more like California.  And that was because of the population distribution.  In East Texas, there was an overwhelming presence of black folks.  And in West Texas, there was an overwhelming presence of Mexicans.  And the black population in West Texas was very, very sparse.  So in San Antonio [Texas], black people were treated relatively well.  The Mexicans were the ones who were treated the way black people generally--were generally treated in the South.  For example, in San Antonio, black people could ride anyplace on the bus they wanted to.  Policemen were relatively courteous to black people, but they were very, very hard on the Mexican population.  So, you know, we learned a lot about population dynamics from that.  Some things--let me tell you something that happened in high school (laughs)--two or three things that happened in high school.  My civics teacher was absence and we had a substitute teacher, and he was trying to continue the lessons that our regular teacher had given us.  And I had written a report on absentee land ownership based on a criticism of what we call shotgun shanties that many, many black people lived in.  They were little shacks that you could see from the front porch to the backyard that had three rooms in them generally.  And they were just in shambles.  And so I wrote a report and found out the people who were the landowners and--I mean, the people who owned those--and criticized them in my report.  And this teacher told me that I should be happy that the Jews built those houses for the Negroes, because if the Jews hadn't built those houses, the Negroes would freeze to death.  And that was the first time I had ever uttered a curse word to a grown person, and I almost got expelled from high school because of that.  The second thing that happened, I was the president of the student council, and one of the teachers abused some of my student council members who were patrolling the halls.  And I decided that the appropriate response to that, after the principal's--after the assistant principal wouldn't intervene, I decided the appropriate response to that was to pull a strike.  The student council was the traffic control agency in the school.  We had about two thousand students in a school that was built for about a thousand people.  And if you didn't have some kind of traffic control, you never would have classes, because when the bell, you know, change of class occurred, you just had a herd of people.  And so, we went on strike, and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: This was at Phyllis Wheatley?
Speaker 2: This is at Phyllis Wheatley High School in Houston, Texas.  And I almost got expelled for that also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the outcome of the strike (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The administration decided to tell the teacher not to interfere with the duties of the student council anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Story_ID: 71139
Speaker 1: Can you remember the names of any grade schools you attended?
Speaker 2: Yeah, B.F. Durrell [Elementary School] in Dallas, Texas, and Blackshear [Elementary School] in San Angelo [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, these are public schools or (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: All of them were public schools.  I went to public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were segregated public schools.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  All my teachers were black from kindergarten through high school, through baccalaureate [Samuel Huston College, San Antonia, Texas, 1950], through the master degree [Texas Southern University, Houston, 1958].  I didn't really have any white teachers.  Well, I went to law school, and I had some white teachers in law school.  And then I--when I worked on my Ph.D. [University of Colorado, 1966], I had white teachers.  But all my teachers were black other than that.
Speaker 1: Now, did--was your father--were your parents, I guess, influential in your education in terms of providing books and information for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother--my mother was very supportive, because her second marriage was rather prosperous.  Her husband was a contractor; my stepfather was a contractor, and they always gave me a good allowance.  But I got fellowships and--I mean, scholarships that paid my tuition, and I worked on campus.  That paid my room and board.  So all they had to do was sent me some spending change every now and then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I guess what I'm getting at is, like, how did you--did they do something to spark your interest in books and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --scholarships?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, my father was an avid reader, and I was around books as a child.  And then I was sickly when I was in elementary school, and the only thing I could do was read.  And so I would do my lesson, and then after I would do my lesson, I would--my dad would buy me books.  And then when I stayed with my mother, she loved to buy me books.  And so reading was my thing, you know.  I read everything I'd get my hands on.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite kinds of books?  Or do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a kid, it was--they were adventure stories, 'The Rover Boys', then I read Mark Twain.  But when I was maybe in the sixth grade, I read 'Huckleberry Finn' and 'Tom Sawyer'.  And I didn't get a book by a black author until I got to high school.  My mother bought W.E.B. Du Bois' 'Dusk of Dawn'.  And that was the first book I ever read by a black author.  And after that, I started trying to find black authors.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite radio program in those days?
Speaker 2: 'Inner Sanctum'.  I don't know if you know anything about that (laughs).  It was a mystery program.  It came on at nine o'clock at night, and I was supposed to be in the bed at nine, but I would turn it on real low (laughs) and listen to it.  And then later on, Randy's [Record Shop] from Tennessee.  That was music--a jazz program [WLAC].
Speaker 1: He was--he's been down here a long time, hasn't he?
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: He was from Gallatin, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Right.  Right.
Story_ID: 71140
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as you--okay.  So tell us something about your high experiences other than that one thing we just heard about?
Speaker 2: High school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: Or mentor in high school that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The principal of the high school, John Caldwell, was a kind of role model for me.  He was man who went off and got a Ph.D., and he was just really the kind of man that I thought I wanted to be when I was in high school.  But my favorite teachers were both women.  One was Miss Rachel Pendleton (ph).  She was my English teacher, and she taught American literature--American literature.  And she taught me more than any teacher that I ran into until I got to graduate school.  She was a wonderful lady.  And the other one was Miss Brooks.  Ms. Pendleton was an older lady, but Ms. Brooks was a young lady and she taught biology and I really learned a lot about nature from Miss Brooks.  Those were my two favorite high school teachers.  In junior high school, at B.F. Durrell in Dallas [Texas], I had a teacher, Miss Bailey.  I don't know her first name, but Ms. Bailey taught me about the Haitian Revolution, and I never will forget that.  So I didn't have her but one semester, but I never will forget Miss Bailey, because the Haitian Revolution became a passion with me, and later on I wrote a book on it.
Story_ID: 71141
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There are a couple of names that I have I think might be of interest to people.  One is, you mentioned once about a--the first African you met.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And then there was something also about all of the people who were named Maceo.  When you find (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --out what--the origin of that name and the significance of it in the black community.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then maybe just in general the overall awareness of the black community-self-in the world (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of itself in the world.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first African--the first person that I knew to be from the continent of Africa was a man that I knew only by the name of Anthony, who came to San Angelo, Texas, in the late 1930s and stayed in--out in the parsonage with us.  And he was a minister, and he came to help Daddy [Jacob Carruthers, Sr.] raise money to build--to build this new church he was working on.  And Anthony organized this fantastic program of African dancing, and none of us had ever seen anything like that.  And Anthony put this show on, and it was just amazing that he taught the sisters in the church how to dance, and they put on headscarves and so forth and so on.  And it was a very, very exciting program.  But the next morning, when I got up to go talk with Anthony, because I'd, during the weeks that he'd stayed with us, I got up every morning to talk with him to learn about Africa, Anthony was gone.  And I had woke my daddy up and I said, "Where's Anthony?"  And Daddy didn't know.  And we never saw Anthony again or the money that Anthony collected for the program.  And so Africa got off to a bad start.  But when I was a freshman in college, I met another African, Manjangua (ph), who was a student along with me and we formed a wonderful friendship, because very few of the other students would associate with him because we had such negative attitudes toward Africa, but Obediah (ph) was my good friend, and I was his good friend and we had a very good relationship for a whole year, the year that he stayed there, then he went away to the theological seminary.  And some very--one of the--there are several things that happened, but one of them that was very interesting was, Obediah came by one day--one morning--one Saturday--and said, "Jake, let's go to the movie--to the cinema."  And I said, "Okay.  Which one do you want to go to?"  There were two Negro movies [theaters] in Austin [Texas].  And I said, "Which one do you want to go to, the Harlem or the Ritz?"  And he said, "No, I want to go to the Majestic, you know, the one Downtown."  I said, "Oh, we can't go there."  And he said, "Nonsense."  And I said, "No.  You see, this is the South, man.  You can't go there."  And he said, "Nonsense."  And he pulled out his passport and showed me that he was a subject of the British Empire and that those laws didn't apply to him.  And so he finally convinced me to go with him, and we went down to the Majestic.  And the woman said, when we got there, she said, "We don't serve colored," and Obediah went into a long dissertation on the fact that he was a subject of the British Empire.  And she kept saying, "We don't serve colored."  And finally she called her manager, and her manager said, "I advise you boys to leave here," and Obediah went into another tirade.  And finally the police came and picked us up and found out we were college boys and took us on back to the campus [Samuel Huston College, Austin, Texas] and told us to never pull stunt like that again.  But anyway, Obediah was a very good friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're at the end of this tape.  So we got to, like, cut here, and then we'll change the tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 71142
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let me ask you about any--can you remember the sights and sounds and smells of your neighborhoods when you were growing up?  What they were like?  What did they look like?  What did they smell like?
Speaker 2: Well, to some extent, San Angelo [Texas], where I really--that's where my childhood was in terms of most of my memory.  It was a very desert-like place out in west--in what they called West Texas.  You had a lot of sand, a lot of cacti, you had a lot of sheep, and I can remember the smell of sheep ranches, because they were all around us; you know, how that kind of smell is.  The flowers--the cactus flowers would bloom at a certain time; the kind of musty smell of mesquite trees.  They had a lot of mesquite trees out there.  And the community was relatively well kept.  The black community there was well-kept.  The houses were fairly neat.  They weren't elaborate houses.  I think there were two relatively wealthy people in town; one was a medical doctor and the other was the undertaker, and they had rather large, elaborate homes; but everybody else had relatively small homes.  In Pelham, [Texas] my daddy [Jacob Carruthers, Sr.] used to send me to the country every summer.  And in Pelham, I remember, you know, the sights of fields of corn and cotton--the cotton plants; I used to have to chop cotton; and the pastures with the cows.  All those smells of the flowers and the manure, I remember all of those very, very vividly.  I used to--when I was too small to do any work on the farm, I used to sit on the fence at the pasture and just watch the cows and horses graze, and then I would mill around with the chickens and the guinea fowls and the ducks, who were out of the yard; and the walnuts.  The walnuts, I like to smell walnuts; the big--the hard black walnut--what do they call them?  I don't know what they call them, but anyway, they're almost impossible to get in to, but they smell real, real good.  And then, of course, bacon (laughs) every morning; wake up to salt bacon.
Speaker 1: You all ate pretty good.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We ate well.  My parent--my grandparents were good farmers.  And in the city, during the Depression out in San Angelo [Texas], sometimes things would get pretty rough, and my grandmother would get a box and send a box of sausage and other kinds of food to us.  And so that helped us out.
Speaker 1: So things were better in Pelham [Texas] than they were (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  Because you could grow--you could--they were almost self-sufficient.  They grew cotton as a cash crop.  They grew corn to grind in the mill and use in various ways.  But in terms of their vegetables, they grew all their vegetables; they grew their meat--their hogs and calves, and chickens.  So they were self-sufficient in terms of, you know, the basics of life; the things that were really valuable in life.
Story_ID: 71143
Speaker 1: So when you were younger, what were your aspirations?  What did you think you were going to do with yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, from about the eighth grade, I wanted to be a lawyer.  My step-grandfather, who was--I loved very, very much--wanted me to be a judge.  He always called me judge, and he wanted me to be a member of the Supreme Court.  You know, he was very impressed with Hugo Black, who was on the Supreme Court at that time, and he wanted me to be a judge.  So he called me judge.  And that sort of, you know, made me start wanting to really be a lawyer, because I loved him so much and I wanted to do what he wanted me to do.  And so I kept that idea of being a lawyer through high school into undergraduate school, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you graduated from Phyllis Wheatley [High School, Houston, Texas] in the forties (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: In 1946.
Speaker 1: --yeah (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --you were thinking about a career of law?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was going to take prelaw in college and then go to law school.  That was my idea.
Story_ID: 71144
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, tell us something about Sam Houston College [Austin, Texas] [now, Huston-Tillotson College].
Speaker 2: Sam Houston was a college--was a--What they call--a historically black college [HBCU].  It was founded in--oh, I don't know--the 1890s or so [1881].  It was a Methodist College, and it was supported by the West Texas Conference, which was an all-black conference in the Methodist Church.  And it was a four-year liberal college.  We had a wonderful president my first year there, a man named Karl Downs, who was a young minister.  And he was very, very dynamic, but he died in my sophomore year, and we all felt so badly, you know, because nobody could come up to him in our estimation.  But it was a good school.  The most famous professor that I had was Dr. J. Leonard Farmer, who was the father of James Farmer of CORE.  And he was an intellectual of the first order.  But, you know, he was much too advanced for us.  I mean, we--he was a philosophy teacher, and we (laughs) didn't really understand him.  He was the oddball, but he was very, very dynamic.  Incidentally, one of his daughter-in-laws sent me a manuscript that he was writing when I was in college in forty--in the forties [1940s].  It's sixteen hundred pages long, and he tried to get it published.  And he was working on it.  It's called 'Stargazer Through Midnight Clouds.'  And he used to tell us he was working on it, and we would always go around the campus and, "I'm writing 'Stargazer Through Midnight Clouds'," you know, teasing.  But she sent me the manuscript a couple of weeks ago, and I've been reading through it.  It's a really, really coincidence that I ran across that.  But it was a good school.  And we, you know, did as well as we could under the circumstances.  But I changed my mind about my junior [year].  I decided I didn't want to go to law school.  I decided I wanted to get a Ph.D. in political science.  And so when I finished Sam Houston [College, Austin, Texas] [1950], I applied to the University of Texas [Austin, Texas] Graduate School and was admitted.  You have to understand what was going on then, though, to bring that into focus.  Nineteen-Fifty [1950], Texas, complete segregation, but a [U.S.] Supreme Court case was about to be heard called Sweatt v. Painter [1950].  A man [Herman Marion Sweatt] from Houston [Texas] had applied for the University of Texas Law School and had been turned down, and that case finally worked its way to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  So a few days after our graduation in 1950, the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruled that [Herman Marion] Sweatt must be admitted to the University of Texas Law School.  And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] knew that I had been admitted to the University of Texas under segregation.  They were going to teach me off campus.  And they asked me whether I would change my mind and go to law school because they wanted someone to be there to be a complement to [Herman Marion] Sweatt.  And so I did.  And two or three other black people enrolled at the University of Texas as the first students in the law school in 1950.  And we had hell.  The day we started classes, they--the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] was out and they had put KKK on every block on the sidewalk leading from the parking lot up to the law school.  And then on the sides of the doors of the main entrance of the law school they had KKK--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: They left a doubt as to what (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: They left--yeah, what they intended.  And the [U.S.] National Guard was out on both sides of the walk to keep the crowds back, because it was packed.  People were out, the press was out, and so forth and so on.  And we had hell that first year.  I dropped out in the second semester, and they flunked [Herman Marion] Sweatt out.  Two of the other people who started, one of my classmates, George Washington, and another man, did finally finish out of that class.  But it was quite a year.
Story_ID: 71145
Speaker 1: Now, why did you drop out?
Speaker 2: Well, I dropped out because I couldn't stand the mess that was going on. It was just--they asked us to use one toilet, for example.  They had two toilets in the law school building.  And the dean (unclear) and asked us to use one toilet and I refused to do that, and therefore, there was a lot of pressure on me.  When they got ready to give the freshman party, the president of the freshman class came up to me and said that they wouldn't--they would give us a hundred dollars if we would stay away from the party and we could do whatever we wanted to with the hundred dollars, and I refused to go along with that.  So the pressure was just great.  We-[Herman Marion] Sweatt was more intimidated than I was.  They broke his family up.  They would call his wife every night and tell her that he was out with white girls partying when he was at the library.  You know, they would--and they threatened us and told us, you know, things would happen.  So I was young, and I didn't have to put up with that kind of stuff, so I just quit and joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 1: So [U.S.] Air Force.  Now, okay.  You were in the Air Force from 1951 to 1952.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened in the [U.S.] Air Force?  Isn't a stint in the Air Force longer than two years (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I signed up for four years, but unfortunately (laughs), I got a tumor and got a medical discharge.
Speaker 1: A tumor?  Is it serious--was it a serious (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: It was serious.  It wasn't--you know, it wasn't life threatening, but it was serious.  It was serious enough for them to agree that I shouldn't be in the [U.S,] Air Force.
Speaker 1: But you didn't mind that?
Speaker 2: Oh, no (laughs).  I--the main reason I joined the [U.S.] Air Force was because unless you were exempted because of being in school, they would draft you into the [U.S.] Army, and that was the Korean War.  And by that time, several of my classmates along the line had gotten killed in Korea.  And I didn't, you know, want to go to Korea.  And I figured that if I joined the Air Force, I wouldn't have to go.  I wasn't going to be a pilot.  So that's why I joined the Air Force, to keep from getting drafted.
Story_ID: 71146
Speaker 1: So by 1953, you are a reporter for the Houston Informer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was the Houston Informer like, and what was going on?
Speaker 2: The Houston Informer was the largest newspaper in Texas, the black newspaper in Texas.  The owner, Carter Wesely, was an attorney who had been disbarred because he sued the sheriff of Harris County [Texas], and they disbarred--the Texas Bar (laughs)--disbarred him, and he started a newspaper.  He was also a consultant on the [U.S. Supreme Court] Brown v. Board of Education [1954] case, on the segregation cases.  He was very brilliant man.  And so, you know, he hired me as a reporter and I (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: His name again?
Speaker 2: Carter Wesely.
Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: W-E-S--W-E-S-E-L-Y.  Wesely.  Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't want to break your train of thought, but, like--so you're working for (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: For the Houston Informer.
Speaker 1: In what capacity did you (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: I was a reporter, and I reported just general news.  I started off his police blotter, which meant I went down and read what the police had done the night before, and I wrote about crime and so forth and so on.  But after six or so months, they elevated me to general news reporter, and I reported on various things like people getting brutalized.  I was a specialist in police brutality.  At the same time, because of that, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] hired me as a brutality investigator.  And so I worked both of those jobs simultaneously for a long time.  One of the cases, the police had hit a man over the head and he had about nineteen stitches in his head.  And I wrote--my most famous story had the headline, "Who's Going to Protect You from the Protectors?"
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you served at the Houston Informer until 1956.
Speaker 2: 'Til 1956.  Right.
Speaker 1: And you were--you applied--what job?  At the post office?
Speaker 2: At the post office.  Right.
Speaker 1: And why did you decide to leave the [Houston] Informer?
Speaker 2: It wasn't enough money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  Carlton Wesely didn't pay.  He paid minimum wage (laughs).  He paid reporters minimum wage, which at that time was a dollar an hour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the U.S. Post Office, in what capacity did you serve?
Speaker 2: A clerk.  I was a distribution clerk at the post office, and I worked there for five years [1956-1961].  In the meantime, I'd finished my requirements for the master's degree [1958] at Texas Southern [University, Houston] in political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did them simultaneously?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I worked at the post office and went to school.
Story_ID: 71147
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Texas Southern [University, Houston]; tell me something about (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Texas Southern University.  We call it--we used--we called it two things.  We used to call it "NUTS":  The "Negro University of Texas."  And we also called it "The Herman Marion Sweatt University."  When the Sweatt case [U.S. Supreme Court Sweatt v. Painter, 1950] started in 1946, there was no law school for black people in Texas or, indeed, in the South.  So the state offered Sweatt what they call an out-of-state tuition; that he could--they would pay his tuition in any school that he could get admitted to--at any law school he could get admitted to.  He turned it down because it was an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] test case.  But after the first round of decisions at the lower court--federal court level, they realized that they had to come up with a law school, the State of Texas did.  And so what the State of Texas did was to buy Houston Junior College for Negroes.  They bought that school from a private religious organization.  And they converted it in to Texas Southern University [1947], and built the law school there.  By the time the case got to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, they had a law school with a law library, they had hired the best black law professors they could find all over the country, and they offered that as a reason not to integrate the University of Texas.  But the Supreme Court, of course, turned them down and ordered them to integrate.  So that's the story of Texas Southern [University].  And after I got out of service, I decided that I would go there.  They had a graduate program in political science, and I went there and got my master's degree in political science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you get your master's degree in 1958.  And I guess from this chronology then, that Texas Southern started around 1950 [1947].  So it was only about eight years old when you got your master's [degree], I guess.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Probably started in 18--in 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  When the case was starting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When the case--when they saw that the case was going badly (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they bought Houston [Junior College for] Negro[es].
Story_ID: 71148
Speaker 1: Now, from Texas Southern [University] you move on to Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Texas] (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) Southern.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: I was work--yeah.  I was working in the post office, and during the Berlin Crisis of 1961, there was a man teaching political science at Prairie View [PVAMU] who was called up from the [U.S. Army] Reserves to go to Europe to deal with the Berlin Crisis.  That left them in the middle of the semester of fall '61' [1961] with no teacher to teach that class.  I had a master's degree in political science, so they got in touch with me and asked me would I take over.  At first I said no because I was so tired of colleges and all that kind of stuff, and I liked the post office 'cause you didn't have to do anything but learn how to throw mail; and, you know, the money was pretty good; so I said no.  But finally, they upped the salary about a thousand dollars more than I was making.  And so I left the post office and went to Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Texas] with the idea that I would stay there for a couple of years and then move on to something else.  By that time, I wanted to be a writer.  And so I went to Prairie View.  And after a year there, I decided that's what I wanted to be, was a college teacher.  And so I, you know, stuck it out and decided to go ahead and get a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: What experiences did you have then that made you decide to become a college teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, in the first place, the students.  They were so--you had such a variety in terms of the faculty there.  You had some faculty members that didn't care about anything except their checks, and therefore, the students got very uneven treatment.  And I really took it seriously, and I got involved in trying to develop the students.  And that was one thing.  And the second thing, I thought that we needed to develop a professional education, because the Negro schools, most of them at that time, were what I considered to be ridiculous in terms of the way they were kow-towing to segregation.  As a matter of fact, while I was at Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University], I got into a whole lot of trouble with the administration, because we decided to boycott the town that we were the major industry of, Hempstead (ph), Texas.  They, you know, it was a typical East Texas town.  They didn't let black people, you know, do anything on an integrated basis.  You couldn't go the restaurants, you had to sit in the crow's nest in the theater, you had to wait on all the white people to get served before--I mean, you know, get service before you could check your groceries out, they wouldn't call you  "Mister" or "Mrs." or "Miss".  They called--you know, they--they would call us "Prof," you now, to get by that.  And so, we made some demands on the town, and the town told us that they were going to stick with the traditions, and they weren't about to listen to a whole lot of foreign colored to come down there, telling them how to change their way of life.  And so we decided to boycott the town and we did and we almost closed it down.  We closed the Buick dealership down, we closed the mechanic down, because we were the major industry of the town.  We almost put the bank in bankruptcy, because we forced the credit union to take the money out of the credit union (sic).  And so, you know, that didn't go (simultaneous)-
Story_ID: 71149
Speaker 1: You were at the core of this troublemaking?
Speaker 2: I was--right.  The--finally, the town [Hempstead, Texas] decided to--the town fathers (laughs) decided to call in a human relations expert to see if they could talk some sense to us.  And so we spent all day one Saturday arguing about it, and neither side would back down.  And so, at the end of the meeting, the guy who was the head of the big powers in the town, the one who owned the Buick dealership that we had so severely hurt, walked up to me and said, "Carruthers, where you from?"  I said, "Well, I was born in Dallas [Texas]."  He said, "Yeah.  Where did you go to school?"  I said, I went to school in various places."  You know, I named off all the places I had gone to school.  He said, "Where did you go to college?"  I said, "I went to college in [Samuel Huston College] Austin."  "Where did you go to graduate school?"  I said, "In Houston at Texas Southern [University]."  He said, "Well, what about when you was in service?"  I said, "I was stationed in San Antonio, Texas, the whole year I was in service."  He said, "You ain't never been out of Texas?"  I said, "No."  He said, "You know what makes me mad?  Men like your president promised us that nigras like you would never come into existence."  And (laughs) I told him, "Well, I hated to disappoint"--but the next morning there--see, that was a Saturday--the next Monday morning, he called me and told me, he said, "Prof Carruthers, I don't believe in anything you fellas are doing.  I--it's against everything that we stand for.  But it's one thing I hate, and that's a race traitor.  Now, if you was to go to Professor Jones's house at midnight tonight, you would see a truck pull up and a television set delivered to his house."  Let me back up a minute.  We published every Monday morning.  We would mimeograph what we called "Uncle Tom's Corner."  And we would have the name of every black person that traded in any of the stores, 'cause we had people all over the little town checking to see who was going in the store.  And if we'd see somebody from the campus going in the store, we would put their name down at the time, and then that Monday morning we would publish all the names of the blacks who had violated the boycott.  And so (laughs) this guy told us that he hated race traitors.  And we were there when professor--when that truck pulled and we had a flash camera--one of those big, ol' flash cameras--and we jumped out (laughs) from under the hedges and took the picture and had it developed and distributed the picture all over the campus of Professor Jones getting his television set at midnight.  So that--what happened, there were nine of us in the core.  From time to time, we would have more faculty members join us out of a faculty of one hundred sixty-five or so.  But there were only nine who stuck it through thick and thin, because administration started putting the pressure on us.  And within a year, they had gotten rid of all of us one way or another.  They couldn't fire us outright, because by that time we had the KPRC, the television people there, and both of the Houston newspapers were there; so they couldn't just outright fire us; but they finally figured out a way to get rid of us.
Story_ID: 71150
Speaker 1: So you were only there a year?
Speaker 2: No.  I was there three years.  That happened--that started in our second year and went through my third year.  I left there in '64' [1964] and went to graduate school [University of Colorado].  And I was supposed to have a leave of absence.  But after I left, they wrote me a letter and told me I didn't have a leave of absence and they were going to fill the position, and that if--if and when I got my terminal degree, I might apply for any vacancy that they may have.  And then they proceeded to--they had a little network that I called the Booker T. Washington Network, where certain presidents would call other presidents and alert them not to hire so and so, and so and so.  So when I got out (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: These were black college presidents.
Speaker 2: The black college presidents.  The guy who was the president, Evans, was very close to the man who was the president at Southern [University] in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  And when I finished, the chair of the political science department at Southern [University] came and tried to recruit me to join her faculty.  And I asked her had she checked with Dr. Clark--Felton [Grandison] Clark, who was the president.  And she said, "Oh, he would be--loved to have you.  Oh, my goodness.  He would love to have you."  I said, "You'd better check with him."  And she said, "Oh, well, I'll write you a letter.  You'll get a letter in a few--in a week or two."  And I haven't heard from her yet.  That was 1966 (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That takes us to University of Colorado.  Now, University of Colorado.  Was it unusual for a black Ph.D. candidate to attend the University of Colorado at Boulder, Colorado?
Speaker 2: Well, I--yeah.  I don't like to join the first stuff--parade.  But I think I was the first black person to get a Ph.D. in political science from Boulder.  There were three of us who started, and they punched out the other two.  It was pretty lonely.  They didn't have many--you could--I could walk around for a week on the campus and not see another black person out of a student body of twenty-five thousand.
Speaker 1: Let's change tapes.
Story_ID: 71151
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're rolling now.  I want to ask you if there's anything outstanding about your career--at the time at University of Colorado when you worked on your Ph.D.  I think when I heard you were a member of a group called "Friends of SNCC" [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] at one point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had a chapter, "Friends of SNCC" in--at the University of Colorado, and I'd joined that for a while.  But I got out because the students who were running it, they later became charter members of SDS [Student Democratic Society].  Incidentally, Amina Fishburne was one.  And they had a point system where you gained points by carrying placards of whatever they decided they wanted to do--march in front of something or another.  And my idea was that, if you're going to have a boycott, if you want to do--is really do something, you needed to boycott and not just simply go out every Saturday and get points.  You needed to really organize a boycott and try to close the places down, if that's really what you were trying to do.  And we had a dispute over that.  And finally, I told them that I wasn't interested in gaining any points.  That wasn't the point (laughs).  The objective was to change the society and not gain points.  And so we had a falling out, and I got out of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].
Speaker 1: So they were actually focusing in on Civil Rights issues in the black community in Denver?  Is that what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Naw (sic).  In Boulder [Colorado].
Speaker 1: In Boulder.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In Boulder.  There were--there might have been twenty-five people-twenty-five black people who lived in Boulder, and they were actually boycotting the churches; I mean, they were marching in front of the churches and all that thing.  They weren't going to Denver [Colorado].  That was the problem.
Story_ID: 71152
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. So can you tell me, basically, how you get a Ph.D. from the University of Colorado?  Is there a method to doing this or was it is just to study hard and do the right thing?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, naw.  No.  What I've found out almost from the first, in order to get a Ph.D., you need to study.  You need to major in getting a Ph.D.  That's what you really need, to study.  And so I studied the process of getting a Ph.D., because there were some students who had been there for five, six years, and who I left there who still didn't have their Ph.D.'s.  And it had nothing to do with their burdens or how much work they did.  It's just the fact that they didn't have the savvy on how to get a Ph.D.  They were actually serious about learning and all that sort of thing, and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: So, you're saying that even though you graduated cum laude from Sam Huston [College], you known--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --generally regarded, this had nothing to do with your receiving (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Naw.  I--you know, you have to be competent, but some of the--some of the people that have Ph.D.'s that I know of, what I would call high-grade morons; and on the other hand, I know a lot of geniuses who couldn't get Ph.D.'s, because getting a Ph.D. is like getting in Sigma Chi or something.  That's a fraternity.  And if you don't do the right things, you're not going to make it.  I don't care how brilliant you are.
Speaker 1: So you were able to negotiate your way through (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  Yes.  I found out the first thing to do is to get in with the secretary of the department.  That's one of the first things to do, because she tells you everything that you really need to know in terms of the personalities and how to deal with them.  If you constitute your committee the wrong way, you're in trouble.  In those days.  Now, things have changed since then.  But in those days, I had a classmate, Jim Wagner (ph)--brilliant, brilliant--who--who didn't really understand that you don't put a--an arch-conservative, anti-communist, and a flaming literal--liberal on your oral committee.  And he did that.  And they spent most of the time in the orals arguing with each other about communism.  And finally, Jim didn't (laughs) pass his orals.  And I left him at the university.
Story_ID: 71153
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you received your--oh, your Ph.D. dissertation was on the theory of nonviolent civil disobedience.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what prompted you to (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, then going back to Hempstead [Texas] and the boycott at Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Texas], when I started thinking about getting this Ph.D., I started thinking about the [Civil Rights] Movement, because to me an education had to relate to what was going on in the world.  And I had been approached by the Nonviolent Civil Disobedience activists in Houston and in Texas in general, and I had explained to them that I couldn't subscribe to nonviolent civil disobedience.  Not that I was courageous or anything, but I just wasn't going to let anybody spit on me and take it.  I'd either run or try to get back at them some kind of way or other, and if anybody hit me, I would either run or try to lay them out.  I just couldn't subscribe to nonviolence.  I mean, I believe in every--the objectives of Civil Rights, but not the method of nonviolence.  So I decided that what I wanted to do was study the theory of nonviolent civil disobedience and see what it was about and see where it fit into the scheme of things.  And so I, you know, went into it by looking at nonviolent civil disobedience as [Mohatma Mohandas] Gandhi practiced it both in South Africa and India; as Luthuli practiced it in South Africa--Chief Luthuli, who was the kind of leader in the '50's [1950s] of the Movement.
Speaker 1: Albert Luthuli.
Speaker 2: Albert Luthuli.  Yes.  And then I looked at some alternatives to nonviolent civil disobedience, such as the suicide burnings of the Buddhist monks in Asia during the war--during the, I guess, the Vietnamese War [Vietnam War].  That was another way of protest.  And then I looked at violence as a way of getting change.  And so I looked at all of the ways and came to the conclusion that nonviolent civil disobedience, if it was absolute, was immoral because it subjected people to danger with no guarantee of any positive results; that nonviolent civil disobedience in South Africa was immoral.  It was working in the United States at that particular time because of certain circumstances.  But if circumstances changed--if all of the United States had been like Mississippi and Louisiana, nonviolent civil disobedience would have been immoral.  And so, you know, that's what I argued in my thesis.
Story_ID: 71154
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So after graduation [University of Colorado, 1966], what did you--did you aspire to become a professor in political science as a university, I guess.  Right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  That was all I could think of.  And since I had been white-listed by the black colleges (laughs), I took a job in a little white college in Kansas--Pittsburgh, Kansas, called Kansas State College, and I was truly the little spook who sat beside the door.  And they did sit me right (laughs)--I was in an office with four people, and they put my desk right by the door.  And that posed a real problem for me because I'm shy (laughs).  And so I put a--I got a partition and put it right in front of the door, and the administration claimed that I was blocking the doorway, and we, you know, didn't get along very well with that.  But they finally moved my desk.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you were shy.  Are you really shy in most (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: I just don't want people gawking at me (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  In that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's what I really meant.
Speaker 1: --in that particular situation being the only black.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The door would--the door was open and people would come by--everybody would come by and look at me as though, you know, they were looking at something in a zoo.  And I got tired of it, and I went and found a partition down in the basement and put the partition up there, and they couldn't see me, you know.  They insisted that they couldn't close the door because of it was a fire hazard.
Story_ID: 71155
Speaker 1: Now, would you--to raise something I asked about earlier, but do you consider yourself a gregarious person or (simultaneous) or what-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I get along with people very well.
Speaker 1: So, in terms of the social dynamic, did you see yourself as a leader of social activities or someone that just participates or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to organize--for example, I organized the Great Books Group when I was, you know, back in Texas.  I was always organizing something, you know.  I was a member of a fraternity, and I tried to get them to organize--tried to get them involved in civic activities, but they--all they wanted to do was party, so I got out of that.  So as long as people were doing something that I thought was, you know, leading to progress, I was very gregarious.  But if all you wanted to do is party, I wasn't too predisposed--although I partied--don't get me wrong.  I partied, but I didn't organize the party, you know (laughs).  You just relax and have a little party.  But you don't spend your organizational talents organizing parties.
Speaker 1: So what was your social life like through college and (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Well, in college I was with a group that is still in existence as a group.  They called us the "Gashouse Gang."  (laughs.)  Oh, my goodness.  You're getting a whole lot of stories now.  The way that happened--the first day that I got to college was a Sunday morning, and some of (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: This is at Sam Huston [College, Austin, Texas]?
Speaker 2: At Sam Huston.  Some of my homeboys, we were sharing a room.  There were four of us in the room.  And the dean told us, when we checked in, that they had a vesper's service--it was a religious college--they were having a vesper service at four p.m., and all students were required to be there.  Somehow or another that just went off the top--across the top of our head.  And so we--about three-thirty, we decided to play some bid whist.  And at four o'clock, we were in the midst of a bid whist game.  At about four thirty, as I was looking at my hand trying to figure out what to bid, a voice behind me said "six, no trump."  And I turned around, it was the president of the college.  And he took us (laughs) to the auditorium, marched us up on the stage, and said "This is the 'Gashouse Gang,' but I promise you they will be in vespers every Sunday from now on."  And that name stuck, "the Gashouse Gang," throughout four years of college.  And even now, when you go back, if there're any of the old people there--still there, they will know--they will remember "the Gashouse Gang" because we were always getting into trouble.  So, you know, we were mischievous and all that sort of thing.  But we were pretty good students.  I mean, we usually set the curve in terms of scholarship.
Story_ID: 71156
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you got married.  Didn't you marry during this period of time before you got out of the University of Colorado?  Or was it afterwards?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--well, I know--I married.  I've been married several times.  I--the first time I married was in 1954, when I was a reporter.  Then I married Trey's mother--my oldest boy's mother in 1959, and she was the one that I was married to at the University of Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  So what about at--now at--in Kansas, you were an advisor to some students that were involved in a (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In my second year--in my--well, at the end of my first year in--as a faculty member at Kansas State College, the black students organized.  That was in 1967.  The black students organized and the white students organized a unit of SDS [Student Democratic Society].  And both groups asked me to be their advisor.  And so I didn't see any harm in that.  You know, that I pretty much agreed with what (laughs) their agendas were anyway.  Well, in 1967, in the September of 1967, the white students decided that they were very unhappy with the administration, and they started protesting against the administration in various ways.  And finally they pulled a general strike and used the newspaper to put forth their views.  And the president took their--took the newspaper away from them and published a sanitized newspaper.  And they took all of the copies of the newspaper, rounded them up, took them out to the middle of the campus and had a big bonfire.  And I walked up on campus in the midst of the bonfire, and one of the students walked and said, "Professor Carruthers, would you throw this paper on the fire?"  And I said, "I think it deserved to be burned."  (laughs)  And I threw it up there.  And I did not know that the chairman of my unit was looking at me out of the window at that time.  And so that resulted in my not getting promoted as I had been promised.  And that finally resulted in my quitting.  In the meantime, the black students had started to protest over Othello, one of the English professors who was teaching a course in Shakespeare; and he didn't treat Othello the way some of the black students thought Othello should have been treated, and one word led to another; and finally, one of the black students hit him in the mouth, and they wanted to expel the black student.  And the black students went on strike.  And so both of those events converged, and I was in the middle of both of them, and so it was a very uncomfortable situation.  I decided the best thing to do was to quit, which I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's 19--that brings us--that's what, 1967?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight (1968).
Speaker 1: Sixty--eight (1968).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That went on in to 1968.
Story_ID: 71157
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, how did you come to Chicago [Illinois]?  I mean, what brought you to Chicago?
Speaker 2: After I resigned from Kansas State College [1968], I was--the semester was still going on, and so my resignation was effective as of May.  I came to Chicago [Illinois] to a conference and told one of my good friends that I was looking for a job because I had just quit my last job, and he said, "Why don't you go to the [Northeastern Illinois University] Center for Inner City Studies?"  I had never heard of it.  And he took by and I met Don Smith, Nancy Arnez, Sonja Stone, and they evidently liked me and they invited me to apply for a position, and I did and it worked.  Up until then, I had never had a job that I kept over five years.  I'd either quit, or quit just before they fired me, or get fired; one or the two.  But somehow or another, I stuck at the Center for Inner City Studies for thirty-two years [1968-2000].
Speaker 1: What in the world is the Center for Inner City Studies?
Speaker 2: Center for Inner City Studies is a community-based educational program that was started in 1966 with a federal grant from the Office of Education to train teachers--experienced teachers--how to teach in inner city schools, because a lot of teachers were having difficulty dealing with inner city students in 19--in the middle 1960s.  By the time I got here in 1968, the thrust had moved just a temporary program to a full-fledged academic program, and they were busy trying to construct the curriculum.  And somehow or another, they decided to make me the chair and give me the responsibility of developing the curriculum.  And so we worked with it, and we came out with what we thought was a pretty good curriculum with an emphasis on Africa and the African connection.  And so what we've been doing to a large extent, even though we have a--we have what you might call cultural pluralism, in the original curriculum we had one track for studying about the problems confronting Hispanics; another track studying about the problems concerning Native Americans; another track, poor whites; and then the main track, blacks.  And pretty soon all of the tracks, except the one on blacks, sort of dwindled down because of lack of demand.  And we basically have been pursuing what would be called an Africana Studies Program for the last, oh, thirty years at least.
Speaker 1: So, just for the record, now, this is a part of Northeastern Illinois University.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Northeastern Illinois University.
Speaker 1: And what's your proximity to the (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: About seventeen miles south of the main campus, which gave us a degree of autonomy, that allowed us to serve the needs of the community without too much interference from the main campus throughout much of the time; although from time to time, someone would get a little concerned about what we were doing, and we had had a little meeting and disagreement, and we finally were able to prevail in the long-run.
Story_ID: 71158
Speaker 1: Now, the--this--there're some interesting, I guess, facts about the site of the Center for Inner City Studies that maybe you can shed a little light on (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When the Center first opened, the [Northeastern Illinois] university rented three floors in a building that is called--that, at that time, was called the Abraham Lincoln Centre.  It had been built around the turn of the century as a [All Souls] Unitarian Church, as I understand, with Frank Lloyd Wright as the architect, who was fired in the middle of the construction and replaced by his cousin [uncle, Jenkin Lloyd Jones], who was the minister of the church.  And therefore, it was a kind of curious architectural wonder.  Some of it was very brilliant to reflecting Frank Lloyd Wright, and some of it was crazy, reflecting (laughs) his cousin.  But the City decided it was a landmark and decided to save it.  And so once we took it over--the university bought it for a token amount of money--we planned to renovate it, keeping the Frank Lloyd Wright features, but making it habitable otherwise.  And so in 1974, we moved out and came back, I think, in 1977 with a renovated building.  The Abraham Lincoln Centre, in the meantime, bought a building--built a building a block away.  And so we, you know, had a good neighbor.
Speaker 1: Well, now that block and--well, the [Abraham Lincoln] Centre itself, you know, has a history of--as a site (unclear) like artistic and cultural activities goes all the way back (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, back to WPA [Works Progress Administration], at least-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and beyond that, I guess, even to (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Once the community changed from white to black somewhere in the '30's [1930s].  It became a center for black cultural artistic and political activities.  W.E.B. du Bois spoke there; Carter G. Woodson did something in the building, I understand; Sinclair Drake and Horace Cayton wrote the study that turned out to be called 'Black Metropolis,' a study of the South Side--blacks of the South Side in Chicago.  And many, many--many, many notable people came into the [Abraham Lincoln] Centre.  Many people in Chicago, the best families in Chicago, sent their children to learn various things, like dance and song, and so forth and so on, at the [Abraham Lincoln] Centre.  And once we took it over as the Center for Inner City Studies, we tried to keep that tradition going.  And today the Center [for Inner City Studies] is still a place where people come in from many walks of life to push their programs.  During our tenure there, we have spawned, and we have incubated, many organizations--organizations that didn't have any space and didn't have any money to get any space.  We gave them some space without any kind of cost and any kind of rent.  And they were able to grow into significant organizations, many of them.  Some of the organizations we associate with were spawned there; for example, the Kemetic Institute, and the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations; NBUF, National Black United Front was really incubated there; the Association of African Historians was incubated there.  So many organizations got their wings at CICS [Center for Inner City Studies].
Story_ID: 71159
Speaker 1: When you arrived in '68' [1968], there's a--well, there's a core I know of people that have been around for the last twenty, twenty-five years that--I mean, now--I mean, like, you just retired and others are retired; can you talk about that core of people that are really (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Most--the people who were really running it when I got there went on to other places over time.  Don Bailey stayed and became the director for twenty or so years.  One of the most outstanding members of the faculty, who, when I came, was a part-time instructor, but who later became a full-time faculty member was Dr. Anderson Thompson, who is one of the most creative minds in our disciplines.  And he's been there ever since.  Let's see, who else was there?  [HM] Carol Adams, who is now the director, was the research director when I first came to the Center [of Inner City Studies], and she was with us for several years, and then she went to other employments, but she came back recently as the director of the Center.  Bob [HM Robert T.] Starks joined the faculty, oh, I would say about 1972 or '73' [1973] we brought him in.  He was a graduate student at the University of Chicago at the time, and he's been there ever since.  We had a brother that came in the same time I came in, Dr. Elkin Sithole from South Africa, who was one of the most creative faculty members we had.  But unfortunately, a few years ago he was killed in a plane crash.
Speaker 1: He was related to the Sitholes from Zimbabwe?
Speaker 2: From Zimbabwe, yes.  And the Sithole Clan, you know, is all over south southern Africa, from Zimbabwe in to South Africa and probably in to Botswana and several of the other states there.  His wife, incidentally, was a Buthelezi.  She was from the clan of Buthelezi, who was the competitor [Mangothuzu Buthulezi] to -
Speaker 1: [President Nelson] Mandela.
Speaker 2: --Mandela.  Nelson Mandela.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, at the Center [for Inner City Studies], like when you got there, then how did things start--I mean, that you--how did you, I guess, react to the people there?  How did they react to you?  I mean was it a (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  It was an exciting time for me, because I was basically from the South and didn't have much experience with Northern--with the northern wing of the movement, and I got--I really got educated.  As I said, Professor [Anderson] Thompson was very creative, gave me a wonderful orientation to the way things were up north.  And so I was learning.  For the first several years, I was learning.  Even though I was putting together the curriculum, I was still learning.  And I had a--we had a very good relationship and have maintained a good relationship through the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're about at the end of this roll, so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 71160
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you this.  So you were in this core group at the [Northeastern Illinois University] Center for Inner City Studies trying to develop a curriculum, and you're trying to make it an African-centered curriculum or at least it evolved to become that.  And why do you--what was unique about, I guess, the situation that made this possible?  Because it didn't happen everywhere.
Speaker 2: Well--yeah.  What we started realizing is that, as long as we were using the methodology of the standard disciplines, sociology, history, political science, economics, and so forth and so on, that we really weren't producing the kind of knowledge that was necessary to change what was happening to African people throughout the world.  So we decided to start looking at things from an African perspective.  And in 1973, we started publishing a journal that we called The Afrocentric World Review.  And what we attempted to do in every issue that we dealt with was to look at it from an African perspective rather than this so-called universal perspective, which was nothing but a term used, to more or less, hide the Eurocentric perspective.  And so we started searching for that.  We didn't have it, and I don't know even if we have it now.  We haven't found it entirely, but we are working toward it.  And that's, you know, what led us to really study at the feet of people like [HM] Yosef ben-Jochannan, Chancellor Williams, and John Henrik Clarke, because we felt that they were unconsciously moving in that direction and provided some guidance for us.   And it is at that point that John Henrik Clarke sort of thrusted Cheikh Anta Diop on us.  He told us about the book 'The African Origins of Civilization' by Cheikh [Anta Diop], insisted that we read it.  And then by 1975, I applied for a sabbatical.  And he helped me plan my sabbatical and insisted that, among other things, that I contact Cheikh Anta Diop in Senegal during my sabbatical, and gave me a letter of introduction.  And I met Cheikh Anta Diop, and he actually changed my whole way of looking at our project, because what--although we were looking for an African-centered perspective, we were looking at history more or less from the way Europeans had begun to study Africa, from the way the African Studies Association was studying Africa by dividing it up into various sections and then dealing with what they would call the African--the true African tradition or the sub-Saharan African perspective.  But Cheikh Anta Diop pointed out was we could not accomplish what we were trying to accomplish unless we focused, first of all, on the Nile Valley in the same sense that European scholarship are focused on the Greco-Roman civilization; that we had to look at a classical African foundation to build from to get the kind of perspective we needed to really take over African history and bring an African perspective to the study of African history.  And so that is where we were in 1975.  We began to discuss that and look at Cheikh Anta Diop's ideas, his methodology.  And one thing he told us was that we had to learn to read the hieroglyphs, as he called it.  And we now call it Medu Neter, the ancient Egyptian language, Kemetic language.  And when we started studying the language, the first thing we found out was that Egypt wasn't what the people called their own country (laughs).  The foreigners called it--some of the foreigners called it Egypt.  The people called it--in everyday language, they called it Kemet, which means the "black city."  In its formal name, according to the people, was Tah Rhee, the two lands.  And so we started using that terminology, and we started studying the language and eventually we formed the Kemetic Institute to specialize in the study of African life, history, and experience from the perspective of a classical Nile Valley African civilization.  It didn't mean that we were studying only Nile Valley civilization, but we were using that as the foundation just as the Europeans used Greece as their foundation.  Ancient Greece is their foundation.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1978 (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: What we--yeah.  We formed the Kemetic Institute first in 1978, and we continued to develop it so that by, oh, I would say, 1981, it was fully formed in the sense that we know it today.
Story_ID: 71161
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said a lot in the last, I think it was five minutes.  I want to backtrack a little bit to (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the--this universal perspective, you know.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: You're saying that the--what most people in the West call the universal perspective is really a Eurocentric (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: It's a Eurocentric perspective.  Right.
Speaker 1: How can you say that that's--is there--I mean, most people are very--they go to school to learn this universal perspective, and you're saying that what they're learning is Eurocentric.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--well, I took three courses in world history.  One in elementary school, one in high school, and one in college.  I took two courses in European history; one in high school and one in college.  And when I reflected on European history and World history, I couldn't tell the difference.  That is, European history was world history.  By the time I got to graduate school and had a seminar on [Georg] Hegel and his philosophy of history, it was inescapable (laughs) that what he was calling universal history was European history; that is, the Europeans' story about everything in the world even though he talked about China, Persia, Iraq, Arabia; so forth and so on, it was the was the Europeans' story about those places, and not their own story.  And so it's, you know--as Thomas Jefferson might say, "self-evident" that it was Eurocentric.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that being ascertained then, how do you determine what's an (African concerns?)?
Speaker 2: That's what we're trying to do.  That's what we've been trying to do for the last twenty-five or so years, is to determine what is an African-centric perspective.
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: What--we start with the notion that Africa is the same principle that [John B.] Russworm and Samuel Cornish started when they started the Freedom's Journal in 1827, the first African-American newspaper in the country, and that is "Let Africa speak for itself."  And so what Cheikh Anta Diop had told us was that we can get ancient Africans to speak for themselves if we read what they wrote, because as one of the articles that I wrote pointed out, they were writing for eternity.  And so when we listened to their voice through what they wrote, then we'll beginning to look at things from the perspective of Africans, who are actually creating and who are actually living the life.  And so that's what we've tried to do, is to let Africa speak for itself, because one thing that I think is apparent, once you get into history, is the whole scope of history from, you know, the period that most historians agree is the beginning of what they call history, from 3100 B.C., all the way up to the present, is that Africans were in the world every minute.  Every minute.  And Africans were experiencing the world every minute.  And so if we stop, you know, looking at the European story, where they will start with China, and then come to Egypt, and then come to Greece, and then come to Rome, they don't even keep, you know, in terms of that, they don't even keep their own story.  I mean, once Caesar--once the Romans arose, Greeks drop out of history (laughs).  Once the Northern Europeans take over, Rome drops out of history, you know.  So (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: I know you (unclear) then it's like a series of heavyweight championships (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  The winner, it's the history of conquest.  And so, what we are trying to do is find another way to look at it, and that is the way--what we are searching for is this African way of looking at it.  And we think here and there we have made some progress.  But we're still--it's a project in process.
Story_ID: 71162
Speaker 1: Now, you said about ten minutes ago, that there were certain key people that called our attention to this project, and you mentioned Dr. [HM] Yosef Ben-Jochannan (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --John Henrik Clarke, and Dr. Chancellor Williams.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can we talk about who these people were?
Speaker 2: Well, Chancellor Williams was a disciple of [William] Leo Hansberry, who started the first courses in African Civilization perhaps in this country, in America.  Certainly, [Melville J.] Herskovits, who started the African Studies Program at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], was at Howard University [Washington D.C.] where [William] Leo Hansberry was taking that.  And even though [Melville J.] Herskovits might have had his own ideas, we can't ignore the fact that what [William Leo] Hansberry was doing gave him some inspiration to establish the discipline of African studies, which emerged out of the depart--I mean the program that he organized in 1948.  In 1958 they organized ASA, the African Studies Association.  So Chancellor Williams was his disciple, and he expanded on it and finally wrote this great work, 'The Destruction of Black Civilization,' (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Chancellor [Williams] was the disciple of [William] Leo Hansberry?
Speaker 2: Of [William] Leo Hansberry.  Right.
Speaker 1: [HM] Yosef ben-Jochannan is perhaps the one who did more to sell black students and black scholars on the Nile Valley than any single person.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that name for me?
Speaker 1: b-E-N, small b-E-N; capital J-O-C-H-A-N-N-A-N.  What--how did I pronounce it?
Speaker 2: No.  You-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The pronunciation is fine (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --curious anyway (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.
Speaker 2: --but (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: He did more to convince African people in this country to take the Nile Valley as a part of the African heritage than any single person.  He didn't quite convince us--that is that little group that we have--he didn't quite convince us.  Cheikh Anta Diop is who convinced us, because we were looking at it, not from the standpoint of general history, but we were looking at it from the standpoint of how we're going to work out a discipline around this.  And Cheikh Anta Diop was the one who really convinced us that we could do it.  And John Henrik Clarke was just the most gracious, fatherly, big brotherly scholar that I know anything about.  He knew everything, he was wisely read, and he had an interest in us that was just unusual for a man of his statute; to be interested in other people.  He promoted what we were doing, he kept up with us, he introduced us to opportunities for this and that and the other.  He was just a grand man who encouraged us to keep on doing what we were doing.  They, [HM Yosef] ben[-Jochannon] and John [Henrik Clarke] were from New York, Harlem.  They were Harlemites.  And John had really studied under the Harlemites, the people who really made a change in the way Africans looked at things.  Even though most of them aren't considered a part of the Harlem Renaissance, they were really the progenitors of the Renaissance; people like Hubert Harrison, Willis [Nathaniel] Huggins, Arthur Schomburg, and so forth and so on.  And John also, John [Henrik] Clarke was a very, very great teacher in telling us that we had to look at the intergenerational development of what we were doing, going all the way back to the 18th century and looking at people like, [Bishop] Richard Allen and David Walker and Henry Highland Garnet, Martin Delaney, and on up to the--and through the 20th century.  So these were our teachers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  These men actually talked about our relationship to the Nile Valley and African history?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  All of them.  All of them.  They talked about it.  John Henry Clarke had this idea of three golden ages that he used to talk about all the time.  And [HM Yosef] ben-Jochannan would talk about the black man on the Nile and his family.  And, of course, Chancellor Williams insisted that we look at the Nile Valley as the source of world history.  So, yeah, they all went back to that classical foundation.
Story_ID: 71163
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, finally, who was Cheikh Anta Diop?
Speaker 2: Cheikh Anta Diop.  Right.  Was a Senegalese (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?  I'm sorry.  Can you spell that?  His name.
Speaker 2: C-H--C-H-E-I-K-H, A-N-T-A, D-I-O-P. I quess I mispronounced his last name.  I think they (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: No.  (Simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: --pronounce it "dee ope."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I say "dee op."
Speaker 1: (unclear)
Speaker 2: --a Senegalese who was born maybe about 18--1923, who studied in the Koranic School as a young boy, but went to Dakar [Senegal]  and got a bachelor's degree in Dakar.  He was so brilliant at the University of Dakar that the French colonizers decided to send him to the Sorbonne as a student in physics and math.  But when he got there, he jumped in the middle of a controversy between Leopold Senghor, who later become the--became the president, the first president of liberated--so-called liberated Senegal; and Aime Cesaire, who was from the French Antilles.  I believe he was from (simultaneous) Martinique-
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --Martinique--over the concept of negritude.   And he jumped in the dispute over whether the Europeans had contributed anything to world development.  And he took the side of [Aime] Cesaire, who said no, and against [Leopold] Senghor, who said yes.  Senghor's famous statement was that the proper understanding of world development is that the Europeans developed reason, and the Africans developed emotion.  And [Cheikh Anta] Diop didn't agree with that way of looking at things.  And so he and Senghor were enemies as long as Senghor was in charge of things.  But [Cheikh Anta] Diop then, once he got that experience, he decided to start to looking for African civilization, because African civilization was almost universally denied as an oxymoron.  And so he stumbled into a class in hieroglyphs, and the students and professors had never seen a black man in a hieroglyphs course.  They wanted to know what he was doing there.  But it turned out that he mastered the hieroglyphs; he mastered Egyptology; he mastered anthropology; and he still got his certificates in physics and math.  But he mastered all of those, just linguistics.  He could read at least a dozen languages.  And he took it as his special project to prove scientifically that the Nile Valley was populated and developed by black African people.  And even in his last major work in 1981, 'Civilization of Barbarism,' he came back and emphasized that that was his great contribution, the scientific proof that Egypt was a black civilization.
Story_ID: 71164
Speaker 1: I know that you've written about the time when Cheikh Anta Diop was challenged on this or challenged others on this point in a United Nations-sponsored UNESCO, [United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization] United States Education Organization; is it (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A UNESCO conference in--held in--was it Cairo?
Speaker 2: Cairo [Egypt].
Speaker 1: --in 1974.
Speaker 2: In Cairo.  Right.  in 1974.  I met him the year after that, and he was very exuberant about it.  In fact, he gave me the mimeograph transcript from that.  It had not been published at that time, and he gave me the mimeograph transcript of it.  But what had happened is, in the earlier '70s' [1970s], UNESCO [United Nations Education, Scientific, and Cultural Organization] had decided to do a general history of Africa, and all of the scholars who were considered to be expert on African history who wanted to be a part of that project volunteered.  Well, this was a mixed group.  Some of them were continental Africans.  Some of them were Europeans from various countries.  And they had all kinds of perspectives about Africa.  And what Cheikh Anta Diop realized before the first volume was published, that everybody had to be schooled on the population of Ancient Egypt, because as far as Cheikh Anta Diop was concerned, that was the beginning of African history.  So he forced UNESCO to call a symposium of the Egyptologists and deal with that question.  And he and his young disciple, Theophile Obenga from the [Republic of] Congo, the state that is now the Democratic Republic of Congo, went there well prepared, and they were so--so well prepared that the argument virtually disappeared and the moderator, at the end of it, said that the other participants were not as well prepared as Professors [Cheik Anta] Diop and Obenga.  They demonstrated that the civilization was an African civilization, the language was an African language, and that the people were an African people.  And even though the Egyptologists as a whole refused to accept the last statement (laughs), and that is that the people were African people, they became rather ridiculous in asserting that they were anything other than African people.  As John Henrik Clarke pointed out, if people from Europe came in--or indeed from Asia--came into Africa and built those pyramids, why didn't they do it in Asia or Africa--or Europe before they (laughs) got there?  We could believe them a little more if they could show us that they built something before they got to Africa.
Speaker 1: So I know person named Jean Vercoutter from [Universite] Sorbonne, I think was (unclear) a major challenger of (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the conference
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So it was on the heels of that conference that you met (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One year later, I met [Cheik Anta] Diop (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: In Senegal.
Speaker 2: --and he was very, very excited about the progress that he felt had been made at that time.  And as it turned out, in 1981 when the first--when the second volume of the 'African World History' project was published, Cheikh Anta Diop had the first article after the introduction, and he dealt with the peopling of ancient Egypt in that article and laid out his thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then you meet with--you're meeting for the first time, and what were your impressions of him (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: I was overwhelmed when I met--I had never met a personality that had captivated me the way he did.  And I've met some people who were pretty--who have tremendous personalities, including John Henrik Clarke, but [Cheik Anta] Diop was just--he just took me over, you know.  I was pretty cocky by then, you know, and I thought I knew something, but [Cheikh Anta] Diop took me over.  And the interesting thing about it is we didn't speak--he doesn't speak--he reads English, but he doesn't speak English well.  And my French speaking is virtually nonexistent.  And so we had a translator, Carlos Moya (ph), who is--which is another story--came in to translate for us.  But just listening to him in French, you know, and picking up a few things that I could remember from my French and looking at the way he looked at me and then his follow-up.  He didn't me (unclear)--if he hadn't heard from me in two months, he would write me a note and say "Professor, where are you?" (laughs)  "I have not heard from you," you know.  And he kept pushing his theory and his point that you must, you must, you must.  And so, it was (simultaneous)-
Story_ID: 71165
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So--but what did you do about it when you got back to (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: When I got back, I started talking with my colleagues and told them that we had to take another look at the Nile Valley.  And we talked about it for quite some time.  It took me a little time to really convince them that this was the way to go.  But--but I started teaching.  I had a course called African Civilization, and it was a three-hour course once a week.  And I--after I started reading the glyphs myself in a very rudimentary fashion, I got the book--the textbooks and the dictionary and so forth and so on--and started learning it on my own, and then finally went over to the University of Chicago and took a few courses (unclear) Institute.  But what I did to really learn it was to teach it.  So I would read a chapter and then at class time, I would take an hour out of my course in African Civilization and teach glyphs to the students.  And that sort of turned some people on, you know, once we got into the glyphs and started listening to the ancient Africans speak for themselves.  As we were reading what they were saying, it started snowballing, and we got a little group together who wanted to continue that kind of study.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the next step once you got the--you had some interested people?
Speaker 2: Then we decided to form the Kemetic Institute, and we had some inaugural lectures on the Kemetic Institute.  I think we had about six lectures.  I delivered the first three, and [A. Josef] Ben Levi, I think, delivered one, and Cliff Washington delivered one and Anderson Thompson delivered one.  And we then were ready for the (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Amasio Josef Ben Levi (ph).  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Amasio [Josef] Ben Levi, who was very good at languages.  And then we started the Kemetic Institute, and then we went on this--before that, we went to the--on this large trip to West Africa, to East Africa, to the Sudan, and then finally to Egypt.  And we were in there by then.
Speaker 1: This puts us about 1977?
Speaker 2: This is '77' [1977], and then '78' [1978] we formally organized the Kemetic Institute.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Kemetic Institute for us?
Speaker 2: K-E-M-E-T-I-C Institute.  The Kemetic comes from--the name comes from the common name that the people called the country, Kemet.  They called it Kemet, which translates out literally as "The Black City."  They called the country "The Black City."   And as I said earlier, the formal name was Tah Rhee, the two lands; something like the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the Kemetic Institute was formed in 1978.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 71166
Speaker 1: And what was the community's reaction to something like the Kemetic Institute and (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: --I know one thing the people would say--one thing that I know I was taught school was that Egypt was part of the Middle East or something, and, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --people, it's hard for people to imagine them being part of Africa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, Larry, yeah, we ran into all kinds of--at one time, the McArthur Foundation contacted us and asked us to submit a proposal, because they wanted to give us a grant to teach about Africa.  They heard about our work and teaching about Africa.   And we wrote a pretty elaborate proposal.  And after about three or four months, they contacted us and told us that they loved the proposal, they were ready to give us the grant, but they wanted us to change the claim that ancient Egypt was black, and we refused to do it, and so we didn't get the grant.  But we had all kinds of opposition.  The Rockefeller Fund called us in and asked us to consider the fact that what we were proposing was ghettoizing knowledge, and they were afraid that that would do more damage to race relations than good.  So (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Ghettoizing.  What do they mean by that?
Speaker 2: Said it was segregated.  That white people wouldn't listen to what we were talking about, and therefore, we were ghettoizing. We were isolating ourselves, and we're going to wipe away all the progress that has been made since Brown versus Board of Education, you know.  So, yeah, we had a lot of opposition, and we had opposition from some black scouts also.  But we stuck by it, and now we have people as we say, "hotepping" all over the place.  Hotep is the greeting (laughs) that the ancient Egyptians used.  It means peace.  And so we have people all over the United States and all over Africa and all over the Caribbean now "hotepping" (laughs).  So I think we made a little progress.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  If you can get a spelling on hotep, and then we can change (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What's hotep's spelling?
Speaker 2: H-O-T-E-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good.
Speaker 2: Hotep.
Speaker 1: Let's switch.
Story_ID: 71167
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Dr. Carruthers, we're in the early '80s' [1980s] now, I guess--in the--I guess, late '70s' [1970s] or early '80s' [1980s].
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Kemetic Institute is starting.  What kind of people were involved with Kemetic Institute?  I mean (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you had some students, I know, at Northeastern [Illinois University] who were involved (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --but, Kemetic Institute is really not, as I understand it, a part of Northeastern [Illinois University] as such.
Speaker 2: No, it's not.  It's a not-for-profit entity that specializes in research more or less after the [Cheikh Anta] Diopian methodology.  Also, the distribution of education; that is, we try to teach teachers and other people who we feel will teach others about the perspectives that we are developing.  The people--there're two people at the beginning that are very important: [A. Josef] Ben Levi, that I mentioned earlier; and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Now what's his background?  Can you tell us something about [A. Josef] Ben Levi?
Speaker 2: [A. Josef] Ben Levi was raised in the Black Hebrew organization [Black Hebrew Israelites].  His parents were members of the Black Hebrews.  And he was raised that way, but he came into the Center [for Inner City Studies] in 1976, I believe, to get a Master's degree in Inner City Studies.  And somehow or another, he really took to what we were doing with Nile Valley studies, and he was very, very good a languages.  I mean, he picked--I taught a course--the course that I taught, he learned it as well as I knew it.  And so we began to develop and he became a member of--a charter member of the Kemetic Institute.  And then we were joined by a young lady, who at that time was named Deidre Wimby.  Now she's called Rekhety Jones.  She's married since that time.  She was a--she got a bachelor's degree in linguistics from the University of Illinois in Chicago.  And when we met her, she had just been accepted as a student in Egyptology at the Oriental Institute [University of Chicago].  And she, also, was excellent in languages.  And that was the core that we were looking for, because it was a language-based kind of research thrust that we were developing.  And so the three of us really went to work in terms of studying and developing the language, and the other people who came into the Kemetic Institute at that time, including Roosevelt Roberts, who came in an earlier period, 'bout '79' [1979], we taught them the glyphs.  We had courses on Saturdays where we would teach.  And then I took one of my courses at the university and converted it into a course in Medu Neter, as we call hieroglyphs, and I taught it for credit, and some of the students, who were in our programs, got in the course.  And so pretty soon we had a half dozen people.  Charles Grantham got in in the early '80s' [1980s], and we started expanding, and we got a group of about twenty people eventually and began to do the research.  We did cultural programs like--we had a program we called "A Day in Kemet," which--where we dramatized the expulsion of the Hyksos, a group of people who had invaded the Nile Valley, oh, somewhere around 1700 B.C., and who had taken over the country--had intimidated the country for a hundred years or so, and we dramatize the victory over those invaders when they were expelled.  And we began to think about publications.  During that time, we took the essays--the speeches that I had done, delivered at the inauguration of the Kemetic Institute, and we finally turned them into a book called 'Essays in Ancient Egyptian Studies.'
Story_ID: 71168
Speaker 1: And we also began to concentrate in our study tours, which had started in 1977, on the study of the Nile Valley.  We had--we devised study programs to--so that the students could concentrate on looking for specific historical information as went into the antiquities in the Nile Valley.  And we held conferences, and then we started the Temple of the African Community of Chicago.  We kind of launched that, even though they had separate organizations, we launched that because we realized that a spiritual dimension was necessary to fully conquer the Nile Valley. And then joining with [HM] Maulana Karenga and the Institute of Positive Education, we called a conference in 1984 called at that time, 'The Ancient Egyptian Studies Conference.'  The background on that:  In 1978, about the time we were forming the Kemetic Institute, we started working with Ivan van Sertima, who had just written 'They Came Before'--what was that.  'They Came Before Columbus'?  Is that the name of the book?  He had just written that.  And he heard about the work we were doing, and he wanted to form a--he wanted to establish a journal.  And so he came to Chicago and asked us would we help him establish a journal for the study of what he was called pre-Columbian history.  During the ensuing encounter, we convinced him that that was absurd to have a journal on pre-Columbian history.  And we talked him into having a journal on African civilization, the 'Journal for the Study of African Civilizations.'  Well, that then sort of worked in to what we were talking about, because what we insisted on when we dealt with [Ivan] van Sertima, that in order to support a journal that is truly significant, you have to have a scholarly association to feed the knowledge into the journal.  And he disagreed with that and we kind of fell out.  But we kept that idea that we needed an association.  And on that basis, when [HM] Maulana Karenga contacted us and asked us how to go about studying ancient Nile Valley, because he had also heard about the work we were doing, we told him that what we needed to do was form an association.  So we got together and called the first African Studies Conference--Committee--Ancient Egyptian Studies Conference.  And at that conference, we formed ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations].
Story_ID: 71169
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the same [HM] Maulana Karenga that started Kwanzaa?
Speaker 2: That started Kwanzaa.  Right.  [HM] Maulana Karenga.  And at that--what we did was to take--from that conference, we had several individuals that we thought were crucial for starting the association:  Dr. [HM Yosef] Ben-Jochannan, Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke, Dr. John [G.] Jackson, Dr. [HM] Asa Hilliard, and Dr. Leonard Jefferies.  The seven of us got together while the conference was going on and laid out the general format for the association.  Later, Professor [John G.] Jackson withdrew.  And so that left six of us.  But in 1985, as a follow-up to the conference, we formerly introduced a constitution that became the constitution of the ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations].  And we got (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Now, Jackson, he was--you were very close to [Dr.] John [G.] Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  John Jackson stayed in my house for a year.  When he left New York and came to Chicago, he was a guest in my house for the first year that he was here.  And so, yeah, we were quite close.
Speaker 1: And I think you took him on his first trip to (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In--yeah (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We took the group--the study group took him to Africa--on his first trip to Africa in 1977.  And when we got back from that trip, that's when he started staying with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why would he, as a member of the--one of the members of the Old Harlem History Club of a (blind society?)--why did he decide to quit the--did--was it a conscious decision to leave or he just stopped?
Speaker 2: He--no.  He just--he didn't--he didn't--it was a personality conflict with some of the people who were involved.
Speaker 1: Oh. And he just decided that it would be better for him not to be involved in it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So the organization was formed then in 1984 (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Los Angeles [California].  And the second conference was held here in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: --in 1985.  But I think before we get to that, you take another trip to Kenya (unclear)-
Speaker 1: (Coughs).  Excuse me.
Story_ID: 71170
Speaker 1: --in '75' [1975], another trip to Egypt--right--in '85' [1985].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In 1985--actually, it was after the conference.  It was--so we had the conference I March.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in December of '85' [1985], I joined with Dr. [HM Yosef] Ben-Jochannan in conducting a study tour to Kemet, to the Nile Valley, that started in December of '85' [1985] and extended in to January of '86' [1986].
Speaker 1: We're kind of going backgrounds here.  Let's go back to the conference then in March if '85' [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now what--there you were elected (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: I was (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: --as president of the organization?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was elected as the president.  We adopted a constitution, and I was elected as the president.  [HM] Asa Hilliard was elected as--no [HM] Maulana Karenga was elected as the first vice president.  [HM] Asa Hilliard was elected as the second vice president.  Leonard Jeffries was elected as the secretary.  Nzingha--no.  Yeah.  Nzingha Ratibisha at that time--she is now Nzingha Ratibisha Heru-- was elected as the treasurer.  And that was the organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the '85' [1985] conference here in Chicago, what was participation like (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think we must have had about four hundred people.  We had it at Chicago State University.  We had it in the, what at that time, I guess, it was a convention center, the--what is that big red building?
Speaker 1: The Student Center.
Speaker 2: Not the present Student Center.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: That red building (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --just as you come in from 95th Street.
Speaker 1: I can't think of the name of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can't think of the name of it right now.  But we had it--we held it there.  It was a three-day conference, and it was well--very well attended and very well received.  And the spirit was high.  And that's when we really got the attention of all of the people in the black studies movement about what we were doing at that conference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this--and it continues on to New York in '86' [1986].
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].  In New York in '86' [1986] we had a tremendous turnout in Harlem.  We had the meeting in Harlem, and at that meeting, we decided that we were going to hold the next conference in Kemet, in the Nile Valley itself.  And we started making preparations for that.  By that time, we had organized into four study commissions, and we introduced agendas for each one of those commissions and then we started organizing to go to Kemet and take it over.
Speaker 1: Was there regional representation of ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We have--we had--originally we had four regions:  The Eastern Region, the Midwestern Region, the Southern Region, and the Western Region.  Later, we divided the Eastern and Southern regions up and added a Mid-Atlantic Region.  So now, we have five regions.  And we had sufficient representation from each one of those regions.  On our board, we have two representations from each one of the regions on the national board.  And each one of the regions is organized in a similar format to the national organization.
Story_ID: 71171
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it seems to me that the idea of going to Kemet or Egypt for--to hold a conference is a tremendous undertaking.  I mean, I don't--I can't think of many organizations that can pull something like that off in their third year of existence.  And what was it like for you all?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was very--I was sort of reluctant about it as the president of the organization because I realized how much work was involved in it, because I'd been doing study tours for several years by then, and I really was reluctant about it.  But there was such a popular demand for it.  I mean, we had five or six hundred people in the [ASCAC] association at that time who were just demanding that they wanted to go and hold that conference there and take over--and announce to the world that we were there to take over African--the African antiquity.  So we had to run to catch up with the masses, so to speak.  It was a lot of work, tremendous work.  But, as it turned out, we had one thousand people who went.  And that was really something, because the airlines just went crazy trying to get us all there, and it interfered with the Hajj.  In North Africa--the Africans in North Africa were trying to get to Mecca (laughs), and we were trying to get to Egypt.  And we had all kinds of horrors.  They had to--one of our groups we two days late getting there because the Hajj prevailed in northern Nigeria.  I believe.  The Hajj, who blew us away (laughs), it went and took over the plane and went on to the Hajj.  So it was--but it was exciting.  And when we all got there, the interesting thing, Aswan is in what they call Egyptian Nubia; and therefore, the people look just like us.  When we got off the plane, the people who were--you know, in the town, looked like us.  And they started calling us American Nubis.  And they started taking various members into their homes and making them put on galabeyas and the galas [ph.] and so forth and so on.  So, you know, if we'd kept our mouths shut, they wouldn't have known the difference (laughs).  But it was a wonderful, wonderful conference.  It excited the non-African world though.  The Egyptians who--many of whom do not considered themselves Africans, were very curious, and eventually the equivalent to the FBI in Egypt decided that they were going to record everything we did and watch everything we did and inspect all of our boxes and materials, and so forth and so on.  So we had the Egyptian FBI all over the place.
Story_ID: 71172
Speaker 1: Now where was--could you tell me something about the setting?  You know, where was this conference held?  And what kind of a hall did you use and what was--how long was the conference?
Speaker 2: Well, we were there about a week.  The conference proper was, maybe, four days.  And--but we were in Aswan about a week, and then we took study tours to the other parts of Egypt.  We took every available hotel room in Aswan, which is a pretty nice sized town.  We held it, the conference, at the Nubian Cultural Center, and it, you know, it was very, very African oriented.  And so we didn't have any problems, you know, in terms of the building that we used, the space that we used.  And the people who were directing the Nubian Cultural Center, in fact, gave us a show one evening during the conference, and it worked out very well.  And we were all over Aswan.  It was just a real celebration.
Speaker 1: So you visited a lot of the major sites there too as well (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: --a thousand, a group of a thousand.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And we had several breakdowns.  We had people going south and people going north.  And we--you know, I think one of our study tours was designed for fourteen days; another was designed for ten days; and another was designed for seven days.  And so, you know, various people saw various things.  Some of them saw practically everything that they have on the regular Antiquities Tour.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What decisions were made at the conference?  What major decisions were made there?
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  I don't know if I can remember.
Speaker 1: I know of one time there's a call for--I think you even called for an African World History (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Oh.  Yeah.  But that was--actually, we introduced the proposal for an African World History project in 1986 at--in New York.  And we tried to demonstrate at the conference in Aswan.  In '87' [1987], we tried to demonstrate the necessity of that project and how we could go about doing it.  And, yeah, you were right, that--yeah, that was a great decision.  We adopted the African World history project as an association-wide project.
Speaker 1: And by that time--let's backtrack a minute to give people an idea how--by that time, you were published widely (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know about widely (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: By that time, I had published a little thing called 'Science and Oppression,' which somehow or another was very widely distributed.  It was libraries would write me and ask me for it.  And then I had published 'Essays in Ancient Egyptian Studies,' which was inaugural lectures at the Kemetic Institute.  And I had also published the 'Irritated Genie,' which is what I was working on when [Cheikh Anta] Diop changed my mind and changed my whole course in 'Essay on the Haitian Revolution.'  And I published several articles.
Story_ID: 71173
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--all right.  So what happens after 1987?  After the conference in '87' [1987]?
Speaker 2: Well, after that, we were in business.  The association was on the map.  We were internationally recognized, and it was time for me to start thinking about changing horses; that is, changing the leadership, because that wasn't my cup of tea anyway, administration.  So I began to look for somebody to take over the association.  It took me three years to find somebody--took us three years to find somebody to take it over.  But in 1990, I gave up the presidency and Nzingha [Ratabisha Heru] took it over as the president. She's been president ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as the popularity of the idea that ancient African civilization began in Egypt started to grow (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I know opposition began to grow as well.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about maybe where this opposition came from and (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, starting in 18--1987, all this was not directly a result of what we were doing, Allan Bloom at the University of Chicago published a book called 'The Closing of the American Mind.'  And that was a criticism of black studies and an indictment against black studies as ruining the educational and academic tradition in the United States.  And that galvanized a number of people who were familiar with what we are doing to start criticizing us, including Diane Ravitch, who is now Bush's something or another in education; including Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., and any number of other intellectuals who look at what we were doing and said it was traitorous and it was destroying the unity of the country, and besides that it was ghettoized education and so forth and so on.  And that didn't work too well in terms of alienating the people we were communicating with and that were joining us.  And so they decided to pull in some African-American intellectuals who were defenders of Western civilization, and that got [HM] Henry Louis Gates and Cornel West involved.  And the first tactic that they tried to pull on us was accusing us of anti-Semitism.  In the New York Times, they wrote two or three articles, albeit, articles that took a whole page.  Skip Gate's article was a whole page in the op-ed section, and it had the Star of David in the center of the page.  And he accused our movement of being anti-Semitic.  And then Cornel West echoed it by talking about, you know, this narrow nationalism that was really admirable in on but unfortunate in another way, 'cause we didn't understand that we had to be connected with all the other liberation movements and so forth and so on.  So we got into what became to be called the Afrocentric Wars.  Later on, Mary Lefkowitz wrote the book 'Not Out Of Africa.'  And then somebody in England, Steven Howe wrote a book about Afrocentricism.  And all of them tried to give us hell, blow us out of the water.  But it didn't really affect our constituency.  That's the thing.  It, in fact, it was like when the press attacked Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] back in the '60s' [1960s] when Stokely said, "Black Power," the U.S. President decided they were going to destroy him as a leader, and they started talking about how horrendous this idea of Black Power was.  And the more they tried to destroy him, the larger the following came and the more black people started talking about Black Power.  Black people never would have taken it up on their own.  Once the press started trying to undermine it, people started talking about Black Power.  Black Power.  And that's the same thing that happened in this situation.
Speaker 1: How do you account for that?
Speaker 2: Well, part of it is just simply if all of those people--if all of those white people are against it, it must be something right about it.  That's one part of it.  But the other is I think the way we approached it.  We didn't approach it in terms of, you know, argumentation and trying to preach against white people and so forth and so on.  We just presented the facts as we saw them from an African perspective.  We just laid the case out and articulated it, and we did not restrict our association to scholars.  That's one thing that made ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] different from most of the associations that deal with this because they all, scholarly academic associations where people are trying to get tenure and all that sort of thing, and we opened up the association for everybody.  We have plumbers, nurses, janitors, what have you, in our association; and we don't really make any distinctions between what kind of degree you have and so forth and so on.  If you can do the research, if you're interested enough to stick by the research, I mean, you are in just like everybody else.
Story_ID: 71174
Speaker 1: There's a question I--I've always--like, what do the--I know people watching this in the future probably want to know--what are the--what do the white academics say about the population of ancient Kemet?  I'm sure that we can go to Egypt now and find black people in Egypt, from Cairo all (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --but what do they--what do they say about the ancient population?  What are they--are they saying they were not black people or what are they saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They're trying to say they are not black people.  A lot of them are trying to--still trying to say that.  The younger ones nowadays have a tendency to say we don't know what the race of the ancient Egyptians were.  And some of them, like, Frank Yurco, who is the Egyptologist at the Field Museum, takes the position that it was a mixed population and some of them were black and some of them were brown and some of them were "yella".  And, you know, I have argued with Frank through the years, and I said, "Yeah, that's true of the black population on the south side of Chicago.  Some of us are black, some of us are brown, some of us are "yella".  I mean, you know, so what are you saying?  They--the reason we are called black here now at this particular time is because we are suspected of or accused of having African ancestry, what they call black African ancestry.  The same is true of the ancient Egyptians.  They were of African ancestry, and therefore, their color--their color spectrum went all the way from light to dark.  And that's all we're saying, that we didn't invent race.  Race, as we know it today, is a fabrication.  The way race as affected the world over the last two hundred years was manufactured.  Race did not exist until certain European thinkers decided that they were going to impose a racial configuration on the world.  And so they invented race, and they used what we can now call the race card for two hundred years against certain people.  Now--just take one example--now that Johnnie Cochran has learned how to use the race card, they want to say, "Let's not play this race game any mo'."  (laughs)  And what we are saying is that, "Well, when we establish that the ancient Egyptians were black, then we can stop using the race card.  But until then, until we recover what we've lost because of that, we gonna say when the race game is over."  That's my--that's not necessarily ASCAC's [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] position, but that's my position.
Speaker 1: Are we towards the end of this?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.  We should change.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71175
Speaker 1: We're rolling again.  So, I'm going to ask you about some other activities other than Kemetic Institute and ask (unclear) involved in over the past few years.  One is the first Pan-African Conference on reparations in 1993 in Abuja, Nigeria.  Now, what was that about?
Speaker 2: Well, I was invited to be a delegate by the OAU [Organization of African Unity] to that conference.  OAU convened the first Pan-African Conference on reparations in 1993.  Actually they had been working on that idea for a couple of years, and I was one of the people in the United States that they invited to become a delegate, and so I attended that conference.  And what it was, was just simply a declaration on the part of Continental Africans that they were also a part of the demand for reparations.  You had representatives not only from the United States and about thirty-five African countries, but also from the Caribbean and from England and from France by black populations in those areas.  And we had a three-day meeting and it was very, very productive.  It wasn't really focused on just reparations as its monetary payments, it was also focused on an idea that one of the organizers of the conference put forth Chinweizu [Ibekwe], who wrote, among other things, 'The West, and the Rest of Us'-Chinweizu [Ibekwe] put forth the idea that what reparations is really about is repairing the damaged African personality and the damaged African cultures.  And so that was a great part of the focus, was on that.  And it was a very inspiring conference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who was the host of that conference (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The Nigerian government hosted it--to be-OAU [Organization of African Unity] convened it.  And the Nigerian government hosted it, but who financed it was Moshood Abiola, who at that time was a candidate for the presidency of Nigeria, but who won the election but was immediately arrested.  The election was canceled, and he stayed in prison until shortly before he died.  He got out--he died when the United States exercised a whole lot of pressure on the Nigerian government to release him.  And while he was being interviewed on his first day out of prison, he died of a heart attack, I guess.
Speaker 1: That's what they, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 71176
Speaker 1: Now, 1995 you attended the Golden Anniversary of the Fifth Pan-African Congress in Manchester, England.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the Fifth Pan-African Congress convened in Manchester, England.  It was financed by a man named Ras Makonnen, who was originally from Guyana.  But it was organized by George Padmore and C.L.R. [Cyril Lionel Robert] James and W.E.B. Du Bois.  Also in attendance was Amy (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Ashwood?
Speaker 2: --Ashwood Garvey, Jomo Kenyatta, and Kwame Nkrumah were at that conference.  So the community, one of the organizations in Manchester, England, made up of Africans and Caribbean--people of Caribbean descent, organized a celebration on the fiftieth anniversary of that event, and we were invited along with John Henrik Clarke and Leonard Jeffries.  We were invited to attend that conference and make presentations.  That was a very, very invigorating experience.
Story_ID: 71177
Speaker 1: Now, in '96' [1996] you were--you were in a craw--no--at the Tenth Commemoration of Cheikh Anta Diop.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Cheikh Anta Diop died in February, as I recall, of 1986.  And after his death, the University of Dakar was changed--the name of the University of Dakar was changed to the University of Cheikh Anta Diop.  That's very interesting, because when I first went to the University of Dakar looking for him, I could hardly find him.  No one wanted to talk about him.  His name was almost taboo.  They talked about him in whispers.  But then ten years, you know, ten years after his death, they had decided that the university should be named for him.  So they had a commemoration of the tenth year after his death, and it was an international conference.  There must have been about seven hundred fifty delegates to it, and we all made presentations and it was a grand affair.  And the thing that was good about it was there were so many young Africans from the States as well as from the continent who were Diopians and who'd pledged themselves to carry out [Cheikh Anta] Diop's ideas.  And that was really, you know, heartening.
Speaker 1: He's had a tremendous impact on a lot of people since he first (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 71178
Speaker 1: --as far--  Now, and you were also in Accra, Ghana.  I think that was at ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] that year (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had our national conference in '96' [1996] in Accra, Ghana, and [President] Jerry Rawlings was a sort of gracious host, although at the last minute he couldn't come to the conference.  He sent his vice-president there to welcome us.  But it was a good conference, because it put us on the continental in an organizational sense.
Speaker 1: It's the first time the organization gathered in West Africa?
Speaker 2: In West Africa.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  1997, are you attending the African Association (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Of Political Science.
Speaker 1: --of political science in Durban, South Africa.
Speaker 2: In Durban, South Africa, and that was really something.  The African Association of Political Science is primarily concerned with getting, as I interpret the activities, it's primarily concerned with getting money to fund political campaigns in the various African countries.  And I came and brought a message from Cheikh Anta Diop's perspective.  And the reaction was really something.  Half of them accused me of romanticizing (laughs) Africa's history and telling me that the reality was quite different.  And I said, "Well, I'm quite--you know, I'm aware of what the reality is now.  But I'm talking about the possibilities, you know."  We had a big argument.  But one brother got up from Uganda and he gave them hell.  He says, "You haven't even read Cheikh Anta Diop."  Said, "Don't you open your mouth again about this until you read Cheikh Anta Diop."  And so that's where--about where it ended.
Story_ID: 71179
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '98' [1998], you were at the University of Zululand (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Vulindlela, South Africa.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: What was going on there?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a brother there, [Jabulani] Maphalala who was the only black professor in the department of history in the University of Zululand.  And furthermore, the white members of the department were all Boers; you know, of Boer ancestry.  And he finally talked them into (laughs) sending for me to come over and help him out.  And we had a battle royal over there.  He read his paper in Zulu (laughs), and that really upset them.  And then I talked about European history, and that further upset them.  But it was an interesting battle.
Speaker 1: Is this the same trip where you were--they were--it was the anniversary of the Battle of Blood River?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's what they were studying.  That's what--the concentration was on the difference between the way Africans looked at the Battle of Blood River, and the way the Europeans looked at the Battle of Blood River, which occurred in 1838 when the Boers were taking over some of the Zulu country, and this big battle occurred.  And according to the Boers, they wiped out the savages who were trying to wipe them out.  And the African interpretation has a different story altogether.
Speaker 1: Now, Blood River (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The--because they claim that when the battle was over, the river was red.  The Europeans claimed that.  The Boers claim that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Two-thousand, you attended the Centennial of the first Pan-African Conference in London.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first Pan-African Conference in 1900, organized by Henry Sylvester Williams, occurred in London in July, and there were delegates from several African colonies, as well as the Caribbean and the United States.  W.E.B. Du Bois attended that.  He wasn't the organizer, but he attended it.  And that sort of set the era of Pan-Africanism off and made the 20th century the century of Pan-Africanism.  And we thought it was quite appropriate to have a celebration of that 100th anniversary, and so we went to London, where the conference was held--where the first conference was held a hundred years earlier and had a very, very stimulating conference.
Story_ID: 71180
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 2001, you were--you attended the--a Sylvester Williams Symposium in St. Augustine, Trinidad.
Speaker 2: Trinidad, yeah.  That's where Sylvester Williams was from.  He was a Trinidadian, and the scholars in Trinidad decided at the University of the West Indies, as they call it, decided that they wanted to celebrate, you know, his contribution to history.  And so they invited me among others to come and make a presentation there.  And it was a very good celebration, you know, because what we got a chance to do was look at the history of about six Caribbean countries:  Guyana, Jamaica, (pause)--where's Joey Bishop from?  Not Joey.
Speaker 1: Bishop, but Maurice Bishop?
Speaker 2: Maurice Bishop.  Grenada.
Speaker 1: Grenada, yeah, and Barbados.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Each--the historians from each one of those places came in and did  history of those five. And that was very, very informative.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I know we can--there are so many conferences you've attended here, we can't get all of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.
Story_ID: 71181
Speaker 1: And--but this is an example.  I think I wanted to maybe talk about your published--your publications and the works that you're trying to help be published.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: 'MDW NTR [Medu Neter]: Divine Speech' [1995] is one of your books.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: 'Intellectual Warfare.' [1999].
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: That came out in the past five years.  Third World Press published that.  The--and the 'African World History Project' [2002] talks about the importance of that.  Could you talk about those publications?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, 'Medu Neter' [MDW NTR] is my response the concept of African philosophy.  There'd be a debate over the last thirty years about whether tradition Africa had philosophy.  And one group, headed by Cheikh Anta Diop and Theophile Obenga claimed that all philosophy started in Africa.  And another group who have degrees in philosophy, who're much younger, claim that philosophy didn't come to Africa until they got their degrees in philosophy (laughs) in the 1970s.  And I thought I'd sort of make a comment on that, and what I point out, that the real--what we ought to start doing is realizing that philosophy is a Europe discipline.  It does not mean that Africa did not have deep thought and deep thinkers.  It just meant that philosophy is so, so Eurocentric in terms of its origin, in terms of its meaning, in terms of the issues it dealt with, that what we ought to do is go back and try to find out what African deep thought was on its own terms and not try to equate it with European philosophy.  And I set forth the thesis that the term that the Africans used in the Nile Valley for deep thought was 'MDW NTR[Medu Neter]: Divine Speech.'  And then I'd go into the text to try to, you know, substantiate that thesis.  In 'Intellectual Warfare,' it's just simply a collection of essays that began to make sense to me as war; that is, what we really have is an intellectual war and have had for the last two centuries at least, where the European philosophers have more or less agree that Africa had no history; that if it did, it was grossly inferior to European history, etcetera, etcetera.  And that has been responded to since the time of Richard Allen in the 18th century on through Prince Hall and David Walker and Martin Delany, and on into our times with people like Chancellor Williams, and so for and so on, that there is--that Africa is--has had a history, and that the Europeans have tried to destroy.  And that's what I call the intellectual warfare.  And I tried to point out the course that that intellectual warfare took, and hopefully, the course that we can take to solve the--end the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 'The African World History Project.'
Speaker 2: 'The African World History Project.'  Growing out of our association with Cheikh Anta Diop, we saw the need for an Africa world history, which is a step beyond the general history of Africa.  The general history of Africa does not have a historiographical framework.  It's just contributions from various people who have studied Africa from various perspectives.  And so what we thought is that we need an African perspective, a historiography--a historiographical framework that would be based upon African perspectives, and that we would write a history of the world based on that.  And so in 1997, we published what we call 'The Preliminary Challenge,' which was a group of essays that, more or less, provoke--were intended to provoke the African scholar, the community, to start thinking seriously about history outside of the confines of Eurocentric historiography.  And now we are about to publish the first volume of that, the volume on historiography.  We have about thirteen contributors, and we think we will finally break through.  What we hope to wind up with is about nine volumes on the African way of looking at the past.  And we hope that that will become the basis of an African curriculum, which will replace and which will supplement the various Africana studies programs, and also be available to instruct the entire world about the truth of the African past and where Africa fits into the world and to demonstrate that African has always been in the world, even though history blanks Africa out from time to time.
Story_ID: 71182
Speaker 1: Now, one of your projects with the Kemetic Institute is teaching about Africa.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the scope of that, and what you're trying to do with the (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We--our thesis is that--contrary to what a lot of people think--is that the real problem is not that too little is thought about Africa, but that what is taught about Africa is wrong, whether it's a little or a whole lot.  In some cases, a great deal is taught about Africa, but it's wrong.  And so what we are trying to do is show that--that Africa, there is a proper way to include Africa in the curriculum.  And we've been doing that now since 1985.  And it's a pretty popular program in terms of generations of teachers coming and going.  And we can see a lot of effects of it in the way students who are exposed to those teachers react to history.
Story_ID: 71183
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could you talk about--I know that you are a priest in the Temple of the African Community of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And you're also--you're very loved in the community that is actually an African community of Chicago (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --which is largely all the black people in Chicago [Illinois], but more specifically, I guess, the Pan-African nationalists in the city in a sense, and you are called upon to conduct wedding ceremonies, and rites of--different rites of passage (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --for people, to speak at funerals (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --and--why do you think that we need an African Temple, and what is the--what is the charge of an African priest in this context?
Speaker 2: Well, we--what we are trying to do is offer an African--authentic African mode of worship, because African religion, if you want to use that word to talk about the spiritual systems throughout Africa, have been so debased in the--in the discourse of the world, that African people are afraid to even admit (laughs) that they are attached to an African traditional religion.  You know, there are some exceptions; Asaderia (ph.) in Cuba and here and there.  But--so we thought that it was necessary to provide an alternative for Africans who have been joining the Christians, the Jews, and the Muslims and the Buddhists that, you know, there's an African alternative to all of that, and there are some African alternatives to all that.  And so we decided to do that.  African people need a spiritual community besides spiritually enrichment itself, besides the growth of the spirit of the God individual.  You also need temples to bring you in the world, to promote you to adulthood, to promote you to community responsibility, to marry you, to bring families together, to create families, and to elevate you to elderhood, and then to take you into the next world.  I mean, that's why a lot of people join the church, because they need that.  They need to have those sanctions as they go through the stages of life.  And so we do that.  We bring children into the world by naming ceremonies, we have rites of passage for people coming from teenage to adulthood, we have investiture for people who are taking office, we have promotion to elderhood, and then we have the initiation into eternity when people die.  And that has been quite successful in terms of our community here in Chicago, and more and more people from outside of Chicago asking us how--you know, how to do that.  It's an alternative--we, even within the African range, it's an alternative to voodoo; it's an alternative to the West Africa religions, the Dogons and the Ghanaian and the Ashanti, and so forth and so on.  We feel that this one, the one that we practice, is based on the ancient Egyptian spiritual system, and we feel it's quite appropriate for most people in the African world today, because it's an urban-based system of spirituality.  So that's pretty much what we have in mind.
Story_ID: 71184
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about--I know your own family are very close, and you have family reunions twice a year (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --communion once every two years.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And, you know, can you talk about your own family and your philosophy--I know--and your immediate family.
Speaker 2: Well, my--yeah.  The--you know, as I said, Pelham [Texas] is our homestead.  And every two years we go to Pelham and, you know, there're thousands of us now, various branches.  They have--actually--originally there were about eight families that my great-great-grandfather invited into the community.  And those families established the community and intermarried.  And so I have cousins all over (laughs) the country, you know.  But we do--we get together every two years, and we go back to Pelham and we celebrate and we talk about the history of Pelham, and we're trying to put a history together.  Part of that has been published in the Navarro County Historical Society's publication.  But we are now trying to expand the publication.  One of my cousins did a master's thesis on the Pelham community.  And I'm trying to get some of my nieces to really do a thorough history and put it into the context of what was going on in the United States at--between 1865 and the early 1940s; so that's one thing.  Of my immediate family; my wife Ife, I've been married to her since 1986.  We've been knowing each other a long time.  Her daughter is my daughter, and, you know, I have one son, who is a biological son, and then I have two adopted sons.  They are all grown and out of the house and everything.  My oldest, my biological son, is a music producer; one of them works for United Airlines as a--some kind of manager of something; and another one has gone into landscaping, Darnell, the youngest boy, has gone into landscaping; Tawa, our daughter, is working with the public school administration here in Chicago.  And so, you know, we do things.  My wife is my life now.  She has been with me every step of the way since we hooked up, and she's a wonderful woman who makes it much easier for me to do what I do.
Story_ID: 71185
Speaker 1: Could you ever imagine, I guess, in the 1950s that you would be doing what you're doing today?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.  I--what I thought in the 1950s was, at the beginning before I, you know--well, in the late '40s' [1940s], I thought that I would be a Supreme Court judge, perhaps the first Negro Supreme Court judge; and I would then straighten the Constitution out and make certain that the Fourteenth Amendment would be abided by.  That's what I thought when I was--up until I was a junior in college.  And then when I changed to political science, I decided that I was going to discover the true political science and use that knowledge to make this world the way it ought to be.  But in terms of what I'm doing now, I had no idea, you know.  I know even in your immediate family you're really not so much of an oddball because you got Asa Hilliard, your first cousin (simultaneous) (unclear)-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --is into African studies.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Margaret [Lee](simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Is in African--continental African studies, yeah.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, no, it's--we've--and I've always--my father was, you know, my hero.  He was--he didn't--I mean, the very fact that this first African that I told you about, Anthony, stayed in our house, was interesting because a lot of people wouldn't let Anthony stay in their house.  In those days, Africans were considered to be cannibals and so forth and so on in much of our communities.  So Daddy has always been a kind of inspiration of guide and a moral barometer for me.
Speaker 2: I know your father and your uncle--your father lived quite a long time.
Speaker 1: He was eighty-eight when he died.  And my uncle is still--his brother--his younger sibling--is still alive at ninety-four; Uncle Clyde.  Yeah.  And he's--Unc Clyde is quite a character himself.
Story_ID: 71186
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have--what would--what do you think your legacy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether I have a legacy.  What I think we--if there's one idea that I think that's important that we have concentrated on, is the intergenerational transmission of knowledge.  And what we've been trying to do was to recover, not so much reduce knowledge, but to recover knowledge that has been lost and to distribute that knowledge in such a way that will go from generation and generation.  One of the weaknesses, as I look back on the history over the last twenty years of the ideas that we are dealing with, is the fact that most times, the Movement or the program died with that generation that created it and the next generation had to start all over again.  And that was more or less true in our case.  When the black students revolted, we were not really ready for them, because that tradition had been disrupted, and we had to go back and scuffle to find Carter G. Woodson and Martin Delany, and so forth and so on.  And what we hope that we accomplish in my generation is that that intergenerational story will be smoothly handed down to the next generation and the next generation and the next generation, and so forth and so on.  So that's what I would like to think that we have worked on.
Speaker 1: What do you see--who do you--I mean, what people on the horizon do you see really (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Well, you.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Would be good to change tape.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 71187
Speaker 1: So I was asking you about the future as you see it in terms of this cultural thrust of this study.  What do you see in the future or who do you see as a future?
Speaker 2: Well, just in terms of the immediate group that we've been working with, the members of the Kemetic Institute, most of them are have generation or hold generation under me and therefore, that's the first group of juniors.  They include--and people outside the Kemetic Institution like--Institute like Kobi Kambon, who used to be named Joe Baldwin; [HM] Conrad Worrill; the--and then we have some youngsters coming along that are really tough; Mario Beatty (ph) and his wife, Belethia Beatty (ph), who got their Ph.D.s in '96' [1996], as I recall, from Temple [University, Pennsylvania], and they are tough.  They are really topflight minds and committed to work.  And Mario especially is already an expert on Nile Valley civilization and its significance for the rest of African history.  And then we have Greg Carr, who got his Ph.D. at the same time from Temple [University, Pennsylvania] that they did, who is just a fantastic mind--creative mind, who is not only dealing with the history of the 19th century in this country, but he's also dealing with translating that to the hip-hop generation; and that's something we really need to do, because you take an old, antiquarian like me, I can't even hear what the hip-hoppers are saying (laughs), I mean.  My daughter tried to translate that stuff for me, but that's worse than Japanese as far as I'm concerned (laughs).  But Greg [Carr] is doing a great job in terms of meeting.  We have a brother who is working on a Ph.D. at Howard [University, Washington D.C.]; Avasar (ph), who has also quite a mind.  I have him working on a project to tell me the relevance of psychology for African scholars.  And he's really doing some interesting work.  He's written me about six papers dealing with various sub-questions.  So, you know--and we have that, whose names escape me right now--but we have a whole generation of youngster; people who are in their late twenties now, who I think are going to be what we call the staff--"the elderstaff," the next generation that we can lean in, who will, you know, protect us and carry on our project.  And that's what we're trying--and on top of that, especially with Mario Beatty, he realizes the inner-generational process, and he has already started training his students.  He's teaching at Morris Brown [College, Georgia], and he has his freshmen, sophomores, and so forth and so on, studying this Nile Valley civilization, and relating it to whatever else they are interested in, he sends them to conferences, and sometimes if they are coming this way, he'll make them call me and we'll talk things over.  So, that's really, you know, that's really inspiring to me.
Story_ID: 71188
Speaker 1: What's the essential--is there one core of teaching, I guess--I mean, there's a--I guess I want to (unclear) this.  What is the essential value of Nile Valley civilization beyond the fact that it's black, I mean, for us?  What core of teaching can we get out of this or anybody else can get out of this that studies Nile Valley civilization?  What meaning is there for people in 2002 or in the 21st century?
Speaker 2: Well, I often say that--that we are--we--our criticism of Western civilization goes beyond the criticism of white supremacy, which is an aspect of western civilization; that there is much more to it that needs to be examined and perhaps eliminated or modified.  I'm particularly concerned with the aggressiveness and the concept of conquest that is involved in the western thinkers, including, you know, people like Karl Marx.  And what I think we can explore in terms of Nile Valley civilization is, even though they had wars and even though they had criminals and all of the other warts and blemishes that, you know, peoples have, why there was such a de-emphasis or lack emphasis on warfare for the first, oh, fifteen hundred years of Kemetic civilization.  Why there was such a de-emphasis on aggression.  Why there was so much emphasis on the, what they call, the good laws.  So, much emphasis on giving bread to the hungry.  I mean, you know, tomb autobiography after tomb autobiography after tomb autobiography; I gave bread to the hungry, I gave a boat to those who didn't have any transportation; etcetera, etcetera.  Very little emphasis on warfare, even though we know they engaged in warfare; heavy emphasis on "macht", the idea of justice, the idea of righteousness, the idea of truth and so forth and so on.  And then maybe, until the Hyksos invasion, which seemed to have changed some, that once they were shaken up by onslaught that came out of Asia, the generals took over the Kemetic society and decided that they had to meet fire with fire.  And in my reading, that's when Egypt started declining, when they became a militant-oriented society.  And so if we can go back and look at a world power that did not have that emphasis on aggression, etcetera, etcetera; and had an emphasis on sharing in terms, at least in their discourse, at least in what they wrote, at least in what they taught, and so forth and so on.  You know, it's like gangbusters.  You know, when I was a kid, there was a radio program that I used to like to listen to, was 'Gangbusters.'  'Gangbusters' was--they started off 'Gangbusters' with "crime does not pay."  That's what the announcer would say, and then he would go to show how the police always caught the gangsters.  And at the end he would say, when the gangsters are in jail, he would say, "Crime does not pay."  And I believed that until I was about twelve, that crime did not pay.  But I got to thinking about that, that if you teach that crime pays sometimes under certain circumstances, you really got a problem, 'cause you got enough crime without teaching that.  But when you teach that, and therefore, if you teach that crime does not pay, at least you might discourage some people from committing crimes, you see.  And I think that that is something that was a part of this most ancient Kemetic civilization, when it rose to its highest literary peak, that was later lost as the Cayemites became heavily influenced by the Asiatics and later the Europeans.  And so that's what I think we can get out of it, is a way of thinking about how to solve the problems that we are confronting today.  Not just for African people, but for everybody; that is, can we start thinking about solving the crisis in Palestine; can we start thinking about solving it in a different way other than rolling tanks into the West Bank rather than suicide bombers, you know, rather than the violence.  Can we think about approaching life from a--can we set other kinds of standards.  And I think that's some that we can get out of a study of Nile Valley civilization; gives us a perspective.  Just as when, you know, when you start taking political science, you start think--theorizing about democracy and looking for the origins of democracy, and you go right back to Athens, you know, and you look at Pericles and what he said in his orations and so forth and so on; then you start looking at the organization of Athenians society and you find some difference between the theory and the practice, of course.  But the idea of democracy has survived all these centuries, even though there are a lot of European thinkers who didn't think much of democracy, including the father of the U.S. Constitution, James Madison.  He thought democracy was a pretty rotten system of government.  That's something that they don't teach in political science, but they ought to teach it because it's true.  But anyway.
Story_ID: 71189
Speaker 1: Do you have a final thought or something you want to share before we close?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say that there's a story that I like to tell about a man who lived in ancient Egypt about 1900 B.C., whose name was Sinuai (ph).  And while he was away from the capital on a mission in a foreign country, the news came through that the Pharaoh had been assassinated.  And he became afraid that chaos was going to break loose and that his life was in danger, and so he decided to leave the country and not try to go and solve the problem, and he went to Asia.  And because he was so well educated and so talented, the Asian community that he wound up in decided to naturalize him, make him a citizen.  And he enjoyed all of the benefits of that society, and he contributed to that society.  He fought in the Army and became a general and helped them win some battles, and he became very prosperous and all the people that he was around loved him.  But one day, one of the natives of the country, who was extremely jealous of him, challenged him to a duel.  And according to the customs of that country, you couldn't turn that kind of challenge down.  And this man was an expert in ferocious fighting.  And so, Sinuai had to fight him, but he won by some miracle or another.  But after he won, he realized that he was in a foreign country and a foreign culture, and he decided that he wanted to go back home.  And so he wrote the Pharaoh and said, that, you know, "I left the country years and years ago, but I'd really like to come back home.  What do I have to do?  What kind of penance do I have to do to come back home?"  And the Pharaoh sent him a little message that said, "I don't know why you left.  You shouldn't have left in the first place.  But whatever the case, come back to Kemet.  Come back to the black land.  See, the cradle city is the place where you came into existence.  Kiss the ground at the Great Gate and mingle with your brothers and sisters."  And that's what I hold out to the people of the world.  Come back to the black land.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Dr. Carruthers.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 71190
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  One more question.  Keep talking to Larry.  You touched on this partly, but we often ask also what your hopes and concerns for the black community are.  You touched on the hopes a little bit, but also their concerns.
Speaker 2: Well, what we've been trying to do is join the struggle for African liberation.  And what we want is for African humanity to be liberated, which means that the African continent will become the base for the rebirth of African civilization, to restore African civilization, because African humanity will not be liberated until African civilization has been restored.  It doesn't--I don't mean in the atavistic sense that we go back to the way Africans did things a thousand, two thousand or three thousand years ago; but the principles of African society are still existing in, what one of the scholars of West Africa says, the living tradition.  That was "Umpan Tambar".  And if we take those traditions as Kwame Nkrumah pointed out in his book 'Consciencism,' if we take those traditions and build on them, we should be able to come up with a revision of African civilization that will equip Africa to deal with the world today and that will place Africa in a position where Africa will take a leadership position in reforming the world into really creating a world order that is fit for everybody in the world to live in.  That's the--that's what African people--African--the world will not be a fit place to live in, in the ultimate sense, until Africans are liberated.  And when Africans are liberated, then the whole world will be more or less liberated; that is, that the example that Africans create in devising an order for African liberation will be a model for the entire world.  And so that's what I hope for African people, that African people will again step on the stage of world history as leaders among others, of course, as ancient Egypt of the 2000 B.C. era were world leaders.  That's what inspired the world.  That's what inspired the Jewish people, the ancient Jewish people.  That's why you find so much reference to Egypt.  That's why you find when Stephen gave his sermon right before they stoned him to death.  He talked about Moses being educated in Egypt as a--and he became a mighty man because of his education in Egypt.  And so that's--that's what inspired even Plato and Horatius.  That inspired them.  I'm not saying that they got their culture from Egypt, but they were inspired by the example that the ancient Egyptians provided for them.  And so that's what I would--that's what I hope for African people, that we will not only repair ourselves, but we will develop a model that will allow the world to repair itself.
Story_ID: 71191
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  We might have a companion question.  Larry, you asked him the legacy question.  But on a more personal level, we often ask how you would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You hear that?  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 1: Well, as somebody who helped to do this.  That's all I ever wanted to do, is to be a helper.  That is, when I woke up in the--when I started waking up in the '60s' [1960s] to what was going on in the world, I wanted to pitch in and give some help to it; not just for myself, but for humanity really, and especially for African people because African people I think need some help.  And so what I'd like to be remembered as is somebody who helped.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  With that, I say thank you, again.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 71192
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  We're rolling.  Go ahead and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture that appeared in the Houston Chronicle in September of 1950, and what it is, is a picture of the first black students to enter the University of Texas Law School, subsequent to the [Herman Marion] Sweatt case [U.S. Supreme Court Sweatt v. Painter, 1950].  The first three individuals, who are there are among the five who enrolled at that time, in front you have Virgil Lott from Austin, Texas; the next one is Dudley Red, R-E-D, from Fort Worth, Texas.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And where is he in relation to Mr. [Virgil] Lott?  Is he to the right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's--Mr. [Virgil] Lott is on the right, and next to Mr. Lott, to the left of Mr. Lott.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Holding the notebook?
Speaker 2: Holding the notebook is Dudley Red.  And behind Dudley Red is Jacob Carruthers.  We were among the five first black students to enroll at the University of Texas Law School.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950]--in 1951, rather, when I was a recruit in the United States Air Force during the Korean War.
Speaker 1: Korean Conflict (laughs).
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  You tell that--you tell it.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next, please.
Speaker 2: And this is Jacob Carruthers' senior--high school senior photograph, Phyllis Wheatley High School, 1946.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture was taken in 1936 in San Angelo, Texas.  And it is a picture--the main picture is a picture of Wesley Chapel Methodist Church, which was located on the corner of Randolph and Sixth Street in San Angelo.  That's the old church that my father tore down and built a new church.  And the photo--the inset photograph is a photograph of my father when he was about thirty-four, thirty-five years old.  Reverend [Jacob] Carruthers [Sr.].
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.  Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother.  At this time, her name was Mrs. Marguerite [Taylor Carruthers] Bill.  She was married to my stepfather at this time.  She was a housewife, but she also played the piano, and she's sitting at her piano.  She was about forty then.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next photo, please.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: This is my sister and I at about the age of--I think I was ten and she was eight, and we're at my grandmother's house in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 2: And this picture was taken in 19--this picture was taken in 1988, and it was taken here in Chicago [Illinois].  My father was visiting me.  And on the left is my father.  Next to him standing is--I am.  I'm next to him.  And then my son is next to me, and my grandson is in the center, the little fella there.  And we all have the first name of Jacob; Jacob Senior, Jacob Junior, Jacob the third, and Jacob the fourth.  We thought we had--one day perhaps become monarchs and we already have lineage established.
Speaker 1: (Right on?) (laughs).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me during the black power days with my Afro and my son, who was a high school--I think beginning high school there.  And this was taken in Denver, Colorado, where he was living with his mother in 1970--'71' [1971] or something like that.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Great.  Next photo, please.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a group of us, members of the Kemetic Institute, who went to Egypt in December of 1985.  And we are standing in front of the Cairo--of the Egyptian National Museum in Cairo.  There were--well, on the right is Caroline Grantham.  Next to her is Jacob Carruthers; next to her is Charles Grantham; and next to her is Ife Carruthers, my wife--next to him, rather is Ife Carruthers, my wife.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great.  Next photo, please.
Speaker 1: And this is my sister and I.  Again, we're about ten and eight; again, at my grandmother's house in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Great.  Next photo, please.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of John H. Carruthers and his wife, Sara.  John H. Carruthers was my great-grandfather's brother.  He is--he was one of the sons of my great-great-grandfather, George Carruthers, who established the community.  John was the teacher in the school in Pelham.
Speaker 2: Pelham, Texas.
Speaker 1: In Pelham, Texas.  Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 1: And this one is a picture of one of the sessions at the First Pan-African Conference on reparations in Abuja, Nigeria [1993], of which I was a delegate.  And my wife, Ife, accompanied me.  I don't know.  I think the man to the left is a reporter who covered the conference.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next, please.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of the--one of the sessions at the ASCAC Conference, the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations Conference, held in Accra, Ghana.  On the right is Ashanti Wa (ph).  Next to her is Jacob Carruthers.  Next to me is Brother Abdulla, who is a Ghanaian; and next to him, and we're coming from the right--next to him is Nzingha [Ratabisha] Heru, who is the president of ASCAC; next to her is [HM] Asa Hilliard, my cousin, and who is now the first vice president of ASCAC.  I'm not quite certain who the other two are.  They might be Ghanaians.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.  Very good.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a--this picture was taken in August of 1966, and it was taken right after I had received the Ph.D. degree.  And what you see on the right is the lady, who at that time, was my wife, Daisy Carruthers; and to--and then I'm in the center; and my father is next to me; and in the center, my son.  He was about six then.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And his name is Trey?
Speaker 1: Trey.  Yeah.  We call him Trey.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  How did you know that?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Could you spell that?
Speaker 1: How did you know that?  T-R-E-Y.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Great.  Next photo, please.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of--this was taken in 19--in 2000.  And what you see here is the president of Northeastern Illinois University, Dr. Salme [Harju] Steinberg, giving me an award as a retiree from Northeastern Illinois University.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is another photograph of the day I got my Ph.D. shaking hands with my father.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: Now this is a picture of my father, my stepmother and my siblings.  On the right, standing in the rear is my father, Jacob Senior; my sister, Carol; my brother, Riley; and my stepmother, Susan Carruthers; and kneeling--I'm going to have to get--I'm going to have to get closer to that.  On the right is my brother, Andrew, out in the center; and my brother James, who is now deceased, is over on the left.
Story_ID: 71193
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead when you're ready.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture of James I. Gage, who called himself Kooji Chakaler (ph) and later became Menelik the Third.  He's one of the community activists.  When I first got to Chicago [Illinois], the first time I met him, he scared me to death.  But he was involved in every phase of the liberation movement.  And here we are at a camp that we used to run called Camp Gianda.  And Cage came out to help me build the dormatory.  And the two of us built this dormatory; he did most of the work.  But as you can see, that was in my militant days when I was a Black Nationalist to the hilt with my Afro.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 2: It's another picture of my father, my son, and myself.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  You know where this one was taken?
Speaker 2: This was taken in Fort Worth, Texas, about 1974.  My son should have been about fourteen then.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next photo, please.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken in May of 19--of 2000.  I was participating in the fiftieth anniversary of my graduation from college.  And these ladies here were three of my classmates who started the college with me in 1946, and we finished in 1950.  The two on my left were cheerleaders.  And the other one was a student who competed with me for the honor roll.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 1: This is--was taken in 1993 in Abuja, Nigeria, while I was attending the First Pan-African Conference on Reparations.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Very good.  Next one, please.
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1995 at the Chicago Cultural Center [Illinois].  The celebration was the initiation--my initiation into Elderhood.  And the Elder who was initiating me, who was bestowing that honor on me, is John Henrik Clarke, my mentor, who is standing at the microphone.  On the right--the character who is right behind Cr. [John Henrik] Clarke is Dr. Conrad Whorl.  In the background to the right of [HM] Conrad Worrill, in white is Roosevelt Robinson, a member of the Kemetic Institute; and then, of course, I'm standing next to Dr. Clarke on his right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 1: And this, again, was a picture of part of the participants in my initiation into elderhood at the Cultural Center in Chicago in 1995 [Illinois].  There were about four hundred people who attended, and that's a section of them.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Story_ID: 71194
Speaker 1: And this is my beautiful wife [Ife Carruthers] holding me up after my initiation into elderhood.  And the staff that I'm holding was a staff which was given to me on that occasion.  The finished version of that staff is right there on the wall that Larry is facing now.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Oh, right there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: The finished version of it, yeah.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next, please.
Speaker 1: And this is immediately after Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke gave me the elderstaff.  And next to him on the right of the photograph is Leonard Jeffries; Dr. Leonard Jeffries, who was at that time, the chairman of the black studies department at City College in New York.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next, please.
Speaker 1: These are two of the elder sisters who were at that same affair when I was elevated to elderhood.  Sister Franklin is on the right, from New York; and Sister Gant, whose husband was a member of the Kemetic Institute, he had died a year or so before that, is in the green hugging me.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 1: And this is at the same occasion, the elevation to elderhood, and that is Mr. Henry Blakey.  Mr. Henry Blakey is now deceased, but he was the husband of Gwen[dolyn] Brooks and a poet in his own right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next.  Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was taken in 1987 in Aswan, Egypt.  And what it is, is a photograph of is of the president, the first vice president, and the second vice president of the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations [ASCAC].  On the right is Dr. [HM] Maulana Karenga, who was the first vice president; in the center, Jacob Carruthers, who was the president; and next to me on the left is Dr. [HM] Asa Hilliard, who was the second vice president.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Hey.  Larry, where are you?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  He got away from us.
Speaker 1: The photograph taken in Atlanta, Georgia, at the graduation of my daughter.  When was that?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Nineteen ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-six [1996].  She got a degree from Spelman [University, Georgia], her bachelor's degree from Spelman.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: Did you give her name?
Speaker 2: Tawa.
Speaker 1: Tawa.  T-A-W-A.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph.  I don't know when it was taken, probably in the 1890s, of George--of Henry--excuse me--of Henry Carruthers, who was my great-great-grandfather.  He was born in 1807, and he died in 1906.  He was ninety-nine years old when he died.  And he is the founder of the community that my father grew up in, and the founder of the community that we hold our family reunions in every two years.  He was enslaved to a man whose name was Lawrence.  But after Emancipation, the story goes that Henry decided that he would change his name, because he didn't like the man who owned him.  And he changed his name to Carruthers, which was the slave name of his wife.  She was--had previously been owned by a man whose last name was Carruthers.  So he changed his name.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Next, please.
Speaker 2: I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken in 1927 in ArKansas City, Kansas.  And it is a picture of the team--of the Negro Baseball League that my father played in while he was working his way through Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Goergia].  My father was a pitcher for the team, and I'll try to indicate where he is.  On the row of those who are kneeling down, he is one, two, three--the fourth person--not that one.  Come over.  Starting at the right.  One, two, three, four.  That's my father [Jacob Carruthers, Sr.].  He was the pitcher of the team.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Very good.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Any others?
Speaker 1: No.  I think that's it.
Speaker 2: That's enough.
