Story_ID: 373235
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, and I'm the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And would you start off by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ayoka Chenzira.  A-Y-O-K-A, C-H-E-N-Z, like zebra, I-R-A.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm sorry, which department of--are you working for?  That's, that's confidential information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's the--where were you born?  Your place of birth (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And tell me today's date.
Speaker 2: I have no idea (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's the--December, December 10th, 2006.  And the location?  Where we are right now, doing the interview.
Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your home.
Story_ID: 373236
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start off by asking you a few People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay. Denise [Denise Gines].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like fall colors.  So burnt oranges, chocolate browns.  Look at my house.  These, these are my colors, yellow ochre.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite out of, inc- of all of those, is there one that's a favorite?
Speaker 2: I would say, you know, there was a time when all the reds were my favorite.  Particularly, like Chinese reds and burgundies, but I'm really into a burnt orange phase, if you will.
Speaker 1: All right.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: It depends on the mood.  I really enjoy sushi, and I love tuna fish sandwiches (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, what is your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: The Amalfi Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 373237
Speaker 1: We're gonna start off by talking about your father.  So tell me any information that you know about his parents, your grandparents, if you know any.  And then talk about your father.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, I didn't know my father's parents.  My mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] and father had been together--they had been together about five years before I was born.  And my father went into the [U.S.] Army.  And as my mother describes him, when he came out, he was a different person.
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paul [Paul Wilson].
Speaker 1: Spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: Paul, P-A-U-L, Wilson, and my mother says that she did not recognize that person.  And I remember as a teenager, thinking and writing short stories, that there was my mother's perspective, and I wondered what my father would have said in response to that.  I think that he probably would have agreed that he was different.  Whether he could articulate that, specifically how that happened, I don't know, but I sense that going into the Army during the time that he went in, segregation, he probably experienced a lot of things that he would consider demeaning to his manhood, and certainly coming back and not being able to immediately find employment was probably difficult for a man like him.  So I aspect--I suspect that he was different, and that, that difference eventually separated them and caused for a divorce.
Speaker 1: You said, a man like him, what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: From what I gather, he was very bright, very handsome, funny, witty, smart, and very prideful.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He did a number of things.  I mean, mostly what I know is about the Army experience.  I know that there was a time when my mother said that he was trying to search around, and very frustrated that he could not put certain skills to work, and I was never sure what those skills were, and I think I was of the age where I, it didn't translate in terms of asking my mother, "What do you mean those skills?"  But I know that he set up a private detective business for himself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which I thought was kind of interesting.  And later, in his later years, he became very involved in a church.  And what the in-betweens are, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, what type of church?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right.  And he went into the Army.  Did he think going into the Army because he couldn't find work would be better than--
Speaker 2: No, I think he was drafted into the Army.
Speaker 1: Oh, he was drafted.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What year do--what year are we in right here?
Speaker 2: Hm.  I'd have to do the calculation on that, but it would be in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is, is Camera too loud for you?  Because I can tell her to go downstairs.  Okay. Just hold.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  So we were talking about your father being drafted and coming out of the Army and your mother and father separating at that time.  And we're somewhere in the '40s [1940s].  Okay.  Do you have any siblings?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, you were an only child?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 373238
Speaker 1: You were born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me where your mother was born.  Tell me about your mother, actually.  Tell me her name first (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mo- my mother was born in Philadelphia as well.  And, she--
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: --and my, my grandparents had six children, three boys and three girls.  And she was the middle of the three girls, and the third, I think third in line, generally.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me your mother's name and would you spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Bernice Wilson [Bernice Cherry Wilson].  B-E-R-N-I-C-E, Wilson.  But the family name before she married my father [Paul Wilson] was Cherry.
Speaker 1: Do you know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's November 22, 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you know about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about them.
Speaker 2: They were from Winston-Salem [North Carolina].  And my grandmother, Lily [Lily Walton Cherry], was a caretaker.  And she had six children for whom she cooked and cleaned and did everything for, and took care of my grandfather, and also took care of her father [William Walton].  And my grandfather was a product of an interracial marriage--well, an interracial union.  My grandmother was an African American woman, and my, my great-grandmother, and my great-grandfather was a white man that I know nothing about, and they left him on the doorstep of a man who had five children already.  And this man took my grandfather in as his sixth child, no questions asked.  And when he died, he divided all the money that he had evenly amongst these six children.  And my grandfather was a very present person, meaning, he was full of life, he was full of energy, he made the ice cream for the kids, he made shoes, he was a stevedore.  He made money during the Depression [Great Depression], but he never quite got over being left on someone's doorstep.
Speaker 1: Who was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Kelsie, Kelsie Cherry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a rascal.
Speaker 1: You said he made money during the Depression.  How so?
Speaker 2: As a stevedore.
Speaker 1: A stevedore.  Okay.  Any other stories about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he got up really early in the morning, and went to bed really late at night, and had these gray eyes.  Which every third or fourth child in our family, that seems to come up, these kind of grayish, blue eyes.  And he was a--my mother adored him.  I think she greatly admired his chutzpah.  That you don't complain about life, you just get out there and take the tiger by the tail, and do what you need to, to do.  And she was, she was a person who had a, a lot of stamina.  You know, a lot of grace, and a lot of stamina, and that I think she would attribute to her father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what about your grandmother?  Was she, your grandmother's name was Lily?
Speaker 2: Lily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell me about her--
Speaker 2: She made sweet potato pie; she made sure everybody was fed.  I would sometimes spend a weekend with her.  She was very loving and gentle, but she was also very, very, very timid, and she was not the kind of woman who, I would say, spoke up for herself easily or quickly.  But somehow, within what I perceive as a very timid, gentle spirit, she successfully raised these very, these six kind of tough, go-getter kids.  So she must have known something.
Speaker 1: So she didn't work outside the home?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Story_ID: 373239
Speaker 1: So your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson], she was the middle child--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm laughing because these are all, they're just like conjuring up images I haven't seen in a long time.
Speaker 1: That's good.  So your mother now, she's the, the third of six children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And her siblings are your aunts, they're aunts and uncles?
Speaker 2: Aunts and uncles, and all of them are dead except for two.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: The two girls are still here.  My Aunt Odela [Odela Cherry], and my Aunt Virtelee [Virtelee Cherry].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who are the others, do you know them, their names?
Speaker 2: My Uncle Kelsie [Kelsie Cherry], who died last year.  My Uncle Archie [Archie Cherry] who died many years ago.  And my Uncle Bill [William Cherry], who died within the last, the last four years, I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your grandparents is--or your grandparents [Lily Walton Cherry and Kelsie Cherry], that's as far as you can go back in your family tree?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandparents and my grand mom Chanie [Chanie Walton], and my great-grand mom Chanie, and my great-grand pop Big Bill [William Walton].  Big Bill was my mother--was my grandmother's father who lived in the house and he was a big, strapping man.  And my grand mom Chanie, who was my grandfather's mother [sic. grandmother's mother], and as kids, my cousins and I used to laugh about her because, I guess, she had some form of dementia or Alzheimer's and how it manifested itself is that she used to spell, and she loved to spell, and my great-grandfather considered this a real feather in his cap that, you know, there was this woman in this house who could, like, spell.  So they would just say to her, you know, Chanie, you know, spell cat.  And she'd say, "C-A-T, cat."  And the words would get progressively harder, but that was the big thing that she could spell.
Speaker 1: And she could spell all of the words?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what about education, as far as your great-grandparents and your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't think--you know, I don't know for sure but I don't think any of them had formal schooling.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you don't know how she learned to spell so well.
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, but one doesn't need formal schooling--
Speaker 1: Right, that's true.
Speaker 2: --to learn to read, write or spell.  That the oral tradition is still something that's extremely powerful.  So I don't know if she wrote or not, but I know she could spell, and she knew she could spell.  Everybody on the block knew she could spell.
Story_ID: 373240
Speaker 1: And we're gonna talk about your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson], and I'm sorry that she recently passed away.  But tell me, did she give you any stories about when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  My mother, you know, during our last year together, she began to reveal more than I had ever known in my life, and I think that part of that is because she didn't come from the generation where people really readily exchange information of a particular type.  In fact, it was considered almost child-like to, you know, or unsophisticated to complain about certain things.  So it's only within the last year that I've been able to put, you know, I'll start to put a lot of the dots together.  She grew up in the household with her siblings, and great-grandparents, and grandparents, but she was clearly the one who was different.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Oh, let me count the ways.  (Laughter) My mom was very non-traditional in many ways.  She was ahead of her time in many ways.  She was no nonsense, she was not afraid to take on systems, she was not afraid of white people.  She loved black people and understood our history and the pain that came with that.  You couldn't easily put her in a box.  There were a lot of things that would be considered part of the culture, which she would not be supportive of.  And, you know, at that time, when I say that time, you know, '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] (pause) my mo- my mother in many ways, defy, defied a lot of labels.  We're talking about the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] where it was not okay for women to be divorced, and certainly, it was not okay for black women to be divorced.  You, you were defined by the man that you were with, or you were defined by your relationship with patriarchy.  And I very clearly remember my mother going to a department store and, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and applying for credit and being denied.  Not because she didn't qualify, exc- well, in some ways, yes, it was because she wasn't married.  And it was just unheard of, and during that time there were girlfriends who would not let single women, or divorced women be around them and their husbands.  And so I remember witnessing some of, of this and very early on listening to my mother talk about this strange sense of competition that women sometime have with other women around men.  She was very physically active.  She rode a bicycle and roller skated up until she died.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In high heels, her bicycle, high heels.  Yes.
Story_ID: 373241
Speaker 1: She [Chenzira's mother, Bernice Cherry Wilson] grew up also in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The community that she grew up, was it, was it in the city or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  In the city.
Speaker 1: City, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else you want to share about your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I think the place where I grew up is interesting.  It's, it's in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there's a very large apartment building there, which was specifically designed for interracial housing.  It was the first of its kind, and my mother found an apartment there in the '50s [1950s], and so for me, it was a very interesting way to grow up in that you had an Irish community, an Italian community, a Jewish community, a Caribbean community.  There were a couple people from Africa, and you had what was considered white collar professionals, blue collar professionals, and people who worked in the sex industry.  You know, all in one place.  You know, the court stenographer and the ladies of the night, all in one place.  And part of that was a rea- was because of integration, you know, there was no place really for a lot of people to go.  But as a kid, I didn't realize until I was much older that most people had not had that experience of growing up with such a mixture of different kinds of people, and I think in some ways it gave me a real leg up on life because I could see people as people, so they couldn't wield their power because of race, or because of class, or because of color, or because of gender.  But that was something that I put together much later in my life, but I know it's a--it's as a result of being exposed very early to a wide range of people.
Speaker 1: What was the name of this apartment complex?
Speaker 2: Well it's, it's undergone so many names, but--
Speaker 1: What was it then?
Speaker 2: It used to be called Flaming-, The Flamingo [The Flamingo Apartments, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], The Flamingo, and then, it was called Ivy Towers [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then it was called, I think, The Regency [ph.].  It underwent a series of names, but the name Flamingo probably, probably says it all.  And it was also a building where black performers who came to town, who could not stay in the hotels downtown, stayed in this apartment building.  So I, you know, I have memories of Redd Foxx throwing money out the window to us. I have memories of, you know, James, James Brown and Billy Eckstine, and you know, just a lot of people passing through.  The flip side of that is, because many people were raised in homes, the concept of an apartment building seemed odd and kind of transitory to people and they--I remember one of my cousins, her--well, my uncle, his daughter, he didn't want her to come.  It's like, this is an apartment building where entertainers live.  (Laughter) And who knows what entertainers do.  But for me, it was very interesting, and a very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was home.
Speaker 2: --very important part of my development, it's a vertical neighborhood.
Speaker 1: The building itself, was it an apartment building that had ten apartments on each floor, was it a high rise?
Speaker 2: High rise.
Speaker 1: How many floors, stories--
Speaker 2: Fifteen stories.
Speaker 1: How many of that--
Speaker 2: Fifteen stories, no thirteenth floor, overlooking the city of Philadelphia and New Jersey, and centrally located.  So down the street from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and down the street from city hall.
Story_ID: 373242
Speaker 1: The entertainers that came there to stay while they were in town, did they stay with people who lived in the building, or were there apartments that they could rent (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You could rent, you could, you could do short-term leases there.  And a lot of them were performing at the Uptown Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was very famous then.  It would be equivalent to New York's Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so, no, you could do a short-term lease in the same way you can do here in Atlanta [Georgia], you can still in some of the post properties do, you know, a month, three months.
Speaker 1: Well, that was unique in that time for that to happen, I think.
Speaker 2: I don't know if that was so much unique because, you know, my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson], up until last year was on a month to month lease for, like, thirty years, or forty years and I was in shock.  And I kept saying, "Why are you on a month to month lease?"  She said, "I want to be able to get out when I can, and if they want to get out, that's fine too."  And she--this was a woman who could afford to buy a house if she wanted to, but there's something about that building, and overlooking the entire city, and watching the sunset and drinking wine while the sun was setting, that was very comforting to her.
Speaker 1: So she stayed there just--
Speaker 2: She did, she, she, I laugh at her because she would go out looking for a house, and she'd start in the basement.  And, you know, most basements are not any place that you wanna really be in.  And she'd go, "Oh, no, I could never live here."  It's like, "Do you want to look upstairs?"  "Oh no, the basement is terrible." (Laughter) So you--(laughter).  You realized after a while, okay, she just needs an excuse not to move.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you think, because she was just comfortable, settled--
Speaker 2: She was very comfortable.  I think she felt very secure, she loved the view, she loved being able to look at all of downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and all of New Jersey, and the sunlight and the sunset was important to her.
Speaker 1: Was it near public transportation?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she drive?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So this was important to her too?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Easy for her to get around.
Speaker 2: Easy access.  And even if she didn't, she had her bicycle and her skates (laughter).
Speaker 1: So she used that to get around as transportation, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, listen, last year when the--it's called SEPTA [Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority], went on strike, my mom was on her bicycle and the, the local channels did a story about her.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she passed?
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven.
Story_ID: 373243
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson], and about where you grow up, where you grew up, so now I wanna go into your early years.  So, we kind of have the background, the setting of where you grew up.  Tell me what your earliest memory is, what's your earliest, earliest memory as a child?
Speaker 2: Being what was called a tomboy, and just running through the neighborhood (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about being a tomboy?
Speaker 2: I remember--well, you know, it was called tomboy then, but I really love sports.  I loved baseball and dodge ball.  Do you know the game dodge ball?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I loved dodge ball.  I still love dodge ball.
Speaker 1: So you were really fast so you wouldn't get hit with the ball.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, and I was telling my fiancee the other day that, 'cause we had, we had gone to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] over the holidays to bring back, just some small things of my mother's.  And I was taking him around the neighborhood and I was saying, "Okay.  So this is where I used to run across the street and defy the cars."  There is this game that we used to play, and--young people, do not try this at home--but we used to literally run across the street as cars were coming and--'cause we thought we were really smart, and fast, and it was a way of measuring, and kind of gambling.  And you never thought you wouldn't make it.  As an, as an adult, I can't believe I did that, but I do remember it being fun and comforting as a kid.
Speaker 1: What age were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was about eight, nine, ten.
Speaker 1: So family, you were the only child.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it was just you and your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have cousins--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that were in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 373244
Speaker 1: What were, say, holidays like?
Speaker 2: Holidays--my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] and I would go to her sisters' and brothers' homes.  My mother's birthday falls around Thanksgiving, let's say, and she has a brother whose birthday is also around that time, and so there would be these big celebrations, and often we would go from one of her siblings' house to another and just spend the holidays eating, and people would also come to, over to our house and eat.
Story_ID: 373245
Speaker 1: What were some of the sounds or smells and sights that you remember as a child?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] had a very fabulous beauty parlor, so everything to do with hair, in terms of smell, that's very much still in me.  Everything from that smoky curl from the, the pressing comb, to the chemicals of the hair straighteners, to Breck Shampoo, Clairol colorings--what is it, that's, the spray that you put on the hair, yeah.  I remember those quite vividly.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sounds?
Speaker 2: Women telling stories.  I was very privy to adult women's stories at a very early age, and in many ways, it has colored my interests in terms of my own film work.  So at a very early age, I knew a lot of things that women were struggling with, and also being excited by.
Speaker 1: So your mother had a beauty parlor.  We didn't talk about that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And was it near where you lived?
Speaker 2: It was in the same building [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, it was in the building.
Speaker 2: She had a, a wonderful beauty parlor on the ground floor of an apartment building.
Speaker 1: And, after school would you go there and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And do my homework.
Speaker 1: --homework.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and study and then go outside and play with friends, and yeah.
Story_ID: 373246
Speaker 1: Growing up in the, the city is a lot different than the South, and you talked about dodge ball and those types of games.  But what about skates and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --jump rope and double dutch?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Oh yes.  My mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] taught me all of those.  My mother did all of that and passed that onto me and in, in the city, you know one of--I'm from, you know, most of my life has been sent in, spent in New York [New York], and then I came here to Atlanta [Georgia], and one of the big differences is I really miss the street culture.  You learn a lot on the street, you know, people walking and passing by.  Whereas, here, it's very much like a bedroom culture.  People drive everyplace, which seems very strange to me.  Well, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when I was growing up, it seemed very much a street culture so you could measure the temperature of a community just by being outside.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about roller skates?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I remember being afraid.  My mom was an incredible roller skater, and I have footage of her in her sixties roller skating in the street.  And she was so good, in some ways I was intimidated because she could turn, and go backwards, and go on one leg, and do an arabesque, and she wasn't af- if we went to a skating rink, she wasn't afraid of the crowd, whereas I would just kind of be timid.  But what I really loved was biking.  I loved the speed of a bike, and double dutch.  I was good.
Speaker 1: Do, do you remember having chalk and drawing--
Speaker 2: For hopscotch?
Speaker 1: --on the street and ho- yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Yep.  Loved hopscotch.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you know, there were different names for, you know, different regions for different things, but the bottle tops, you used to shoot them into boxes, we used to call it--
Speaker 2: We did--more the boys did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You've just reminded me, one of my favorite games was marbles, marbles in the dirt.  One, I loved to collect them because the colors were just amazing and there was this game that you played where you dig out holes, and shoot marbles and that's something that fascinated me, and then later I grew up and played pool.
Story_ID: 373247
Speaker 1: When you go to elementary school, tell me the name of the elementary school you went to (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gesu [Gesu School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Gesu?
Speaker 2: Gesu.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the school integrated?
Speaker 2: I don't think you would describe it as such.  You know there's this history of Catholic schools being in African American neighborhoods, or in black neighborhoods.  Because they're also in neighborhoods here where there's a large Korean--Caribbean or African population.  And so there was a, a Catholic school in the neighborhood and at that time, sending your child to Catholic school was kind of equivalent to sending your child to private school.  And there were white students in the school, but I wouldn't describe it as, as being integrated, in that the white students for the most part would be Irish, Eastern European, which was kind of equivalent to being black, or Italian in some cases, and in a couple of cases, German.  Because those people had, had all settled in neighborhoods and some couldn't leave.  And so, there would be, I don't know, maybe five, six, seven, maybe ten white students in the school.  But I wouldn't describe that as being integrated.  'Cause often times when you think about integration, you think of black people going into white schools, first of all, and you think of some concept of diversity, which I don't think existed.  I think it was just about the nuns spreading the, the, the Catholic word and making sure we had really good penmanship.
Speaker 1: Did your paren- did your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] have to pay for you to go to school?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I wanna say no, but I, you know, the truth is, I don't know.  I really don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine.
Story_ID: 373248
Speaker 1: Going to a Catholic school [Gesu School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], were you Catholic?
Speaker 2: Well, I was baptized, confirmed.  Baptism, Confirmation, Holy Eucharist, Penance [First Reconciliation], Extreme Unction [Anointing of the Sick], Holy Orders and Matrimony.  It stays with you like a Motown song.  But my family was not Catholic.  You know, I went to Catholic school and you were expected to be Catholic.  So I went through all the rituals, which I loved, you know, it was very theatrical, very larger than life, and I think that much of my film sensibilities come from having grown up in a large Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your First Communion?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Not only can I tell you about it, but I have pictures.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We were talking about your First Communion.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And you were going to tell me about it.
Speaker 1: I do remember my First Communion.  I--because it was also when I got my first pair of stockings (laughter), and I had on a very beautiful white dress and white veil, which my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] made.  My mother made a lot of my clothes.  She was an extraordinary designer and seamstress, and I hated every minute of it because I wanted to look like everybody else, and then when I got older and didn't want to look like everybody else, it was too late.  But the--there's a story that I had written in one of my screenplays that's not been produced yet.  I remember my mother took me to downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and she took me to a store where you could purchase stockings, and at that time stockings came in these very thin boxes.  And the person would pull out a thin box, put it down, open the top, make a fist, ball their hand up so that they wouldn't snag the stocking, and show you what the stocking looked like against the skin.  So my mother and I went in the store, and she said, "I'd like to see a pair of flesh colored stockings for my daughter."  And the woman said, "Fine."  She brought out this box, she undid it, and had tissue paper, and, and the stockings were white.  And my mother went off 'cause she was that kind of girl.  She always used the Queen's English, but she went off.  As in flesh, as in my flesh, she went off, and I have memories of just being embarrassed because my mother was loud and clear, and direct, and confident, and these were things that I hadn't seen in a lot of other parents.  And so, it's interesting that when my daughter [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock] grew up and she would have some issue with school, I'd say, "Do you want me to go to the school and talk to the teacher?"  She'd yell, "No!  No!  I'll work it out, please no."  (Laughter) I know exactly, I know exactly what she means by that.  So, yes, I remember my First Communion.  It was lovely.
Speaker 2: Did your mother get the color stockings that she needed?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, and of course, you know, stockings came in flavors and trees.  Cinnamon, mahogany, what was it?  It was some reddish color.
Speaker 2: Red fox.
Speaker 1: Red fox (laughter), yeah, and smoke.  But, you know, that whole beige, red family was what I got.
Story_ID: 373249
Speaker 1: Religious instructions and the nuns.  Talk about the nuns.  Was there a favorite nun that taught you [at Gesu School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had tons of favorite nuns.  I mean, I loved the, you know, they were nuns, they, you know, and they were from the order where you were robed from head to toe.  And all you saw was a face, you know, like this, and they had fabulous rosary beads, which I loved.  You know, I still collect beads, and I think it's, I think it's from there and they were, they were, some of them were mean, and some of them were just tremendous fun and, and silly.  And I remember once, confiding in one of the meaner nuns that, that I had seen the Blessed Virgin Mary, and she says, "Oh, you did not."  (Laughter) I said, "Yes, I did."  She said, "You did not.  There's no such thing."  And I was like--and I was called into mother superior's office for that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of their names?  Most nuns were Sister Mary something.
Speaker 2: They--you know, it was always Mary and Marie.  I think it was Sister Mary [ph.], Sister Marie [ph.], maybe Sister Thomasina [ph.], Sister Mary Thomasina, Sister Christian [ph.], and Mother Superior (laughter).  And they are all gone even though recently I, when I went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I had my fiancee take a photograph of me on the steps of the convent, and that was, that made me smile.
Speaker 1: What'd you get--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I also studied piano with them, and I just remember having a lot of fun--
Story_ID: 373250
Speaker 1: --And there was an ugly incident eventually, but prior to that, I had a lot of fun [at Gesu School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Do you want to talk about the ugly incident?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--there was a, a young, a boy.  I think I was in third grade, fourth grade, and we were in the playground playing.  It was one of those playgrounds that was kind of made up of broken bricks.  And you know how boys like to do things to you when they like you to get your attention, and he threw a brick at my feet, and I tripped over the brick, and hit my head on the point of another brick, and kind of fell out and my head felt funny and I went to scratch my head and I could put my finger in this hole.  So I went--my classmates took me up to the office of the mother superior, and what she did was she sent me--she got a friend who lived in the same apartment building to walk me four blocks home.  Not take them to their hospital across the street, and my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] was furious.  I didn't have a clue what was happening, I just remember eventually we went to the hospital, they shaved my head, they gave me stitches, it was Halloween, people thought it was a costume, and then the next year, I was out of that school.  But there was, there was a lot of adult conversation that went on between my mother and the nuns because she could not understand why they would take one of their students who was bleeding home, escorted by essentially another kid, and not take them across the street to the hospital.  So she went on the warpath.
Speaker 2: Why do you think that they did that?
Speaker 1: Well, as my mother describes it, clearly race.  It was not necessarily a hospital that a lot of black people went to.  But it was their hospital, it was the church's hospital, and I th- you know, I think, as I've, as I've thought through it some in the years, I also think that they panicked, like knowing my mother and her tongue.  That it was like, "Look, we don't want to call her and say that she's in the hospital.  Let's send her home as quickly as we can so that she won't say, why didn't you tell us immediately."  'Cause you know, this is not the day of cell phones and text messaging and all.  I think they just wanted to get me home, sooner rather than later.  But my mother, up until her dying day said, "You know, those racist nuns," (laughter).
Story_ID: 373251
Speaker 1: Before we go on, I wanna ask you about, how did you feel about confession?
Speaker 2: I loved confession.  See, I really liked going to church because, you know, I could not articulate that as--what I'm about to tell you--as a child, but certainly being older, it's quite delicious for me.  It's so theatrical, and so mystical, and magical, and, you know, between the incense, and the candles, and the statues dressed in purple robes, and, and the priests and all their regalia, and the altar boys, and then you've got these wooden confessional boxes with the screen that slides open.  I mean, it is just so powerful.  But, you know, I wasn't really a bad kid.  I didn't really have much to confess and so I would feel a little guilty about that so I'd make things up, and they'd say okay do five Hail Marys, and, you know, seven Our Fathers, and I loved rosary beads, and so, you know, you'd do that and that would be the end of it.
Story_ID: 373252
Speaker 1: So you said you wasn't, you were not a bad child, but were you mischievous?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't describe myself as mischievous, I was curious.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was curious, and I was an only child and I had a lot of freedom, and I also was in the midst of a lot of adult conversation.  So it was an interesting mixture of things, I think.  I was smart mouthed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] as a disciplinarian?
Speaker 2: Tough.  Tough.
Speaker 1: What type of punishments did you have?
Speaker 2: It depends on what I did.  My mom was, you know, very controlling.  That was important for her, and she, she saw discipline and control as synonymous, and she also was a single parent who needed a certain kind of discipline and control, which was always something I understood later.  So we would really get into some arguments because on the one hand I was raised to be smart, and feisty and no-nonsense, and take no crap from anybody.  But she forgot to add, but with me, you deal differently (laughter).  So, basically, you know, she raised me with this spirit very much like hers, and that was not always easy.
Speaker 1: So you say you had a lot of freedom.  Freedom to, to do what?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, now that I think about it, freedom to just be out in the street roaming around.  But it's also, you know, as I talk to more and more of my contemporaries, they all had that.  And part of it is because the neighborhood watched out over you.  It wasn't like today where kids are just out in the street and nobody's, you know, got an eye on you.  So you could go a couple blocks away, but everybody on the block knew who you belonged to, and you better not get out of hand, because they could take you home to your mama.  But it seemed to me that I had freedom, I think, because I was an only child, and I was not burdened by, "Take your sister with you.  Go do the laundry.  You have to do x, y, and z."  I mean, basically I had to do my homework, and, you know, be accountable in terms of some chores.  But I had this, this freedom because I didn't have certain family attachments that my--some of my other friends had.  You know, some of my friends, they couldn't go out until they washed and ironed all of their brother's shirts and starched their underwear.  I mean, you know, I didn't have that.  (Laughter) I was just was like, "Ooh, you can't come out to play?  Sorry, we're gonna go play dodge ball now.  See you later."  So I didn't have, I didn't have those kind of family dynamics.  So I think it, it made--it gave me the appearance of having a lot more freedom.
Story_ID: 373253
Speaker 1: What about meals; did your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] and, did y'all have meals together, breakfast and maybe dinner?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Yes.  My mother, she in her infinite wisdom was determined that I would be healthy, and she suspected that when I was not in her presence, I probably ate junk, which was true.  So her contribution was to make sure that I--that for the meals that she was responsible for, and that she could control, that they would be healthy, and I would eat them.  So she cooked dinner for me for breakfast.  So I had steak and greens, and potatoes and liver for breakfast, because she said breakfast was the most important meal of the day.  You need your iron, you need your vitamins, as a kid, it's really hard waking up to liver.  It's really difficult, although some places in Africa and the Caribbean this is standard on the weekends.  But, you know, it was, you know, everybody else got Cheerios, and I sometimes had that, but she was, she was really very health conscious.
Speaker 1: Well, if you ate that for breakfast, what did you eat for dinner?
Speaker 2: Same thing (laughter), a similar, similar--dinner again.
Story_ID: 373254
Speaker 1: We were talking about your freedom to go in the neighborhood and play.  Were you a light post child, you know had to be in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's that?
Speaker 1: --when it was, when the light post came on you had to go in?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yes.  We lived down the street from city hall [Philadelphia City Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And on city hall, there's a gigantic clock that you can see from quite a distance, and I had a time to be home.  Or, you know, when the sun sets, you better be home, that kind of thing.  When the sun sets, you know, I couldn't say, "Well the sun didn't set on time today."  But with the clock, I could fudge it a little bit, like sometimes say the clock was wrong, or I didn't see it, or I didn't hear it, or it's broken and that didn't go over very well.
Speaker 1: We talked about times of the year when it seemed like it was summer but in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it snows in the winter time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what kind of activities did you do in the winter?
Speaker 2: Ice skating, making snow people, snowball fights, sleigh riding, burying your friends in the snow (laughter).  But I also had cultural activities like I grew up playing the piano and ballet.
Speaker 1: When did you start taking ballet lessons?
Speaker 2: When I was about eight.
Speaker 1: And who were your classmates?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, were they black or white?  Was this--
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: White.  Most of them?
Speaker 2: They were white.  They were white, they were--it was a Russian couple [Irena Koszalka Novak and Edmund Novak] who taught ballet, and they were under a lot of pressure to get rid of me.  The, the white parents did not want me in the school and the, the ballet teacher started giving me more and more solos to do.  And the white parents were not happy about this at all.  And eventually, they had a conversation with my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson].  Not to, not to put me out of the school, but they wanted her to know that they were receiving some challenges to my being there.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it didn't cause you to leave the school [Novak and Kowalska School of Ballet, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did you really love ballet?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So ballet was the only thing that they taught.  They only type of dance that they taught there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I also studied, let's see.  I studied modern dance in my high school years.  My mother would not let me study tap and I wanted very much.  I loved the sounds of the taps and we used to put Coca-Cola bottle caps, like you'd take your sneaker and you'd jam it onto a Coca-Cola bottle cap.  You'd jam the heel and that way, like you could tap around, you could tap around.  But my mother, my--tap dancing to my mother was always Negroes shuffling across the stage.  That was her only relationship to tap dancing.  And as she got older, I think she began to understand some things differently, but as a child, I was not, it was forbidden.
Story_ID: 373255
Speaker 1: We were talking about your ballet and the classes there.  And I wanted to ask you about racism and prejudice.  Now, we've talked about two other incidences, but tell me what else, as a child, that you can remember about prejudice or racism?
Speaker 2: I had to be taught to identify it.  As I said, I grew up in a vertical neighborhood [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where there were a lot of different kinds of people.  And the--when I heard about racism, it was someone putting an incident in context for me.  It wasn't coming from me saying this is racist.  I had to learn what people identified as racist, so here's an example.  My mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] used to take me out a lot.  She called it, getting exposure.  She thought that it was very important that I be exposed to the world, to the city.  So we would do things like, go downtown, and go window shopping.  Which meant that you never purchased anything, you just went to look, and then we would eat at a very, what seemed to be a very fancy Chinese restaurant.  But, you know, years later, you've realized it's a, it's a restaurant if you turn on the lights, there may be something, like, running across the floor.  But all the red carpet and the big chandeliers looked beautiful to a child, and the food was good.  So one day, my mom took me to a restaurant, which she often did, and at the end of the meal, I began to stack up the plates the way you would if you were home.  And she got so angry with me, and I didn't know where the anger was coming from.  What I subsequently learned, was that we were in a restaurant that had not been open to black people, and so me putting together the plates represented my being a housekeeper, and she was not having it.  But I didn't understand what her anger, what her anger was about.  'Cause the waitress came along and said, "Oh, isn't that sweet.  That's so nice."  Which made my mother even angrier, because she had a history and a context that I, that I didn't.  So slowly, I learned more about why she would say particular kinds of things, or look at some situations in a particular way.
Story_ID: 373256
Speaker 1: So now the, the dance school, how long did you stay at this particular dance school [Novak and Kowalska School of Ballet, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember.  It was a Russian couple, Mr. and Mr. [sic. Mrs.] Novak [Irena Koszalka Novak and Edmund Novak], but prior to that, I went to a dance school that was all black.  This was Essie Dorsey [Essie Marie Dorsey], and many people may not realize it, but taking ballet lessons was a very common thing in African American northern culture.  I don't know about the South.  But you, you know, if you had a daughter, she probably took ballet lessons.  And it wasn't really to become a ballet dancer, it was more for grace and, and poise, and being, you know, learning some language.  But God forbid you really wanna be like a ballet dancer.  That was, like, not gonna happen.  But I did go to a ballet school, or school where as I remember, all the teachers were black, and all the students were black, and then I eventually moved over to this other school.  I think the other--I think the black dance school may have gone out of business.  And my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] thought that it was important for me to grow up with the arts.  Where she got that from, I have no idea.  It certainly is not a background from my grandparents [Lily Walton Cherry and Kelsie Cherry].  Her sisters and brothers don't seem to have that, but it was always very important to her.
Speaker 1: So you were taking piano lessons also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in your ballet, did you, did you go to toe, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And your solos would be on toe?
Speaker 2: Early toe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Early toe.  I was just beginning to become more articulate with my feet and get my strength in that direction.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I liked it very much.
Speaker 1: So is there anything else about this period of time?  What year are we talking about here?
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s].
Story_ID: 373257
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s].  Okay.  So is there anything else in that period of time that you might wanna, you have any other stories about that time?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I do, but I just--(laughter) I, I had some really great friends.  I remember being--in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there's a large Jewish community, and there were people, there was a Jewish couple who owned a delicatessen in the apartment building.  And I remember seeing the numbers on their wrists, and--this is also in a story that I've written.  I thought that it meant that they were blood brother and sister.  Do you know how kids prick themselves and then blend the blood together?  That's what I thought.  I didn't know that it was related to the Holocaust for many years later.  And when I discovered that, I felt, I guess, kind of embarrassed that I didn't know.
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Story_ID: 373258
Speaker 1: You leave the Catholic school [Gesu School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and where do you go to school now?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I leave, I leave Catholic school, I go away to--well, I eventually go to high school.
Speaker 1: Well let's, did you go from elementary School to junior high school, or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  I went to, I left Catholic school and I went to a public school for junior high and for high school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I think I went to a school before then.  No, I left the Catholic school after the, the brick incident and I went to a, a public school in South Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  This was during the time when you've got some movement in terms of integration in schools, and I went to a school called Steven Girard [Steven Girard Elementary School] in South Philadelphia and there were three black people who when there.  A guy named Reggie [ph.], his brother and myself.  And it was a, sort of a strange experience.  I went there for fifth and sixth grade, and I remember having really wonderful teachers, but I remember it also being strange.
Speaker 1: There was a lot of controversy about that school, actually, as far as integration.  It was very slow in getting integration to that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: So, but by the time you were going there, do you remember the ratio of blacks and whites?
Speaker 2: There was three.
Speaker 1: Just three, okay.  You did say that.
Speaker 2: Just three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And mostly, mostly the whites were Italian, Italian and Irish.
Story_ID: 373259
Speaker 1: So you went there [Steven Girard Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for two years.  What--do you have any memories of, you know, anything that might have happened during those two years?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I do.  As I said, I remember having really good teachers.  I mean, really, teachers who seemed very dedicated and very interested in making sure you got what they were teaching.  The incident, I guess, that, that stands out as a lingering memory is--I told you I was a very physical child.  So I loved gym and I loved the, you know, the freedom of having, being able to move the body around.  And I could run very fast, and I could outrun all the girls at the school.  So what the gym teacher did was made me race against the only other black boy in the class, and the kids would get a kick out of the two of us racing together, and I would always lose against him.  So that was kind of my comeuppance (laughter).  It's like, you think you so bad, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  You, you said the teachers were very good, was there somebody who might have influenced you, or encouraged you, or--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the school principal, her name was Ms. Love [ph.].
Speaker 1: And so she shared love.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And she really was a sweetheart.  She seemed both tender and strong at the same time, and very warm and welcoming, and the name really suited her (laughter).
Story_ID: 373260
Speaker 1: I guess the biggest memory is that is where I heard that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been killed, and being sent home from school, and everyone just crying.  I think that stands out.
Speaker 2: What were your feelings about that?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was in tears, because I came from a neighborhood where you were taught, you know, you may not have known anything about these people, but you knew that John F. Kennedy was considered a saint.  So was Pope John XXIII [Saint Pope John XXIII], and I'm trying to think if there was anybody else.  Those were like the only two people who mattered in life.  So this was--I don't know that I understood the enormity of it, but I knew that--a teacher came in, it was announced, and it was devastating to everyone.  Everyone seemed to instantly be on the same page as to what that meant.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And at home in the neighborhood, at the beauty parlor--
Speaker 1: People were devastated.  People were, I mean, just weeping.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this was junior high school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 373261
Speaker 1: So now you're going on to high school.  What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Girls High.
Speaker 2: Same as our mayor [Shirley Franklin].
Speaker 1: As the mayor?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Same as [HistoryMaker] Bebe Moore Campbell.
Speaker 1: Oh, and--okay.  Okay.  And at Girls High, were you still taking dance or piano?
Speaker 2: At Girls High, I was becoming, I had begun to find my footing in the arts.  I was very interested in painting and dance and music.  At this point I'm playing both the cello and the piano.  The cello I had started in junior high school, liked it very much, continued in high school, and there was a wonderful art teacher, Ms. Bloch [Gladys Bloch].  Who--you know, it was the first chance of really playing around in a lot of different kinds of, of media.  But I can feel myself really shifting towards this notion of wanting to be some kind of, of artist at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the different mediums that you were working in then, with the art teacher were what?
Speaker 2: Mostly fine arts.  Mostly painting, engraving. There was a process of tinting photographs, taking photographs, watercolors, yeah.
Speaker 1: What a--was photography a part of this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --era here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did you think about photography?
Speaker 2: I had a little box camera, a little Kodak box camera, and took lots of pictures along with my classmates.
Speaker 1: And the pictures were in black and white?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--
Speaker 2: I don't remember when they became color.  At one point they did though, but I remember black and white and then a, a color process, that, you'd take a roll, and get back, like this negative that was kind of reddish brown, and there'd be this color print, and be like, "Oh!" (Laughter).
Story_ID: 373262
Speaker 1: At Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], tell me some of the other activities.  Did you go to the proms?
Speaker 2: Field hockey.
Speaker 1: Oh, field hockey.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Field hockey.  Eight o'clock in the morning, Tuesday and Thursday, in your gym suit, freezing cold, playing field hockey.
Speaker 1: Did you learn to swim or play tennis?
Speaker 2: I played--I learned to play tennis, but that was not at school.  I had an uncle who played tennis, and I didn't particularly care for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about swimming?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, we lived close enough to Atlantic City [New Jersey], so in the summers I would go to the beach, and I would stay with friends in Atlantic City.  But swimming was not really part of my repertoire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just music and painting.
Speaker 1: And what about gymnastics?
Speaker 2: Well, not really gymnastics, but gym, and gym included gymnastics, like, you know, the horse, rings, and I used to do high jump competitively.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you di- were these the things that you really enjoyed?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me, were there any stories about any of--any competitions?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  There's one that ended my career (laughter), short that it was.  There's a technique that--where you trained, where you do the high jump, you high jump, you'd run and you'd do the scissors over the bar, and I was pretty good and pretty comfortable with that and then one day we got out at a major meet, and the girl, the competitor, went before me and she ran, and instead of doing the scissors over, she flipped so that her belly was lateral with the bar.  So she was actually able to get up significantly higher, 'cause you don't have your butt weighing you down, and I had never seen it before.  And I was furious.  I was so angry with the coach, because I felt like, you bring us out here to compete, and we're seeing something for the first time.  I mean, you didn't get the memo?  And I quit the team.  Yeah, 'cause I felt like I couldn't, I couldn't trust him (laughter).
Speaker 1: Any other stories about high school?  Did you date?
Speaker 2: Not really.  First, my mom [Bernice Cherry Wilson] was really strict, but I kissed a little bit (laughter), and there were a couple of boys that I thought were interesting.  But girls would really fight over boys.  I mean, like, really fight, and that was a little deep.
Speaker 1: So you never had a, a fight with one of your girlfriends?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: Not over a boy.
Speaker 1: Over anything?
Speaker 2: Not--minor arguments, but not, I mean, you know, this is a time when girls really fought in the streets.  I mean, take my earrings, give me the Vaseline, and people would stand around and egg them on, and I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: Ladies don't do that.
Speaker 1: Well, did you go to the prom?
Speaker 2: Sort of, but not with--not with a date.  You know, girl friends went and had a good time, but not really, you know, this is my, this is, you know, my one and only love and, you know, putting on [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, and just being with that one person, no.
Story_ID: 373263
Speaker 1: The teachers at the school, once again, was there any teachers who, that you looked up to, or wanted to emulate?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, I went to Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for two years, and then I didn't want to go there anymore. I was in some ways bored, struggling to grow up and find my grounding in that I was growing up with a single parent who was very opinionated, very structured, could be dogmatic in some ways, and there was a lot of tension in the house.  And I just said I don't want to do this, so I went away to boarding school [Lourdesmont School, Clarks Summit, Pennsylvania] for the last two years in upstate Pennsylvania.  And it was in many ways a saving grace, because I had a kind of freedom and space that I had not imagined before.  And I began to study things that I would not ordinarily be exposed to.  So, for example, I was taking courses in anthropology, which were--at one point, I thought that I wanted to be an anthropologist.  I wanted to be an anthropologist.  I was taking early psychology and sociology courses in high school, I was starting to explore speaking French and Italian, and it was like the world was opening up to me in a very different way.  And I was getting a lot more comfortable in my skin, because I was also around other young women who felt as though they were the fish out of water, as well.  So it was a--it was an interesting community.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in this, in this particular school, you start to explore the different things that you are coming to yourself.  Okay.  Becoming--and you had already decided that the arts was gonna be a part of your life, what role did the arts--I understand what you're saying about the classes that you took, sociology, but where were--
Speaker 2: Where did the arts fit in?  I discovered that I really like to do things with my hands.  And that doing things with my hands seemed to trigger information for me in terms of being able to put pieces of puzzles together, in, in terms of life, in terms of other people's lives, in terms of just figuring out some things.  So I learned--there was a young woman who taught me how to knit and crochet, and it was, it was like doing hours and hours of meditation, it was wonderful.  I got to the point where I could do it and not even think about it, and, you know, make very interesting things.  But I think, more importantly, than the things that I was making, my mind got a chance to work things out.  Both this movement with my hands and physicalizing something, there was a sense of comfort and peace that came to me in a way that I had not known before.  And so if I was angry or upset about something, if I began to work with my hands, with knitting and crocheting, the feeling would go away, it would dissipate.  The same thing if I was working on painting, or working on sculpture, or I played guitar for a while.  These things, I began to become more aware of the impact that creating something had on my own psyche.
Story_ID: 373264
Speaker 1: So this is a very powerful time in my life, because I'm also meeting kindred spirits who are not interested in, you know, figuring out how to become a bank manager, or a nurse.  Which is, it's, it's not that these are, are not important occupations, it's just not where my spirit was aligned.  And my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] always had artistic sensibilities, but she never defined it as such.  So once I was able to see that much of what I was experiencing was as a result of watching for example, my mother make clothing, my mother could take one object and five--find five, six different uses for it, and think nothing of it.  These were things that I took for granted, whereas now I'm in an environment where I'm really thinking about these things, and I'm also being exposed to filmmaking at this time.  I'm taking courses at a university while I'm in high school that is critiquing film.  And at this point in the late '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], you've got some really interesting films being made in terms of American cinema.  So coming in at that point was also--helped to shape me in many ways.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What is the name of the school?
Speaker 1: Lourdesmont [Lourdesmont School, Clarks Summit, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Lourdes--
Speaker 1: Lourdesmont.
Speaker 2: Can you spell that please?
Speaker 1: I think it's L-O-U-R-D-E-S-M-O-N-T.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the college that you were--
Speaker 1: University of Scranton [Scranton, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Scranton.  Okay.  Okay.  Is there anything else about that school?  Were there any teachers there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Small, small.  Students from all over the country.
Speaker 2: Did you make friends that you still have now?
Speaker 1: No, but I think while we were there, we were really intense friends.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and then people kind of drift apart for whatever reasons.  But it's the first time I, you know, rode horses, and planted flowers, and dug up a garden and went running in the woods and, so these things were different, very different for me.
Story_ID: 373265
Speaker 1: You're starting to think about college because now you're taking classes in college [University of Scranton, Scranton, Pennsylvania].  Did you have any idea of what you wanted to major in?
Speaker 2: No, I was raised to go to college.  I didn't even, before I knew what college was.  (Laughter) I was two when my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] said, "You're going to college."  So whatever it was, I was going.  But at this time, I am--because everybody I know wants to go to college, or they want to go off to California to be a hippie.  And most of us are thinking about colleges that have strong arts programs.  So people are thinking about some of the, you know, art schools in California, art institutes, like the Art Institute of, of Chicago [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And, and also I would say, places that were considered progressive, politically progressive.  And I decided I wanted to go study film.
Story_ID: 373266
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s] 'cause we're getting ready to go into the '70s [1970s].  Let's talk about civil rights.  Tell me when you heard about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  We talked about Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], what about Martin Luther King, and were you involved in, in civil rights at all in school, or in the community?
Speaker 2: My family was not.  And it's, it's interesting, because when you, when you read about the Civil Rights Movement, there's a way that it's presented that suggests that all black people in America were involved in the Civil Rights Movement, and actually, the number of people was very, very small.  And when I heard that Martin Luther King had been killed, I was over a friend's house, and his mother just started screaming.  She was looking at television and she started screaming and she said, "They've killed the king, they've killed the king."  So it was another one of those things where you have an attachment to someone, to an, to an iconic figure, because you are in many ways, inheriting the attachment, not necessarily because you fully understand everything.  And I was of the age where that understanding of who King fully was, was not clear to me, except that he was someone who black people loved, who was putting his life out there trying to make things better.  But for a kid, those are very amorphous things.  Do you understand?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Later you start to put pieces together and you say, "Ah, this is what, you know, this meant."  So the fact that I went to a, a, a school in South Philadelphia [Steven Girard Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where there were only three black people, I don't--didn't connect that to any work that was being done.  What I connected it to was that my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] wanted me to get out of a situation where I was, and she was looking for something that she considered better.  And she had a friend who worked for the board of education who told her about options.  So I'm not looking at this point at any behind the scenes work that's being done to move things in a particular direction.  So I felt the, the sadness because, you know, everybody felt the sadness, the collective sadness.  I, you know, King was hanging on everybody's wall.  You know, it's like with John F. Kennedy, you know, King, and then, you know, Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], but it didn't mean then what it means to me now.
Story_ID: 373267
Speaker 1: When Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died he ga- it was for, your feelings were so much different because he was president, because he was Catholic.  What about Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy]?  What was your feeling about him?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think it was because he was president or because he was Catholic, I think it was because he was, he was packaged to us as a young white man who wanted to really do good things.  Now, if you look at his history, as well as Robert Kennedy's history, you know that they did not start off in those positions, that there was a lot of work that had to be done.  But how John F. Kennedy was marketed was, he's handsome, it's Camelot, you know he and Jackie [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] (pause)--how John F. Kennedy was packaged was that he was young, he was handsome, he had a gorgeous wife who was into fashion, all the women loved him, he was a good guy, and he loved, you know, everybody.  And, and then, of course, he was, he was the president.  But, but that, the president part of it, as a kid, doesn't really have the same weight, doesn't mean anything.  What means more is that he's a really good guy and he's handsome, and he's trying to do wonderful things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and a feeling that he's accessible.
Speaker 1: Anything else about that era?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I actually also want to say with Kennedy, where the apartment building [The Flamingo Apartments, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I grew up in is located, he was scheduled to drive by, stop, and shake residents' hands at one point, and I was supposed to read him a poem.  So there's the attachment there as well, and as it turned out, this was during a speech at Independence Hall [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  As it turns out, on his way to the airport, he ended up not stopping there.  And we just remember the limousine going by.  So that, of course, when I think about him, I think about that context, as well.
Speaker 1: Were you disappointed?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 373268
Speaker 1: What about Malcolm X?  What were your feelings?
Speaker 2: Well, Malcolm is, you know, for me, Malcolm is later, and Malcolm is introduced to--I'm introduced to Malcolm and Malcolm is introduced to me in terms of philosophy, at a point where I am a young woman getting very comfortable with my body, and wearing hipster pants, and bell bottoms, and halter tops.  And these men in suits and bowties telling me that I'm an exhibitionist.  That was my introduction to Malcolm.  Brothers with bean pies and a paper telling me that I'm an exhibitionist, and I'm like not, not understanding what they are talking about at all.  And, you know, my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] being a cosmetologist, the--you asked about the '60s [1960s] and civil rights.  You know, a lot of people were wearing their hair quote, unquote natural, which was not acceptable in a lot of black communities.  Okay?  People think it's like, "Oh, black people, just all over the world like, just picking their hair out."  I was like, oh, no, no, no.  You had to convince your parents and your aunts and uncles and everybody that this was appropriate, because they would just say, "Look, you look like a heathen who didn't comb--didn't take care of their hair.  So come here and bring the hot comb."  But, you know, there's something about aggressive youthful energy that has a way of shifting the landscape.  And initially, because the philosophies of the Nation of Islam and Malcolm X felt so oppressive, and unkind, particularly to women.  You know, they, they had an agenda that still I wasn't old enough to understand the bigger picture.  All I knew was what I was seeing and interacting in the streets and I didn't like it.  I didn't like it at all.  So it's really not until I'm moving into college that things are--begin to congeal for me in some ways.
Story_ID: 373269
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's talk about that move to college.  You're off now to New Rochelle [New York]?
Speaker 2: I went to The College of New Rochelle [New Rochelle, New York], I was afraid to go to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know New York City--
Speaker 2: Initially, initially I wanted to go to California to go to school, and my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] was very concerned about the earthquakes, and she kept talking about these earthquakes and that did seem kind of frightening.  Except that I kept looking in all of these college catalogs at schools in San Francisco [California] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] art schools just seemed perfect for me.  And my mother kept saying, "It's really far, and they're these earthquakes."  So, New York seemed like a place where there were a lot of artists, a lot of people I knew were interested in going to New York.  But my introduction to New York, was my mother and her girl friend dragging me to a women's liberation parade, where mostly white women were walking--marching down 5th Avenue, braless, taking off their bras, no tops, being arrested, and burning their bras.  And I'm thinking, "What is this?"  And my mother saying, "That's not anything, you know.  I don't wear a bra when I don't want to."  (Laughter) So I was coming across various programs in New York, and I decided to ease into it.  So I went to a small school, The College of New Rochelle, and I went because they had film there, but you had to be in the art program to take film.  So it gave me more of an opportunity to paint and do clay work and explore different mediums and take film.  And then Jeanne Moutoussamy [HistoryMaker Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe], who was married to Arthur Ashe, not at this time, but would be shortly after, also went there.  And she was a photographer.  She was studying photography and she was seeing Frank Stewart at the time, who was also a photographer.  So it, you know, there was, there was an ally to begin to look at photography, and, of course, Jeanne knew a lot about photography, and photographers.
Story_ID: 373270
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at the college in New Rochelle [The College of New Rochelle, New Rochelle, New York]?
Speaker 2: I wanna say I stayed, I stayed a year.  And then I decided it was time to go to the big city so I went to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], which was only thirty minutes away by train.
Speaker 1: What made you not afraid to go after a year?
Speaker 2: Because I had been going into the city enough that it no longer seemed like a scary place to me.  And I had been going and meeting a lot of artists, meeting people from different parts of the world, having great food, and really liking the city a lot, and so I applied to NYU's film school, and went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about life at NYU.
Speaker 2: Well, I was one of three people in the, (laughter) I was one, actually one of four black people in the film program.  There was one other woman and two men and--this was, this was during a period when film is really being seen and pushed as an art form, and not a business in the way it is now.  So there was a lot of focus on international cinema, and directors as auteurs, authors of films.  So I grew up on Japanese cinema, Brazilian cinema, Italian cinema, German cinema, French cinema, and was not trained to see Hollywood as a place that you--that was a goal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was almost anti-Hollywood in many ways.  Because you have a now, you have a, a--the independent film movement is really rising.  And the idea of making socially conscious, artistic, progressive cinema is becoming important.  Mixed with the fact that we had had uprisings in New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Detroit [Michigan], Watts [Los Angeles, California], where you now have black journalists who couldn't get a job before, now they're getting a phone call, "Hey, you want to go into like, Watts and interview people, and get like the story that, you know, the white cameraman is afraid to go and get?"  So there's, there's an idea of being able to do something with these media tools that is important in terms of storytelling, important for your community.  Not important as a, you know, "I'm the latest Hollywood director."  But really seeing this as something that the community really needs in terms of telling our stories, and getting out, getting them out there nationally and internationally.  So I'm a big part of thinking that way, and being influenced by people who thought that way.
Story_ID: 373271
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, I, I really admired a lot of the Italian directors.  Some for what I thought was, seemed to be very progressive political statements, some that seemed to have quite an understanding of the human spirit under different kinds of stress, and I think because I had this kind of Catholic background, I also understood many things that they, that they were doing.  And I also liked the kind of, surrealism for example, of a (unclear).  But at this time, I'm also really influenced by literature and certain paintings, so you know, along with what's happening here, you've, you've got black studies coming into colleges, you've got something penned as the Black Arts Movement, you have black woman writers coming forward and their work being published.  I'm dancing with Syvilla Fort who comes out of, you know, [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's company.  You know, I'm in New York [New York] where there is a huge black arts movement, and so I'm influenced by the ideology that our tradition and, and cultural lives have meaning and are important, not only for history, but, but in terms of future and dreaming.  And it's all right there in New York, and I'm in the middle of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned about dancing with--
Speaker 2: Syvilla Fort.
Speaker 1: Syvilla Fort.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her.
Speaker 2: Syvilla Fort, Syvilla Fort was the training link between the Katherine Dunham and Alvin Ailey periods of concert dance.  She was a first generation black concert dancer, which means that she was amongst the first group of people that's looking at modern dance as an art form, and, you know, and exploring with it.  She was the ballet mistress for Katherine Dunham.  She was my dance teacher, I adored her, and I made my first film about her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], you are going to film school, you're taking dance, is photography a part of this now?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And you're, the painting, are you painting?
Speaker 2: I'm painting, I am teaching theater in prison, and I'm working the graveyard shift at New York University hospital [New York University Medical Center; NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York] so I can have some money in my pocket.
Speaker 1: So you learned film and video?
Speaker 2: Not so much video, 'cause video wasn't like it is now.  Yeah, when, when video was kind of moving forward, those of us who were studying film were like, "What's that?"  Because we had basically been trained to be film snobs.  And the new technology compared to what we were taught the, the materialistic value of film was, and how it fit into a larger art world.  Video just couldn't cut it or so we thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about your music?  Any music--
Speaker 2: At this point, I'm not really playing piano or cello except for my own personal enjoyment, and I'm taking up a little bit of oboe and saxophone.  But not particularly good, but finding it playful and interesting.
Story_ID: 373272
Speaker 1: Besides your dance teacher [Syvilla Fort], were there any other teachers, or professors who encouraged you or influenced you?
Speaker 2: There was my cinematography teacher, Peter Glushanok who was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], who was a funny, hippie, smart guy.  And, I guess, Peter might have been in his sixties, and he was a real rebel.  And Peter is the person who taught me how to take some of the mystery out of things.  Meaning, usually, when, when people are trained to teach, their, their approach to teaching is to--for the students to make it seem like what they do is really hard, and really special, and if you stay with me, you too can learn this.  And particularly in the film world, which is very male dominated, and has these large technical components, people who want to keep you out of it, can put these things to the forefront to discourage you.  And so you'll find that women would be in the editing room and the men would be the cinematographers, women could sometimes be sound people, and I'll tell you a story about that in a moment.  But when Peter was teaching us lighting, he was starting off teaching us what's called basic three-point lighting, and he said, "Let me explain something to you.  This is how lighting works.  You put it up, you move it around on the stands, you squint your eyes, you look for the shadows, if you don't like it, move the light."  And that was really helpful.  It was really helpful for what he was saying was that there's a common sense component that you can bring to the table, that you know when something, like, looks bad.  And here are some little things that will help you along the way.  And once you figure out that, you know, something is too dark, does that mean you have to move the lights closer, further?  If the light is too harsh, does that mean you have to put something over it to soften it?  And these things all have names, but it was so helpful.  And I, in my teaching practices now, still do that work with the students at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  A lot of the women have never been exposed to technology, some of them are still fearful of the camera, and you just break it down, you just break it down until it's, you know, it's like, here's a series of buttons, here are the arrows, what do you think this button does.  They go, "Oh, yeah, yeah.  It's not so hard."  But when I went to NYU, I wanted to be a cinematographer, and the man who was head of the film school was a guy named Haig Manoogian, who was considered like a god because he was Martin Scorsese's mentor, and he, you know, people really were afraid of him, they deferred to him, and I wasn't particularly scared of him. And I told him that I was interested in being a cinematographer and he said, "Girl, you need to be an editor because women are best with their hands."  And that wasn't specific to me as a black woman.  That was specific to just women in general.  So as a result, I began to take internships, and so that I could be away from Haig and to experiment doing things I wanted to do.  And I began to become involved with not for profit organizations like Third World Newsreel [New York, New York], and Women Make Movies [New York, New York], and Camera News Now [ph.] that were politically active, grassroots community organizations who were also working with media.  And that was a very helpful track to move along in addition to the more formal film studies at the university.
Speaker 1: And this also helped you later on when you started producing and directing films?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By being involved, you already had that ground laid to be able to walk into those doors. Is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 373273
Speaker 1: So, animation.  Where did that come in?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: You don't know?
Speaker 2: First of all, I, first of all, I have always loved cartoons and animation.  It's the only reason to have cable.  And I just decided one day that I wanted to teach myself to do animation, and I had written this short film story, and I thought that animation would be right for it. This is 'Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People.'  And I thought that animation would be right, because I wanted to create a piece where we looked at our relationship with our hair, you know, our being black women, relationship with our hair.  But I wanted to do it in a way that was not accusatory, by saying, okay if you wear your hair like this, this means X, if you wear your hair like this, this means Y.  I wanted to say, this is what we do and some of the decisions that we are making, make no sense at all.  And I knew I wanted to do a satirical piece, and so I taught myself to do animation so I could do that piece.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna go talk about the, the films a little bit later, you know, we'll talk about that again, about 'Hair Piece--'
Story_ID: 373274
Speaker 1: But I want to go back to, to college.  You also went to the Teachers College.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me why you wanted to go to Teachers College.
Speaker 2: I went to Columbia University's Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]. I was very interested in art and education, I went there for my graduate studies.  I was interested in art and education.  I had this notion of teaching things like history and math through the arts, and I wanted to be able to take a small group of students on tour for a year internationally doing this.  And when I got to Teachers College, I mean, I got my degree, I successfully completed the program, but I found that there was more resistance than there was support.  And the things that I wanted to manifest were not--I wanted to do them, but I would say that it didn't feel like my number one passion.  It felt intellectually important.  One, because people really pooh-pooh the arts in America.  They're not exactly sure what artists do, they're not sure of the range of art, they're not sure of the value of art.  They want you to have just enough of it to be able to know what to put on your wall, or what to invest in, but whatever else is going on, we're not really sure, and there's an entire tradition of art that, you know, we have very much to be proud of.  But equally, it teaches important philosophical and practical principles that I think can take you a really long way, and I was interested in exploring those things, but it didn't work out.
Story_ID: 373275
Speaker 1: After college, well, actually you're still in college when--
Speaker 2: Are you talking about NYU [New York University, New York, New York], or are you talking about Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: When you fir- do your first, your first piece.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Syvilla' ['Syvilla: They Dance to Her Drum']--
Speaker 2: NYU.
Speaker 1: You were at NYU.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this was in '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We talked a little bit about it earlier, but tell me about why you decided to do something about your dance teacher.
Speaker 2: One, I was specializing in documentary at that time, and working with Professor George Stoney [George C. Stoney], who was a very well known documentarian.  And the--Syvilla [Syvilla Fort] is someone that I knew who had an interesting personal and private life that I spent a lot of time with, who I had been through all of her photographs, I knew the people who used--I knew a lot of her history already.  And it seemed that she was one of those unsung women who the dance community knew about, but other people did not know necessarily who she was and why she was important, historically important.  So I thought she'd make a, a great subject, so I did my thesis film on her.
Speaker 1: And were these photographs, what process did you use?
Speaker 2: No, it was interviewing her, photographing her dancing, photographing her teaching, talking with people who worked with her, finding archival information about her.
Speaker 1: Anything else that you want to say about her?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she didn't get to see the film, which was troubling to me.  She died before I finished it.  She died on my birthday, before I finished it.  And I was so upset at the loss and--and some of it is how you hear about these things when you--I'd been to see her and I kept calling the hospital, and the doctor finally said she's expired, and I'd never heard that word before, which is quite common in hospital lingo, but I had not heard it.  And I, I was, because we had gotten so close, and she had left me her dance photograph collection.  And I was overwhelmed with sadness, and it took a while to just shift out of that.  I had not experienced death really with someone that I felt so intimate with.  This was my first big one, and it was a stunner.  I was not prepared for it. So I put the film away for a little while, and then something in my mind clicked and I thought, well, if you put it away, no one's going to see, and you wanted people to know about her, so you better get it together.  And I did, and I wrote a small grant, an application for a small grant to the American Film Institute.  It was actually my first grant.  And they called me and said, "Don't you need more money?" (Laughter) I guess because I'd had no experience in grant writing, I thought if I just ask for two cents, maybe they'll give it to me. And they called and said, "Don't you need a little bit more money?"  I said, "I guess so."
Speaker 1: And, okay, this was in '79 [1979].
Story_ID: 373276
Speaker 1: Your next piece is not until '84 [1984], 'Hair Piece' ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People'](simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's see. Let's go back a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I am--before 'Syvilla' ['Syvilla: They Dance to Her Drum'] is finished, when I graduate from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I get a call out of the blue to come and be an editor for Fiat [Fiat Group Automobiles S.p.A.] commercials in New Jersey, in a warehouse over Christmas.  And then I get another call to come and be an editor for CBS news, and to this day, I don't know how either of those things really happened, except I know that with the CBS news there was a time when the stations have to renew their license, and so if you get a woman and you get a black person, you know, you get the two fer, so with the--one person counts as two.  But I worked there for a while, made really good money, made some interesting friends, and made more money than I have ever made prior to then.  Finished the film, and then--it's, it's not that I'm not making films, my films take a long time to research.  So, 'Zajota and the Boogie Spirit' is like, almost two years of research, including visiting different parts of the world to try and get the historical parts right, and raising money.  So I'm producing, directing, and raising money for all of my work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, 'Hair Piece,' and I didn't want to allude to the fact that you were not making films, I just wanted to know, you know, what you were doing also during that time period.
Speaker 2: Teaching myself animation, researching.  I'm trying to think if I'm going to graduate school or not.  Oh, having a baby [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock]!  Getting a, getting a partner [Thomas Osha Pinnock], having a baby (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How's that?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: In 1980, so, okay.  You, let's just go back.  Okay.  You received your degree from NYU in, in '80 [1980]?
Speaker 2: In '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 2: I received my degree from Columbia Teachers College [Teachers College, Columbia University, New York, New York] in '80 [1980].
Story_ID: 373277
Speaker 1: So in 1980, you have a partner, and you have a baby.  Boy or girl?
Speaker 2: Girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her name?
Speaker 2: Haj [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock].
Speaker 1: Haj?
Speaker 2: Haj.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you wanna talk about your partner then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The--his name was Thomas Pinnock [Thomas Osha Pinnock], he was from Jamaica.  He danced with--he was one of the lead dancers of the National Dance Theater of Jamaica, which was created by Rex Nettleford, and he came to the U.S. on a Martha Graham scholarship, and became a dancer, and a performance artist and travelled a lot, and it's a little hard because he died a few years ago of cancer, and I think that none of us ever thought he would die.  He was kind of a magical, fun, loving person who people adored, and a very easy person to talk to, and people loved him and he loved people.  And so, yes, our daughter grew up with two artists as parents (laughter).  So you could imagine, she's a very interesting child.
Story_ID: 373278
Speaker 1: We have that you were an editor for the, for commercials and CBS, and now in '84 [1984], 'Hair Piece' ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People'] is going to be produced, right?
Speaker 2: If you say so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And here again where--you taught yourself animation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to be able to use it in this piece.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, you know, animators were all men.  I think there was maybe one or two other women, but not black women.  Women in, I think 1954 who were animators.  And as you talked about before, the women did not get paid very well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: From the research that I did, the female animators got $40 versus $125, so it was never a thought to be an animator only, only you learned this process to be able to include it as a part of what you were doing in your films.
Speaker 2: Right the, in my work, I'm not--I'm thinking about storytelling in the way, a novelist or a short story writer is thinking about creating an entity, or a painter.  I'm working very much like an artist.  So I'm not thinking an animator makes $40 or $150.  I'm thinking, here's a piece that I wrote, what's the best way to express this?  And I decided it's animation, and so I teach myself animation.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about 'Hair Piece.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm trying to think.  There was something else, there is something else I was doing though with 'Zajota' ['Zajota and the Boogie Spirit'].  Oh, I know--I made--there, there's was an organization, it was here in Atlanta [Georgia], it was called the National Black Women's Health Project [Black Women's Health Imperative], and it was run by Byllye Avery, who is now in New York [New York].  And they were doing a four part series called, 'On Becoming a Woman' ['On Becoming a Woman: Mothers and Daughters Talking to Each Other'], and it was designed for young girls to talk about body changes and reproductive organs, etc.  And they asked me to do, having seen 'Hair Piece,' if I would do the animation for it.   Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's great.
Story_ID: 373279
Speaker 1: 'Hair Piece' ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People'] also opened up a lot of dialogue and discussion about racism, is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it opened up a lot of discussion, I think about black women and our aesthetic choices around our physical self.  And as part of that discussion, what emerged were conversations around, "It's not okay to look a particular way and work in Corporate America if you are black."  It brought up discussions around black people working for the airlines and what was considered standard, the standard, the standard airline uniform, which includes hair, earrings, et cetera.  And how things like braids and locs [dreadlocks], and the afro don't fit into that world.  And it brought up, when some women looked at the piece and talked about it, they remembered being burned as children, you know, with the hot comb in order to get their hair straight and what that feels like, having to look forward to that every Saturday.  And, you know, the question is why is it that we do this, not that it's not okay to do it, you know, to straighten your hair, lighten your hair, whatever you're going to do.  But why is it that we are making certain choices, and some people would say, you know, I do this because I like versatility.  But the reality is that most people had to go face white people every day, and white people, you know, hadn't been clued, they didn't get the memo.  You know, so slowly, it's like, you know, they caught up with braids, and then they caught up with the afro, then they, you know, caught up to locs, but there's always this lag time, and so you have discussions, you have inter-race discussions around notions of what is beautiful.  And, and that was quite complex.
Speaker 1: Well, even in the, the African American community, because as you talked about before, your mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson] didn't want you wearing afro.  You had to straighten your hair.  So at home, we were still faced with those, the challenges of not being able to do what we wanted to do with our hair.  Also, we talk about white Corporate America, but in dance also, as far as, well let's say ballet, I mean, everybody had to be uniformed, everybody had to wear their hair back in a bun.  And I mean, so, it's not only in Corporate America, but I guess, what I'm trying to ask you is, in all parts of, of society, this was an issue.
Speaker 2: Well, it--well our physical selves have always been troubling.  You know from, from size, to skin color, to body type, to the way we move.  When we walk, to the--how we can be vocally very expressive.  And so there's this notion of taming, I think still, the beast if you will, and so we do things to ourselves to tame ourselves in relation to what certain structures are demanding.  So I would, I would say that while it's true that ballet, you're supposed to look a particular way, you know, [HistoryMaker] Arthur Mitchell dealt with that and created the Dance Theatre of Harlem [New York, New York].  In Corporate America, you go in for a job and based on your physical self, you know, you, you have the skills, you have the desire, based on just a look that has nothing to do with your skills, you're sized up as being a particular way because you look a particular way.  So braids means X, afro means X, locs means Y, et cetera.
Story_ID: 373280
Speaker 1: What happened with 'Hair Piece' ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People'] is, people began all over the place to talk about what their experiences had been.  Including, you know, when I, when I would talk, I was, it was, I wanted people to be clear that this was not just in African American communities.  Because having grown up [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with Jewish women who had curly hair, as a kid, I remember seeing them iron their hair on the ironing board to get it straight so that they too could look like Barbie.  So, you know, it's a larger issue of, you know, western hegemony.  How much you retain of certain colonial processes, and at what point do you--when you say I, how much of that is constructed from things that you've really consciously thought about, as opposed to things that have just been passed on to you, you know, even from your family.  That you generally accept because they've just been--the ball's been thrown to you.  And you go, "Oh, I've got the ball, and this is what you do with the ball and you throw it to the next person."  So I really wanted people to not say, "I am going to wear my hair like this because, you know, of some political statement."  But whatever it was going to be, to at least have thought about it consciously and then decide.  Because there's a difference between arranging yourself from a standpoint of a sense of adornment, and wanting to fix yourself because somebody has told you there's something about you that's broken, and you believe it.  That those are two, while they may produce a look, that is similar.  The propeller for them is very different, and that's what I was interested in, what's up underneath of the layers.
Story_ID: 373281
Speaker 1: This film ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People'] was done in '84 [sic. 1985], do you think today that much has changed?  I know Erykah Badu is singing about this now.  She has a, a song talking about hair, you know, shouldn't define who you are.  So do you think that much has changed since you've written this, produced this piece.
Speaker 2: A number of things have changed.  I think that, that there are more black women with straight hair than I've ever seen in my life before.  And not only straight, but like, you know in, in, in the African American communities that I'm most familiar with, there are these, this body language that we would do to say we're imitating a white girl.  And one of them was the whole thing of throwing your hair back from your eyes, even if you have no hair.  And I see more black people doing that than I ever remember, that along with the straight, the bone straight hair, has also gone the body language.  That is much more identifiable with other communities, because we do not come out of that tradition of you know, my hair is so in my face, I've got to, you know, throw it back.  So that's a new body language that we have developed, that I've been watching.  And recently we've been seeing with young people, the, the, the afro coming back.  I mean and big, I mean this like, big and fabulous and wonderful looking.  But there is still this idea that if you want to work in Corporate America, you have to look a particular way.  So in that regard, I don't think that there's been a whole lot of shifting of the landscape, even though, you know, there are corporations, for example, if there's a product that they want to sell to a particular component of African American communities.  They'll say, "Okay.  We need somebody with locs [dreadlocks], 'cause we're trying to hit a particular target, and this target, you know, would have locs."  But I think that, that we're still open for a lot of discussion on this.
Speaker 1: So this, this film is still being used to deal with this issue.
Speaker 2: It was, it was voted in early 2000, it was voted one of the top twenty-five films for educators to talk about issues of race.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I made a mistake, it wasn't Erykah Badu, it's India Arie.
Speaker 2: It's India Arie, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 373282
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else you want to say about 'Hair Piece' ['Hair Piece: A Film for Nappy-Headed People']?
Speaker 2: I thi- yes.  What was, you know, I had been so used to having this really delicious dialogue with African American women, that when I was invited to go overseas to London [England] for the first time to speak, the sisters in the audience were mad (laughter).  They were mad.  It was like I had let all the dirty linen out of the closet, and I had never perceived the, the creation of film to be that at all.  They were furious.  And they were, you know, I remember very clearly standing there and just being surprised at how furious they were.  And that's when I realized that we were really in some deep trouble because on the one hand, they did not want to talk about this issue publicly, on the other hand, most of them were intimately involved with white men.  So you would, you're, you're in a relationship where you are sharing your most intimate self with somebody who you want to partner with, you've made this choice.  But there is these fundamental parts of you that you don't want that person to know about.  It was the strangest thing to me.  It was a, quite a learning experience.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: It had to be in the '80s [1980s] because we were doing a lot of traveling (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighties [1980s], okay.  Traveling, okay.
Story_ID: 373283
Speaker 1: So how does it feel to be the first African American woman animator?  I mean, when, when you hear that, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't really connect to it, it doesn't, it, it doesn't really have meaning for me.  First of all, I'm always skeptical when I hear about firsts because I always assume that there is somebody working, and people don't know who that person is.  I went to a conference once and someone asked the question, well they prefaced their question with, you know, when black women started writing in the late 1800s--I was like, no, when black women started being published, you know, not writing.  So there's a difference between, you know, the creation and the distribution of something.  So I, you know, don't claim those firsts very easily, and I'm really just trying to do my work, so I'm not preoccupied with positionings.
Story_ID: 373284
Speaker 1: Between '84 [1984] and '86 [1986] is your, you're still raising money and doing different things to, to, to produce your films.  The next film is in '86 [1986], 'Secret Sounds of Screaming' [sic.]  What brought--
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], right.  Sec- it's called 'Secret Sounds Screaming: The Sexual Abuse of Children.'  I had been working part time in a hospital, and a mother and child came in, and there was all this whispering and moving back and forth of doctors and nurses, and I learned that the child had been sexually assaulted.  The mother was in denial about it, and there was all this discussion about how they were going to treat the child, and family services was going to have to be involved.  And I didn't know anything, didn't know diddly-squat.  And the film, probably the release date is '86 [1986], which means it might have been done in like '84 [1984] or, you know, start--the process might have started around in '84 [1984], and, you know, at this point I have, like a four year old [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock], and I'm not thinking about this issue at all and it frightened me, and one way to try and understand this territory that kind of just hit me over the head, was to explore it and so that's what that piece was about.  Finding out, you know, what's going on here, you know, why is, are the numbers rising, why are we seeing so much incest, why are people in denial and it's a very complicated issue.
Speaker 1: What hospital were you working in part time?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I wanna say Sloan Kettering [Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York].  Let me think about it a little bit.  I'll have to think about the route that I took to work.
Speaker 1: And, but this film was multicultural, it just wasn't about, you know, blacks, or any--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Right.
Speaker 1: --particular race.  Okay.  Okay.  And you began working on another film after that, of course.  We know it takes time and 'The Lore' [sic.]?
Speaker 2: 'The Lure and the Lore.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: 'The Lure and the Lore.'  That was a documentary--
Story_ID: 373285
Speaker 1: So we were talking about your next film, 'The Lure and The Lore,' and this is a film about a Jamaican immigrant, right?  And Thomas Pinnock [Thomas Osha Pinnock] is the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  He was my partner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about the film.
Speaker 2: Well, it might help to talk about a couple of films together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'The Lure and The Lore' is a video documentary that I did about Thomas, who was a very interesting performing artist, and he was also a writer, and he had a very interesting take on America and the American dream.  And being an immigrant, the kinds of things that they hear about America, are not necessarily the things that they expect, that, that they see when they get here.  It's a very different, you know, picture that's, that's painted.  And so I enjoyed working with him as a writer because he had, oftentimes another way of looking at something, and so both 'The Lure and The Lore,' which is about him, and MO- and 'MOTV,' which is about a Jamaican immigrant who was, kind of, looking for the American dream, and it ends up being a nightmare for him are, kind of, our takes on trying to, one, have people look at black communities as more than just being African American communities.  That there, there are Caribbean communities here, there are different African communities here, and that we need to begin to share dialogue about a number of things, but in particular, what it means to be a person of African descent living in the United States.  And so, working with, with Thomas on both of those projects, and exploring other projects with him, gave us an opportunity to look at some bigger pictures around the notion of community, the notion of how America sells itself, even sells itself, even to it's own citizens.  And how the discomfort that people often feel is about not keeping up with a dream, that's actually almost in many ways a set up, a false situation, that you then try and access, and the frus- and, and how you become frustrated with yourself and the tensions that that can create on a, on a personal level.  And so both of those pieces, working with Thomas, take a look at some of that.
Story_ID: 373286
Speaker 1: I notice that most of your films deal with people from different countries, as far as Africa and Jamaica.  The next film is no exception in, in 1989, 'Zajota and the Boogie Spirit' is produced.  Now, you use, a lot of, of mixed media, I guess, you would say, in this film, so let's, let's talk about that.
Speaker 2: Well I'm, in, in addition to trying to figure out how to tell a story, I'm also very interested in playing with the medium, and coming out of, you know, dance and music as we talked about earlier.  These are mediums that, where you can do a lot of experimentation, doesn't cost you anything.  But once you get to the materiality of, of film, you're in a different world in terms of cost, and I wanted to play with film in the same way that I felt the freedom to play in dance, and to play in music.  So things like mixing film with still photography, and computer, computer animation which is what I'm starting to do now, are becoming interesting to me, and for this piece I won the Sony Innovator Award.  It was, you know, one of those early pieces that began to mix film and video and the computer, the computer as an expressive art form.  And the, the story is basically about the movement of African people into slavery and spread out throughout the diaspora, but it's done by looking also at our dance, and how dance for us is everything from the joy of, expressing the joy of children or the new crop, or rain, or as signals, to, to, to signal a, an escape to announce that, that an uprising is going to take place.  And I found that fascinating, because wherever I've been able to go in the world.  If there are people of African descent, even if we don't speak the same language, we can always dance together.
Speaker 1: Do you think boogie-woogie came out of the boogie spirit of Africa (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 373287
Speaker 1: In 1993, you founded Red Carnelian Films [Brooklyn, New York], your company.  Tell me about that, and why, how that came about.
Speaker 2: Red Carnelian Films came about because I wanted to begin to develop a structure for consistently making films, consistently raising money for films, working with other artists, and raising money for other people who wanted to do films that I was interested in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I wanted to formalize the process and not just raise money for one film, but to see if I could raise money for a sleight of low budget independent films.  And for a while I did that, and, you know, we did production, we did distribution, we did PR [public relations], we did, you know, everything, and what I discovered is as much as I enjoyed putting the company together, that it was also taking a bit away from my creative spirit.  There's an art to running a company, and if you are 100, 150 percent involved in that, it's also very difficult to write the films, make the films, et cetera.  And so I had a pretty good run of it for almost ten years, and eventually let it go so that I could begin to focus on some projects that I've had sitting for a while that I want to bring, that other people are coming in to produce and raise money for.  And I did--no longer wanted the responsibilities of a business entity.
Speaker 1: So is somebody else running the company, or--
Speaker 2: It's, no.
Speaker 1: It's just gone now.
Speaker 2: It's over.
Speaker 1: It's over, okay.
Story_ID: 373288
Speaker 1: So after this, and you wanted to do some other things and begin to do films again.  You're a dictor--
Speaker 2: Just as you're going, you're going through like, dates, I'm thinking, hm, there's a gap between there and there, and there and there, and there and there.  And suddenly, you know, things I'd forgotten, are coming up.  I went off to Austria--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to do films in the, do a couple of films in the '90s [1990s], I was involved--I was asked to come and do these very avante garde films, and I was doing some other things for public television and so I'm in my own headspace, I'm trying to fill in.  Okay.  Now, how old was my daughter [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock], now where was I, now what--and I'm also teaching at the City College of New York [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is in '93 [1993]? Nineties [1990s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the '90s [1990s] I began teaching at the City College of New York and staying there long enough to start their first grad program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And be chair of the department.  But you ask the questions, it's just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no that's fine.  Just--
Speaker 2: --like all this stuff is circling.
Speaker 1: --continue to tell me.  Okay. So you went--the grad program, tell me about the grad program that you started there.
Speaker 2: No, go through your film list, and then we'll do the grad program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that will bring us here.
Speaker 1: Current, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 373289
Speaker 1: So your directorial debut is with 'Alma's Rainbow,' is that right?
Speaker 2: You mean as a feature.
Speaker 1: As a feature film.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd actually started raising the money for around in the late '80s [1980s] and then there was that stock market crash, which put a hold on everything.  A lot of small businesses, film companies went out of business, and the worlds of independent filmmaking really shifted.  But I managed to get the film made with a combination of American money and money from Channel 4 in England, and made my first feature in New York [New York], and it was really interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is it true that you did this on a budget of $300,000?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, $350,000.  And everybody, everybody including me got paid.  No deferments, and when people saw it, it was also around the time that you have pictures like 'New Jack City' coming out, so you've got like more hard edged urban pictures coming out, and distributors would just say, you know, this film is too pretty, and it doesn't look like a black fi- a real black film.  And what they meant was there was no blood and guts, and there was no, there was no black pathology.  There was a mother, a daughter, and an aunt who thought she was Josephine Baker, and there was, you know, black women trying to figure stuff out.
Speaker 1: And, and this cast, tell me about the cast.
Speaker 2: The cast--Alma [Alma Gold], there, there, well there's three main people.  There's Alma, and Ruby [Ruby Gold] who's the aunt, and Rainbow [Rainbow Gold].  And Rainbow was played by, she was at that time sixteen years old, Victoria Gabrielle Platt, and she prior to this had been in a film called 'Round Midnight,' and she walked into the audition after we'd seen about three hundred people and she was perfect.  Kim Weston-Moran, who's Randy Weston's daughter, was actually our reader, meaning, when we would invite people to the audition, she would do lines with them.  And then one day we just looked at her and went, "Why don't you do this part?"  And for Aunt Ruby, that was played by an actress, Mizan Nunes [Mizan Kirby], who originally, Cassandra Wilson was contracted to play that part.  And she got her first really big break, and she said, "I need to go do this."  And I said, "Honey, there's no way I'm gonna hold you to this contract.  You go and do what you have to do."  And this is after we had done all the fitting and we were teaching her French and, and we had to find somebody in two days.  And so we found Mizan, and luckily Mizan spoke French, she also spoke Wolof, which is a West African language, and she just had a real wonderful flair for the part, and those three women, for the most part come from theater.  So it was, you know, learning to construct character for the film, which means that you're a little less broad than you would be for theater.  But we all knocked it out, and I'm really proud of that piece.  It's Isaiah Washington's first film, and people still see the film and they go, "Is that Isaiah?"  It's like, "Yes."  And he walked in and we said, "He's the one."
Speaker 1: You played a nun in--
Speaker 2: I did.  It's because the actress didn't show up (laughter).  So, yes, I played the nun.
Speaker 1: What gave you the idea, or why did you want to use the, the flashbacks in the sepia tones?
Speaker 2: They're actually in black and white.
Speaker 1: Oh, are they?
Speaker 2: And because it's the easiest way to signal to an audience that this is a different time period, and I liked the lushness of black and white.  And when I think about the kind of photographs that, that Alma would have taken then, I see them in black and white.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you work with this particular crew that you just talked about the cast, in other films?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?  This was your first time working with them and it just all worked good.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 373290
Speaker 1: We talked about 'MOTV,' and the next film, 'The Rivers of Mercy Angst'--
Speaker 2: 'In The Rivers of Mercy Angst.'
Speaker 1: And tell me just a little bit about this film and I want to know about the magical realism--
Speaker 2: Okay,
Speaker 1: --that you used in this film.
Speaker 2: 'Mercy Angst' comes from, I mentioned to you before wanting to continue to experiment with the, the medium, the various mediums, and I was in my studio in Brooklyn [New York] one day and laid out all the equipment that I owned that related to film, video, and computer technology, as well as still photography.  And I literally wrote a piece that I could use all the technology that I owned and explore some things that I didn't really know so well then, like Photoshop, as a computer application.  So the story is about a woman who, whose name is Mercy and she is a photographer, and one day, she is out taking photos of the city, and there is a magical character who comes to her and begins to store his memories in her.  And once he does that, she begins to speak in tongues, and appear to be out of control, but enough in control where every now and then, you can get these full sentences and what she's ranting and raving about is, you know, the conditions of black people.  And KOM is the Keeper of Memory, who, you know, every three, five years, he stores his anger, he finds a body to store his anger inside of her.  And so, eventually, how Mercy gets free is she's visited by two women, a Cloud Woman and Abydos who is the Keeper of Dreams.  And the, the piece is really about how sometimes, you know, there--there's, there's political gain in keeping us angry as a people.  And I oftentimes think that there needs to be more energy in having us discharge that in healthy ways, and I think that the ability to think about what you want to create in the future, as well as things that inspire you to laugh are very healing.  So it's a piece that uses those kinds of dynamics to talk about being, being, being a slave to your own anger, and how that's destructive, and how you unleash that with learning to dream, laugh and love yourself.
Speaker 1: Does it also talk about, about a person who can't move forward?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me--
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's the trap of anger, that it keeps you in this loop, and that's why she speaks in tongues.  It's like, "Bla-bla-bla," and you don't know what she's saying.  It's like going around and around and around in circles, so how do you dislodge yourself from that?  And, you know, coming from a place like New York--New York [New York] is a street culture, so, you know, which I really miss being in Atlanta [Georgia], but it's a street culture and so you go out in the street and life is vibrant, it's visible, it's very in your face.  Unlike here, which is more of a bedroom culture, so you don't have a real temperature of the city, so in New York, you find people are just out there, and they say things and they do things in the street, they eat in the street, they laugh in the street, do things that they probably shouldn't do in the street, but it's all in your face and visible.  And one of the things you definitely can see is people walking around with a lot of anger and hostility.  And I think that there are people, politicians, in our own communities for whom that serves really good purpose, to keep people in a particular state. So the piece in many ways, is a call to have to get that interrupted, so that you can see the difference between issues and your issues.
Story_ID: 373291
Speaker 1: And let's see, next, just quickly about the performance with Jane, is it Galvin or Gavin?
Speaker 2: Jane Galvin Lewis.
Speaker 1: Lewis.
Speaker 2: Jane Galvin Lewis is an hysterical comedian who lives in Brooklyn, New York who does character comedy.  Male, female, young, old, snooty, down to earth, and I have just always loved her comedy, and I made a piece about her, at Red Carnelian [Red Carnelian Films, Brooklyn, New York], we, we made a piece about her, because I really want to see her career take off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's 'Sentry at the Gate' ['Sentry at the Gate: The Comedy of Jane Galvin Lewis'].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was creating a piece that sh- that would expose people to her and also that she could take out to people and say, "Here.  Here's something I've done.  Book me."
Speaker 1: And that's just such a great thing to do because it's just so hard for people to get started in their careers so that's a wonderful thing to do.  "Snowfire"?
Speaker 2: "Snowfire" was a piece that was done for public television.  There was a four-part series on, called living positive ['Positive: Life with HIV'], which was about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and I did what's called the interstitial spots, which were these dance spots that I did with a very well-known choreographer, David Rousseve.  I also did a piece called "Snowfire," which was done all in still photographs, but as a, as a--the, the, it's, it's shot very much like you would shoot if you were rolling film, but you're doing everything in stills.  And it's about a Jamaican father and his, his African American wife, and they get the phone call that their son has died of AIDS.  And the father, who kicked the son out once he learned he was gay, is now struggling to come to terms with that decision, and the fact that he really loved his child.
Speaker 1: Let's talk a, a little more about the process.  You said, it's done with stills, but there was a cast, so explain more about the process.
Speaker 2: The process is, I wrote, I wrote a story with dialogue.  That story and dialogue were laid down as a track, as a voice track, the way you would lay down music.  And then the actors would go through motions, whether it's eating dinner, walking up and down the stairs, picking up the telephone, burying the son, but it would be recorded as still images, as opposed to the fluid movement of film and video.  So it has this, almost like this animated still look, so I was looking for another way to visualize the father's memory.  And even when he's washing his hands, that's all done with still photographs, and when you put them together, you get this kind of animated washing of hands, and the voices are laid down because they are, they're memories.  And so the actors are listening to the playback of the voices as they're moving through their actions.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Anything else you want to say about that piece?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Story_ID: 373292
Speaker 1: And 'Her'?
Speaker 2: 'Her.'
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: 'Her' is in post-production right now, I'm really excited about 'Her.'  'Her' was produced by my daughter Haj [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock], and her business partner Niaja [ph.].  They have started a company and they said, "Would you write and produce--write and direct something for us."  I said, "Sure."  We talked about all of the things that it could be and what it ended up being was a science fiction meets social commentary.  Basically, you have this black woman who lives in another universe and she's a computer generated image, and her world is all computer generated.  We worked with a wonderful artist here, William Hudson.  And this character, her body is made up of images of women all over her body.  That's--and she's out riding her star and she begins to see cracks in the universe, and she hears this cacophony of sound coming from Earth, and she realizes that these awful sounds are causing these fissures and cracks in her world.  And she gets the approval from the old women in her community, and she jumps through this black hole and morphs into a human being and lands on Earth.  And she basically discovers what, what the problem is, why she's hearing these voices yell and scream, and it has to do with these three iconic figures who represent a particular kind of male patriarchy that is from the personal level to the political level eroding away women's rights, and she deals with them to heal the universe.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that will be finished this month, and they did a, they did a really good producing job.
Speaker 1: That's great.  And your daughter also played in some of your films, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in 'Alma's Rainbow,' and she was also in, 'In The Rivers of Mercy Angst.'  So she's grown up to be a filmmaker.
Speaker 1: Like her mother.
Story_ID: 373293
Speaker 1: 'Flying Over Purgatory.'  Now, I know this was a stage play first.
Speaker 2: No, it was a screenplay first.
Speaker 1: Oh, was it? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had been, I had been at City College [City College of New York] in New York [New York] for close to twenty years, and I decided that I was going to retire and move to South Africa because I had been working there over the years, and I have quite an extended family there.  But I was invited to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] to be the first Cosby chair in the arts [William and Camille Cosby Endowed Professor in the Arts], and with that comes some kind of culminating event, so I converted my screenplay into a multimedia stage play.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee came to do it, Mabel Mafuya from South Africa came, there was a South African community here, and it ran for five days, and it gave me a wonderful opportunity to test out the film story and to see how an audience responded to it.  That was a, a wonderful lab experiment.  So it's a story that takes place in South Africa and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I am trying to get it made.
Story_ID: 373294
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were talking about 'Flying Over Purgatory,' and is it a story with just two characters?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's got a whole lot of folks in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because we mentioned [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and--
Speaker 2: And Mabel Mafuya.  Well Ruby, Ruby plays one of the lead characters from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and Mabel Mafuya was a very known, well-known, South African actress who primarily did political plays, and she died a couple of years ago.  But her history, basically was being an actress in South Africa, and not often getting to the finish line in terms of getting to the third act because the theater would be raided by the police.  So she was on the run a lot, and by the time I asked her to come here, she was in her seventies, she had not been out of South Africa for many, many years, like thirty years.  And we had trouble bringing her here because of immigration laws and, you know, we had to, to get just a lot of people involved, and the school's attorney, because we had to prove that she really was an actress.   And they said, "Send us playbills."  And it was like, you know, this is, this is a woman who's like running out of the theater during apartheid, I mean--but luckily, we were able to find some things online and we got her here at the, just in time for the piece to open.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, no, that piece had a cast of characters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about your relationship with Ruby Dee.
Speaker 2: Ruby, Ruby, I'm not sure when we met, but we've known each other for a long time and she has been supportive of my work for a very long time.  And I'm sure that there are tons of other people who say the same thing about her.  But we are kindred spirits in many ways, and when I have needed her, she has always been there for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else you wanna share?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this play, well, it was a screenplay, but this play was produced because, tell me again--
Speaker 2: Well, I was invited to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as the first Cosby chair in the arts [William and Camille Cosby Endowed Professor in the Arts], and with that, you are expected to do a culminating event.  And so my culminating event was to take the screenplay of 'Flying Over Purgatory,' convert it to a multimedia stage play, and see just how the story worked or didn't work with an audience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this was in 2001?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002].
Story_ID: 373295
Speaker 1: You're now at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So creator of the director of Digital Moving Image Salon?
Speaker 2: I'm founder and director of the Digital Moving Image Salon, which is the, the component at the college where people who are interested in basically creating film and video stories, come to learn that process.  So I teach a course called, a year long course, I take nine students for a year, called Documenting Women: Oral Narrative in Digital Media, and we first work with the oral narratives, collecting oral narratives from women and use that as a springboard to create a documentary around some issues.  Social justice as it relates to women's lives, and I teach another course, both of which I've developed, both of these courses called Cinemythic Journey: Black Women as Hero in American Cinema.  And we look at a range of films where you have a black woman as protagonist, and see what kind of choices the writers and directors are making to have the story move forward.  And after you look at these enough, you see these patterns that often times when there's a black woman protagonist, she has to be rescued, and usually by a white male lead.  And so there are choices made for her that put her in a situation where she has to be rescued.  And you often find black women's stories beginning at a point where they have no money and there's some kind of crime involved.  You have the, the, the kind of over the top sexuality in some of the comedy, so we take a look at this.  In other words, I, I destroy film viewing for my students (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So after, you had three semesters in this appointment, right?
Speaker 2: No, I've been there since 2001 now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I'm saying after that, you were offered a, a position to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to stay there and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --decided you want, wanted to stay in the South.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm in the new South.  I decided that I wanted to stay at Spelman, 'cause there's still a lot of work to do, and they have been very supportive of the kinds of things that I need to stay there.
Story_ID: 373296
Speaker 1: What do you see in the future that you want to do there?
Speaker 2: At Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  I want to grow the Digital Moving Image Salon.  Right now, we can only take nine people.  I'd like to see that grow, because so many women now are interested in story telling in the digital domain and I think that, that's really important.   And I also want them to begin to move their stories over to different platforms, so that the presentation can be on your iPod, it can be, you know, online, it can be through your telephone.  And we have a series there called Reel Women [Reel Women Student Film Showcase], which is part of the salon, and it's, it's conversations with black women who work with the moving image, and that happens every spring, along with the festival of student works that we show, and I would like to grow that so that it becomes international.
Speaker 1: And what about your personal life?  What do you want to see happen?
Speaker 2: What I want to see happen personally, is to finally get all the money to do 'Flying Over Purgatory' at least by next year.  I'm getting married next year, and I'm excited about that.  My daughter [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock] just got married in October, so those things make me happy when you find partners that you want to spend a long time with.  And I'm also right now, a Ph.D. candidate in my second year at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] at digi- in digital media, so, I am working now with moving some of my film stories over to what's called tangible interfaces, for you to be able to interact with them.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Some of your films have been translated to different languages--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a part of co--
Speaker 2: Film collections.
Speaker 1: Film collections.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you want to tell me which ones they are?
Speaker 2: Well, the Museum of Modern Art [New York, New York] purchased about five of my pieces, which was very nice and you know they're in distribution in, in Japan, and so, I don't know what they're saying, but hopefully it's--it works.  And, you know, in French [France] and, and Germany, and they're people who collect my work.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't talked about in your life?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't think so.  My dog.
Speaker 1: Oh, tell us about your dog.
Speaker 2: My dog Camera, who we had to put downstairs so that you wouldn't have trouble with your soundtrack.
Story_ID: 373297
Speaker 1: When you look over your life--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, am I dying already (laughter)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which we, which we have.  Which we have looked over your life, is there anything that you would change, or you regret?
Speaker 2: I don't have any regrets, but you know, I have the arrogance of hindsight.  So, you know, so far, even the, the hiccups and the explosions and the bumps have all seemed to work out.  And that's something that, that I want to tell younger people in any industry, that wherever you are, it doesn't mean that you're stuck there, or you will be there forever.  Whether it's a good thing, or not a good thing.  That after a while, if you live long enough, you can see patterns.  And one choice that I'd made was not to take crap off of people in the film industry.  And you know, that's from my early teaching, from my mother [Bernice Cherry Wilson].  And, people oftentimes are much more comfortable if they feel that you are more controllable, or if you don't have particular kinds of political sensibilities.  So I have managed to carve out a way of being in the film and video world that gives me tremendous comfort because they are the stories that I want to tell, and I think that when I'm gone, they will still continue to add up to something that will be important for other generations.
Speaker 1: In your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: What, is there any one event, or time in your life that stands out the most that you, that just, just comes to mind?
Speaker 2: I think it depends on what day it is.  You know, what I would say would be in, in (unclear) relief or not.  But I, I think I gave you an image earlier of running, as a kid, running through the streets, and that still stays with me very much and I feel very happy.  There's a sense of freedom about being a child and just running.  And when I think of that little girl running around Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], it puts a smile on my face.
Speaker 1: On your face?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 373298
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a really big question.  We would need about ten more tapes.
Speaker 1: Oh, goodness (laughter).  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I think that we are experiencing a crisis on many levels.  And that if people need leadership, I don't think that the leadership is there, because the leadership is in crisis, as it has struggled to be to the left, be to the right, and then be to the middle and then just to survive.  And the, there, there's so many layers, you know, there's, there's everything from health, to personal relationships, to new technology, to understanding that the role of young people is not simply to carry out your orders, to learning that African American people are not the only people in the world, and to understand, you know, what struggle looks like, what challenges look like when they come in different presentations.  'Cause often times when people talk about racism, they're really just talking about black folks and white folks, and it's much more complex than that.  But the country is also in a crisis.  So there's a lot of work to do and a lot people are experiencing a lot of pain right now.
Story_ID: 373299
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to someone who wanted to be in the film industry?
Speaker 2: Well, the film industry is, is very big and right now a lot of the media are connected.  So the film industry is connected to the game industry, which is connected to the television industry, which is connected to, you know, satellite, you know, it's, it's not just little niches anymore.  And so one has to figure out, I think, what it is that you want to do.  And when I ask people that, they say, "Well, I wanna direct."  Everybody wants to direct.  And say, "Direct what?"  They say, "Action adventures."  Well, you know, there's one hundred people in a day who can direct action adventures with their eyes closed, so, you know, the question is, what is it that you think you're bringing to the table?  What part of the industry do you want to work in?  What makes you think that you can tell stories that people will be interested in seeing?  Who do you think your audience is?  There's a lot of, of questions so the industry is not this little manageable thing that it used to be in some ways.  New technology is changing the face of the film industry very quickly, so is the game industry.  So there's a lot of new possibilities.  I would suggest that instead of people trying to repeat what they've already seen before, to think outside the box.  You know, people are, are, you know I work with people who are inventing storytelling games with new technology that can be on your coffee table as monitors.  So there's a--you know, there's, there's all kinds of entities that you can write stories for now.  It's not just films on a screen with a movie star, with an A list movie star.
Story_ID: 373300
Speaker 1: Do you have a, a message for your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: I don't have any grandchildren yet.
Speaker 1: I know, but, but this will be around when you, or if you do have grandchildren.  So when I say grandchildren, not necessarily your own, but for the future generation.  Is there a message that you want them to know from you?
Speaker 2: I could only talk about the things that have worked for me, and I would say one of the things that has worked well for me, is that I have a very tenacious spirit.  That I understand that most people are going to tell you no, and every now and then you'll buck up against somebody who'll say, "Yeah, okay."  But for the most part, you've got to figure out how to keep telling yourself yes.  And particularly, if you work in non-traditional areas, and I think particularly if you are a woman, that we bring a level of complexity to the table, and many times people are not prepared for that.  So if you crumble easily, you're gonna have a hard time, and so there's a way of being both compassionate and thick skinned.
Story_ID: 373301
Speaker 1: As one of the last thoughts.  Is there anyone up and coming as far as people who are working in the industry that you admire?
Speaker 2: In what, in what role?
Speaker 1: In any of the, I mean you're in every role.  You're a director, a screenwriter, so is there anybody in particular that you're looking at that's up and coming and think that person's gonna to do well?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm looking at my daughter [Haj Chenzira-Pinnock].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's who I'm looking at right now.
Speaker 1: And is there--well, we've talked about the people that, that you respect, but is there anybody else that you might wanna mention?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've got a--you know, respect for tons of, you know, a lot of people, I have, I have respect for--but you know, you can have respect for people, but not necessarily think of patterning your life after them.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you recognize that people are able to do what they do under certain circumstances, under certain conditions.  So I don't think that those things are all, one is always able to duplicate.  And there is a way of teaching people that says look at this person's career and model that.  And I don't necessarily think that's possible, particularly in this business, with, you know, it's fickle.  It's fickle, and, and people change positions and chairs every year or two years, and nobody's got, you know, much attachment to, anything other than what's the next job, where's the next money, et cetera.  So I don't play in, in that world.  I'm really interested in, you know, fundamentally I'm interested in how to be the best person I can be on the planet, and how that, when I meet with other people, how we explore and express making things better, being better.  And I think that there, there are people who have done that in, in many ways.  You know, I could say I admire [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte in terms of his activism, you know, or [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, or you know, [HistoryMaker] Beverly Guy-Sheftall, or you know, there's a lot of people that I admire.  But one of those things, one of the things I think they all have in common is a sense of commitment to who they are and what they'd like to accomplish.  And the, the nerve to continue to get out of bed and try and accomplish it every day (laughter).  So I, yeah, you just keep putting one foot in front of the other and you'll get someplace.
Story_ID: 373302
Speaker 1: So I know you have a lot of years left, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'm still thinking about the years left, so I'm not (laughter), I'm not thinking about the, to be remembered at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about legacy?  Is that easier?
Speaker 2: I don't think in those terms.  I'm not there yet.  I, I, I really think that my best work is ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fair.
Speaker 2: That's where I am these days.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to?  Do you want to mention who your fiancee is?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else?
Speaker 2: Thank you for doing this interview.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're so very welcome.  Well, if that's it, I thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Speaker 1: This has been a wonderful interview, and I look forward to seeing it being shared among the wonderful people who are a part of this project.
