Story_ID: 6001
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Edgar Cary Lane.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Betty Currie.  Betty, B-E-T-T-Y, Currie, C-U-R-R-I-E.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: By birth it's Betty Grace, but I go by Betty Williams, my maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 10, 1939, Edwards, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right, and you grew up in Waukegan [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: When I was three months old, mama followed daddy to Chicago [Illinois], and we ended up in Waukegan.
Speaker 1: All right, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm happily retired.
Speaker 1: All right, and your immediate past occupation was?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked for the federal government, and doing that job I worked for secretary to President Clinton.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 8, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your address?
Speaker 2: We're currently in southern Maryland, in beautiful southern Maryland, St. Mary's County, Hollywood, Maryland.
Story_ID: 6002
Speaker 1: We start off by asking five lightweight 'People' magazine-ish type questions--.
Speaker 2: That's a very good--.
Speaker 1: --and they just deserve a short answer actually.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Let's see if I had to get one favorite food cause I like a lot of favorite foods, I'd have to say chicken (laughs), because you can do so much with it.  And it's healthier than a lot of other things.  So that's--
Speaker 1: A lot of the other things taste like it too.
Speaker 2: (laughs).  So they say, but I've not tried anything yet (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Always has been, usually light blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, and someone complained that fall is when things are dying, but fall is also a time of rebirth too.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like quiet, and one of the prettiest places I went on a vacation--I've done a lot of travel, but up at, during the--when the leaves turn up in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, Northeast, it's just beautiful up there.  I love that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I have several.  And one is "yes lovebug," or "lovey," things like that.  I try to keep it lighthearted, and in order not to say anything bad, a bad word, I'll say that too.  "Holy moley" or something like that.
Story_ID: 6003
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about your family history.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name was Vivian Ercell Jones Williams, Vivian, V-I-V-I-A-N, Ercell, E-R-C-E-L-L, Jones, Williams.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Wow, October 28, 1912, and she was born also in Edwards, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right.  What can you tell us about your mother?  What was she like and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, mama was one of, oh, geez, I'm gonna forget--I think there were eight kids and she was the youngest.  She was the baby girl.  Her sisters used to tell us that she was a little spoiled, which we re--refused to believe.  She and her sisters--her father was a minister.  And her mother was a housekeeper.  And she--her family, excuse me, all went to Southern Christian Institute, which is a college like in Edwards, Mississippi.  And, but once she got married, she had me and immediately a sister, another sister, and she had like six kids; very hard working.  She worked all her life, raised kids and worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a good woman.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance at higher education and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, Southern Christian Institute was considered higher education in Mississippi.  And I'll never forget when I was in high school, I, maybe I was freshman or sophomore, they all asked if our parents had higher education, and I told them my mother went to Southern Christian Institute in Mississippi, and they said, oh, that was just what they sent people for, but it's really like a high school, which I was offended because mama told me it was higher (laughs), it was higher.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you know much about her family history and, you know, how long they, they were in that--do they have a long history in Edwards, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: We have a, a man in the family who's now doing all of our genealogy and everything, so he knows more.  And my sister is the one who's our contact.  To my knowing and the best I remember, mama was born there, and I think her father who was a minister, I think was born there also.  But I'd hear stories that tell us that the family migrated.  Some of them went to Alabama, but they've been in Mississippi as long as I know, remember.
Speaker 1: And her father was a--?
Speaker 2: Minister.
Speaker 1: And what denomination was it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I'll find out for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories that have passed down through your mother's side of the family about, about life in, in the nineteenth century or during Reconstruction or going back to slavery or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not very much since mama was a baby.  She was born in 1912, so she--it was a lot still happening there, but she was not aware.  She never shared it with us that much.  And we were, at that age, you just, unfortunately, didn't talk about it that much.  It was like ancient history to us.  And now that we want to talk about it, she's not here to tell us more about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did she tell you any stories about growing up that you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  It's just that they--her sister would tell us how spoiled she was.  That's how they would--to talk about her.  They never talked about her much as a youth.  She was the, the baby, they all doted on her and took care of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when she was a baby, the oldest children had already moved on.
Story_ID: 6004
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for?
Speaker 2: Theodore Roosevelt Williams.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 4, 1903, I'm gonna say, Edwards.  If not Edwards, it was a city close by.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when mama married daddy, he was widower with two daughters.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, tell us about your father.  What was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see, daddy, I don't think went further than eighth grade.  He, we were told by my half sister that had daddy wanted to, he could have probably played in the Negro baseball league because he was a great baseball player, but he was married with children, he couldn't do that (phone ringing).
Speaker 1: Let's pause a second.  Okay.  We were talking about your father, and what was he like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: He was, well, I, very, very close to daddy, just a wonderful man.  He did mostly--when he moved to Waukegan [Illinois] from Mississippi, he worked in many--one of the many factories they had around there.  That was a easy job to get, and they paid quite well.  And when the factories started closing down, daddy became sort of a handyman.  He would do yard work up and down the, down the line in the Chicago [Illinois] area.  And that's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there--do you know why your parents left Mississippi or?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know exactly, but I could only imagine that for a better life.  I'm sure in Mississippi things were not easy, and with the family, he had a ready-made family, and then I came, so there were three kids, and they had to do something.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was his background like?  Did he talk about what life was like for him growing up?
Speaker 2: He was one of three children, one of the boys.  There were three boys and one died.  And I think they used the word, was killed.  I don't know exactly about what happened there.  He and his brother were very close.  I heard them talk about slavery, and I think--I don't know if my grandfather, grandpa Demps (ph.) was slavery or not.  I'm assuming, just the time frame where it could have happened.  But they talked about that, and they didn't talk about--we were all, everybody was poor.  They talked about that a lot.  And daddy was, he played this baseball.  He also was a singer, and they had a lot of fun times.  They did talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was a good baseball player, and could have--?
Speaker 2: That's what I was told, and my sister, I didn't inherit any of that, but my sister, she likes to brag about how great she is (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also she inherited his singing talent.  She's a singer.
Speaker 1: So did he play any ball at all in Chicago for organized teams?
Speaker 2: No, it was all in Mississippi.  And once he came up here, he couldn't do it.  Down there, he--with a family, you couldn't travel with the--cause they traveled a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he traveled with the team in the South?
Speaker 2: He didn't do it because, he, he--he was good enough to do it, but he couldn't.  Family came in the way.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But he never held it against us.
Speaker 1: Right, well, obviously he chose to support his family--
Speaker 2: For sure.
Speaker 1: --the best way he could.
Speaker 2: For sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he, he worked in the steel mills in Waukegan [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Waukegan.  We had a wine mill, we had a tannery, we had something called Houdaille-Hershey, which is where he worked.  And they made steel.  That's all I--and eventually, they started closing down, one by one.
Speaker 1: Okay, when, but when you were growing up, they were really active and?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was the main employment in the area there.
Story_ID: 6005
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet?  Did they have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They never told us.  I'd like to say fate brought them together, but they never said.  And I'm assuming in Edwards, Mississippi, there was not, the population was small.  And according to what I was told by a distant cousin, that the Jones girls were considered attractive girls in the area.  There were five or six girls, all very, very pretty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he would have been attracted over to--.
Speaker 2: (laughs).
Speaker 1: --that place by reputation of (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Story_ID: 6006
Speaker 1: Did you know your grand--well, you knew your, some of your grandparents, right?
Speaker 2: I knew, my mother's [Vivian Ercell Williams] mother had died before I was born.  I knew Papa, her father, a tall, distinguished-looking gentleman who was always, to my recollection, always in a suit.  I never saw him casual.  Of course, back then, you never--no one's ever casual that much any how.  He died when I must have been maybe seven.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now, he was the minister, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And did he support himself solely by the ministry or did he have other--?
Speaker 2: According--now, I do know they had farm, they were on farms so I'm assuming it was a combination of both.  And they all did farm work, the girls did, or the family did, and the boys also.  But that's all I knew about papa, that he was always--and he was, I don't know how old he was when he died, but he always looked old to me.  Of course, when you're little, everybody looks old.  And when he died, they buried him in Mississippi.  The whole family went down.  I did cause my mama took the baby.  And my father's family I knew quite well because we came, when we came to Waukegan [Illinois], they were still here.  They were here ahead of us.  There was Grandma Rie and Grandpa Demps.  His name was Dempsey and her name was Mariah.  And he died first, I hope I got it right.  And then Grandma Rie came to live with us for a while.  And then she died.
Story_ID: 6007
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Well, mama gave birth to six and then she had the two from the first marriage.  So that made eight of us, and there's three of us left.  And I was the oldest of my mother's children.
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us, and--?
Speaker 2: Surely.
Speaker 1: --in order.
Speaker 2: (laughs), what a task.  Well, the oldest, my father--Edna Mae was the oldest and Lee Ethel, the two by his first marriage, and the other children would be myself, Betty, Laura, Iris, Teddy, Esther and Celeste.  And my older sister, Edna Mae, by the first marriage, she had a son Isaac.  And when she died at the age of thirty, he came to live with us.  So there was Isaac also.  And he died also.
Story_ID: 6008
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up, and you grew up in Waukegan [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood I remember, and I think when we first came to Waukegan, I think we lived with one of daddy's [Theodore Roosevelt Williams] relatives cause mama's [Vivian Ercell Williams] relatives were in Chicago [Illinois].  Then we got an apartment on South Avenue.  And I remember it fondly.  We stayed there until I was twelve or thirteen years.  And it was four apartments together, and we were all like family.  It was aunt somebody, and uncle somebody, and if we did wrong, it was the old school where they reprimanded, they took care of us.  We played games on the front porch and hop scotch, kick the can alley, fun.  And we could walk to school, which we never heard of busing to school, we could walk to school, which at the time seemed like a long distance, but was probably three blocks away, and enjoyed it immensely.  It was, then we moved about a block and a half down from the house and still maintain--and I still keep in touch with some of the people now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was your neighborhood a integrated neighborhood or all-black neighborhood or?
Speaker 2: When we moved--what I remember, that neighborhood was mixed.  There was a, a (unclear) store on the corner, a neighborhood grocery store.  There were whites across the street, up the street and around.  And as I got older, I--fewer and fewer whites were there.  And then you could certainly tell when you're at the, at grade school because the classes were mostly, mostly white; then became mixed, and then it became mostly all black.  And I think that was when white flight took place, along about, it must have been when I was about eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Tell me what were some of the sights and sound and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: One of the sights and sounds that I think about is that you had the washing machine that's usually on the back porch.  But on wash day, it came into the kitchen.  And you had that agitator and that wringer and those buckets of water and the heating up of the water.  And then hanging the clothes outside.  And it was a, an effort I guess, to get laundry done, but we all participated in it.  And nowadays, you go downstairs, you push a button, two buttons for it to dry, and that's it.  But I remember it vividly.  And now, whenever I drive somewhere, on country roads, you see the washing machine on the front porch, and it brings back that memory again.
Speaker 1: With the wringer and all that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, getting your fingers caught in it, getting, yeah.  And the sounds, we--there were a lot of kids in that four-development house.  And I remember one day the lady at the street came by and said, "Now could y'all be quiet," because her husband, who was two houses up, had been sick, and he wanted, wanted us to be a little quiet.  And we tried to abide by that.  And behind our house, Reverend McCullough had his church, and we would hear that sort of music going on.  And daddy would sing at his church every so often, whenever he needed a guest singer, just thought of it then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had a piano in the living room, and we took piano lessons so we, we always had someone banging.  I want to say musical, but there was always piano noise.
Story_ID: 6009
Speaker 1: Now did you all attend church in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Next door to us, immediately next door to the house was a church parsonage.  So therefore we had to go to church because the minister would be watching.  And the church was about another half a block away, so we'd go to church.  We would go to Sunday school, church, BTU [Baptist Training Union], and any event.  And I was telling somebody--Easter just passed recently, and I said, do people still give speeches.  And they said, pardon?  Cause when we were growing up, you always had a speech Easter Sunday, and I don't think they do that anymore.  We have fond memories of getting up there getting our speeches.
Speaker 1: Somebody would give you a slip of paper, and--.
Speaker 2: You got it (laughs).  This is yours, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you'd say something about Jesus, and--.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Miss that.  We were all active in church, and I was, I guess they call it an acolyte, and I call it a baby usher because we would go in before the choir.  Then we all joined the choir, we were all members of the choir.
Story_ID: 6010
Speaker 1: What kind of a little girl were you growing up?  I mean what did you like to do, and what did you dislike?
Speaker 2: Let me think.  Now, I'm gonna tell you that I was a good little girl, 'cause I (laughs).  I never talked back, I just never did to my parents or to, almost to anybody.  I studied hard.  I tried to do right, played hard, had lots of friends, and enjoyed life.  And, but everything revolved in little bitty area we were.  That was our life, that's what we did, walked to school every day, loved the teachers.
Story_ID: 6011
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: At the time, it was McAllister Grade School [Waukegan, Illinois].  And it's now changed to Carmen [now Carman Buckner Elementary] or something else.  It's changed the name.  But it was the grade school for the South side of Waukegan, and everybody went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of your favorite teachers at McAllister?
Speaker 2: My kindergarten teacher was Ms. Ralston.  I remember her--and everybody usually remembers their kindergarten teacher.  And my third grade teacher, she was, I think it was Ms. Bloomberg.  And she, they sent me upstairs to go to a class that had third and fourth grade together.  And had I thought about it, I had known, I could have probably skipped a grade and gone on to fourth.  But I just kept doing what I was doing and enjoying it very much.  And Ms. Ulrich was our fourth and fifth grade teacher.  And who was our eighth grade teacher, geez, forgot.  But there was a man there at the school, Mr. Spellman, who taught science, whom I enjoyed, he was very good.  It, the teachers were--Ms. Brown taught history, but while I was there, they asked me, the secretary of the school got pregnant.  Well, she was married and she got pregnant.  And during maternity leave, they asked me if I would sit in the office and answer the phone.  Now, that could have been a precursor, and I didn't know it (laughs).  But I, I would sit in the office and answer the phone.  And one day someone called asking if anyone could, if they could find a babysitter.  And I said, well, I can do that.  So that was my first job.  I think I was twelve years, and I was babysitting, two doors down from the school, yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were answering the phone?
Speaker 2: I must have been twelve, twelve or thirteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought that I did very good in, history was very good for me, easy for me, and English was very easy--not easy, but I, I liked that a lot.  I didn't like, and to this day, don't like math, which I regret.  I wish I had learned to love it, and later in life someone said, "Betty, math is such a science of logic."  You know, it either is or it isn't.  And I just wish I had enjoyed it more because it is important now in everything you do, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so did you make good grades in school?
Speaker 2: In grade school, I did very good.  I did very good.  I enjoyed it, and, unfortunately, when I got to high school, I don't know if it was the discovery of boys or what, but the studying sort of slipped a little bit.  But my grades were still good, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I should have been, could have been an A student, and I was like a B.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in extracurricular activities in school?
Speaker 2: We did a Spanish club, I took Spanish in high school, the Girls Athletic Association, the choir, of course, all the pep things, all those things that were involved in that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Waukegan Township High School [Waukegan, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum (laughs).
Speaker 1: That's pretty simple.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughs).  At the time it was the only high school in the area, and then it started growing so they had to get two of them.  They called it East Campus and West Campus, but still it was Waukegan Township.
Speaker 1: And Waukegan is the home of Jack Benny.
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: And did they--did he ever come back to Waukegan [Township] High School while you were--?
Speaker 2: Well, they named a school after him, so he came back for that.  I didn't get to--I did not get a chance to see him or meet him, but he did come back for that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, when you were in high school, now this is the only grade in high school, black--how many, what was the percentage of black students, say, in Waukegan High School or in the City of Waukegan, do you think in those days?
Speaker 2: If I had to give a guess, growing up, in the early years, I'd say ten to fifteen [percent].  And in high school, it was about the same.  Now, it's probably reversed or maybe even more, maybe even ninety [percent].  But it was, yeah, we were the minority.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think now, it might be the majority--?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --black students at Milwaukee, okay--I mean in--(a second tape cut off).
Speaker 2: Did you--how did they treat the black students in school?  Was it, was it?
Speaker 1: Two answers to that question.  When I was going there, I thought they treated us okay.  We were, they had certain organizations which had very few blacks in it.  One was the girls' ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  That was highly prestigious, and to my knowing, the first African American to get it was a girl named Molly Springs.  It was done by academics.  It was done by popularity, and a lot of other things, but she was the first.  I think Dorothy Wilkes may have been the next one.  But it was very, very, very few.  When they had junior--homecoming court and prom court, there was always like maybe one or two on there, and cheerleading, the same thing, it was just--and I don't know if it was discrimination or if we didn't try out for those sort of things.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Were there any black teachers?
Speaker 1: The first black teacher we had was a man named Mr. McClendon.  He taught, I think it was social studies.  And he was the first--I never had the pleasure of being under him.
Story_ID: 6012
Speaker 1: So this [high school years] was the 1950s we're talking about?
Speaker 2: We're talking about the late '50s [1950s] (laughs).
Speaker 1: Late '50's [1950s], okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (laughs), I graduated in '57 [1957], so it was that time frame, yeah.  And--.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the advent of Rock and Roll and all of that--?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --in nineteen, 1956, Elvis Presley is starting to come out.
Speaker 2: Bill Haley and those sort of things.
Speaker 1: Bill Haley and the Comets, right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: And the Moon Glows (laughs).
Speaker 1: What was your favorite music in those days?
Speaker 2: I wasn't musically inclined.  I sang in the choir, but my favorite song, because I could sing it, was 'Earth Angel' and that, that was my favorite.  And at the time, in order to get to the, the black music or the African American music, you had to turn on the radio because the through, through TV sets we had, you didn't see very many African Americans on TV.  So we had--I forgot the name of the station that came out of Chicago, where we can hear the black music.
Speaker 1: Was it VON in Chicago [Illinois], WVON?
Speaker 2: It was three letters.  That's all I remember (laughs).  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the black station in Chicago, WVON, Voice of the Negro, actually it stood for.
Speaker 2: Ah, but that's how we had to hear it, and the mainstream, they weren't playing that much black music, but 'Earth Angel' was a song that they picked up, and we could hear it sometimes on the white stations too because on American Bandstand, I think they appeared on that show.
Speaker 1: It could have also been WLS of Chicago.
Speaker 2: That sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: WLS might have been, cause I think VON started in the early sixties [1960s].
Speaker 2: But we couldn't hear it in Waukegan, I know that.
Speaker 1: --actually, yeah.  And, and WVON had a, had a very weak signal.  It only--.
Speaker 2: Ah, well, Waukegan had one radio station, and you could get all sort of futures trading on it and local news, but that was it.
Speaker 1: And that wouldn't be popular among high school students.
Speaker 2: It wasn't.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I'll never forget one thing, I--when I was in the sixth grade, and I tell this story all the time, people wondered why I watch news almost twenty-four hours a day.  When I was sixth grade, I got to class, and the teacher said, something important happened today.  Does anybody know what it is?  Did you hear it on the radio.  So I had the radio on, what were they talking about, corn prices and things like that?  I didn't know.  Several of the kids raised their hand.  King George [VI] had died.  I said, well, I missed that.  So from that day to this, (laughs), I've got the news on so if anything happens, I will be up to date on it.
Speaker 1: This was the King of England.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughs).  Way back then, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did you have a favorite television show?
Speaker 2: When we first got our TV show--set, which, gosh, I forgot what year it was, I used to watch the 'Paul Whitman Hour', is that the bandleader.  He had a, a show, sort of talent-like show, and Arthur Godfrey had like a talent show.  And we would watch that.  And we'd have to, initially we had to go down to my uncle's house to watch his TV.  Then we got our own.  And I'm trying to think when Nat King Cole got his own show because we were glued to the TV set then.  And we were glued to it, one day they told us that--I may get it wrong, the June Taylor Dancers are on the Jackie Gleason Show, and it had the first African American dancer.  And she was the daughter of, was it Cab Calloway or Duke Ellington?  Someone like that.  And we couldn't wait to see her.  Unfortunately, she was light-skinned, and we couldn't tell which one she was (laughs).  But we, yes, whenever there was any, any one of color on TV, we had our eyes glued to it.
Speaker 1: I remember that.
Speaker 2: Good (laughs).
Speaker 1: My grandmother actually was talking about that.  And you're right, I think we couldn't tell which one she was.
Speaker 2: Which one she was, and we were glued to the TV set.
Speaker 1: They would make the geometric patterns with their legs and kinds of--
Speaker 2: For sure--right.
Speaker 1: --stuff on the, on the show.
Speaker 2: And, of course, the TV was black and white, which made it, you know, more difficult, yeah.  Your grandmother, okay (laughs).
Speaker 1: Well, she would tell us to come, she would always tell us, colored is on, and we would come in and watch TV (laughs) as kids.
Speaker 2: I know, yeah, yeah.  And it's just hard to believe that it was so hard, you know, for us to get on.
Story_ID: 6013
Speaker 1: How was your social life in high school?  Did you get a chance to go to the prom and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I did go to the prom, and I went to the homecoming.  My girlfriend, unfortunately who died, Helen, she was quite artistic, and she was in all those painting up and decorating sort of things.  And I would hang around with her.  The football games were always a lot of fun, which in a small town, that's a big thing for everybody to do.  We did that a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we had the Elks.  That was the after-school activity for us.  On weekends, we would go there for dances and things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had a place called Bar Well in Waukegan [Illinois].  We would go there for dances too.
Story_ID: 6014
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, did you, did you have a sense of what you wanted to be or what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: When I was a senior in high school, I thought I wanted to be a speech pathologist.  I thought that would be a good thing to do.  I, and one reason I did that, one of my cousins, we were in Chicago [Illinois], and we were--I was talking to her, and her older sister came to me and said, you two don't even sound alike.  You sound so much different than Juanita, cause I talked--they called it proper.  And I just thought I was talking.  I said, well, geez, I said, well, then I'll teach people to talk like I talk if that's--which I thought was, at the time, I thought was (important?).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I didn't do it.
Story_ID: 6015
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of this speech pattern and so forth, I mean this--did--so you, you were criticized for speaking properly or proper English?
Speaker 2: I wasn't being criticized.  It was just a comment, and, and I took it as something that may be--as a good thing.  So I said, maybe I can promote it.
Speaker 1: Well, it certainly can be a good thing (laughs).
Speaker 2: It sure, it sure was.
Speaker 1: It's a useful thing, you know, certainly, that's for sure.  So, so you thought that you might be a speech therapist or--?  Did any of your teachers encourage that or did they think about it or?
Speaker 2: They didn't, they, they did encourage me to go on.  But they didn't--that's another thing.  I don't know if it was not available, but they don't have as--I didn't think they had as many counselors to help you back then.  And they may have had it, and they just didn't reach out to us.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 6016
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any high school teachers or counselors or administrators that served as sort of a mentor for you when you were high school?
Speaker 2: No.  I had one teacher, Ms. Parr.  I excelled, she taught the typing and the shorthand.  That's what I think, and she told me how great I was, that I should continue to go ahead.  And I said, yeah, yeah.  But then there was no one else, not like they do now.
Speaker 1: So you were basically in the business course in high school?
Speaker 2: That's what--I had taken the commercial classes, yeah.  And, unfortunately, back in '57 [1957], that was the thing to do.  It was, if you weren't a school teacher or a secretary, you were out of line.
Story_ID: 6017
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation from high school, what did you think would be the next step?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd applied for Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and had been accepted.  And then I had taken the test at Great Lakes Naval Training Center [Great Lakes, Illinois], which was another employment source in our area, and passed the test.  And they called me for an interview.  And I was working the summer down at Skokie Valley Laundry.  Well, when Great Lakes called me for a job, I quit that and went to work.  And then, at that time, that was good pay.  And so I said, well, I'll just a while, I'll work some more.  It was good, it was helping for the family and everything.  And so--.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: --college got put off.
Speaker 1: So you lived at home during this time?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: So--well, you were getting ready to say something more, and I kind of cut you off.
Speaker 2: Who knows, I, I'll just keep going on and on (laughs).  But I stayed there at Great Lakes, and I loved it at Great Lakes.  It was a wonderful place to work.  I had excellent co-workers, and they were also helpful to me.  But then my sister joined the military, and she was younger than I, and she left home.  And I said, well, geez , here I am older than she is, and I'm still at home.  So I decided I was gonna go to Washington [D.C.] to work.  And that was because working for the government, Washington had more government jobs than anybody I knew, so I came to Washington, applied for a job with the Navy Department, and got it and came to live here.  And that was in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay, so working for the Department of the Navy here, and--?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so how long did you work for the Department of the Navy?
Speaker 2: Let's '59 [1959], it must have been like four years.  Then I went to work for the postal department, the main, main department of the postal service.  Then I went to [US]AID [United States Agency for International Development.]  Then I went to Peace Corps, Peace Corps Action, State Department, Peace--well, vice versa, and then after Peace Corps, I went to work for HHS [Health and Human Services], and I retired from HHS the first time in 1984.  They offered a early out which I took advantage of.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, but when you first started with, with Great Lakes and, well, when you first got to D.C., were there many black secretaries?
Speaker 2: When I worked at Great Lakes, I was a GS-2 [Federal job classification] clerk typist, and I worked in Building One, which was the headquarters.  And there was one black person.  I was a secretary.  There was a black lady who ran the Xerox area, and then there were cleaning crews.  And that was it.  When I got to Washington, D.C., in my office, at the, the first office I had, I was hired as a clerk typist.  There was another black man in the office.  I think that was all, but they had me doing the mail.  And I did the mail for, I guess in there (unclear) even six months or more.  And I went to personnel, which was highly unusual for me to do cause I was usually a go-along sort of person, and I said, they hired me as clerk typist, but all I do is sort mail all day.  And they looked it up, and I was a qualified clerk typist.  So they called my office, and the office why didn't you come to us?  I said, well, I didn't know what to do.  So then I started typing.  They would give me letters to type.  And one of my bosses suggested I go to a, to another office at the other part of the building, and I became a clerk typist and then a clerk stenographer, and then--.
Story_ID: 6018
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want to backtrack a little bit to back even as far as you can remember, did--you said you listened to the news quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, in fact, they only had a station that broadcasts news and stock quotes .
Speaker 2: Not stock, poultry and corn (laughs).
Speaker 1: Poultry and corn.  Okay, but, so did you, did you always keep up with the news--?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --or with politics or world affairs and those (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Mostly, not so much politics, but world affairs and the news.  And I've always watched the 'Today Show', even from Dave Garraway and all that, always watched it.  And right before we'd go to school, I'd flip it on and then go to school.  And then, in the evening, not so much because, with one T.V. and six people, you didn't have much of a choice to do it.  But we always had a newspaper, I always read the newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you family get the, any of the black papers like the 'Chicago Defender' or the 'Courier', the "Pittsburgh [Courier]--?
Speaker 2: In Waukegan [Illinois], we didn't.  And I don't know if we, I don't think they had an outlet source in Waukegan.  But whenever we'd go to Chicago, we would read the relatives' papers.  And we, the "Accyrm" (ph.)--no, that was in Washington, but we didn't--we would read it, but we didn't get it.  And we would get, I don't know when 'Ebony Magazine' came about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the mid-'40s [1940s] so it was out in the '50s [1950s], but, so did you, did you read any of the Johnson Publications  (unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Whenever we'd go to the beauty shop (laughs).
Speaker 1: Well, people do pass them around.  They buy one and they pass it around.
Speaker 2: Oh, for sure.  We didn't subscribe to it.  I don't (unclear) subscribing to magazines, where they'll start at school, and they would get the magazine subscriptions and we started getting it at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you pay attention to presidential politics at all when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I'm trying to think when King George [VI] died, I would--I couldn't tell you who was president.  I just knew we always had a president, and I didn't know--I don't think I knew about Republican and Democrats.  I just knew there was always a president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you were a kid under [Harry S.] Truman, I guess would have been President then, and then [Dwight] Eisenhower.
Speaker 2: Well, no, it was [Franklin D.] Roosevelt because I'll never forget--
Speaker 1: Roosevelt, Roosevelt, okay.
Speaker 2: --when he died, my family talked about that.  And when the war was over, they talked about that.
Speaker 1: Now, you were very small when the war was going on.
Speaker 2: Right.  I must have been, maybe six or seven.
Speaker 1: So that didn't affect you (unclear).
Speaker 2: (nods head no)--
Speaker 1: But when you were a little older, well, in high school, the Civil Rights Movement had started kicking up, I guess a little bit with the Montgomery [Alabama] Bus Boycott.
Speaker 2: Right--.
Speaker 1: Did, what did you--did your family discuss that?
Speaker 2: They didn't.  And I think when I came to Washington in '59 [1959], there was also then a lot of active Civil Rights Movement.  But I was by myself, and nobody I knew was doing it.  And we would hear about it, and we'd talk about it, but we didn't know what to do to get involved, which is bad, which is bad.
Story_ID: 6019
Speaker 1: Well, was there much civil rights activity in D.C. itself when you got here?
Speaker 2: When I told--I was working for this family as a nanny, other than working at Great Lakes [Naval Base, Great Lakes, Illinois].  And I told her I was gonna move to Washington [D.C.].  And she said, "Why do you want to go to Washington?  That's the most segregated city in the world."  I said, "I beg your pardon?"  She said, "Oh, my gosh, yes, it's awful there in Washington, D.C."  And I was, it scared me a little bit cause I didn't know what that meant.  And so I came to Washington, and luckily, the one man that worked in my office, he said, well--and this was in '59 [1959], he said as late as '57 [1957], Washington was very segregated.  U Street was the Washington--the blacks hung out on U Street, and they couldn't go downtown.  And they didn't go downtown.  And everything was separate.  But in '59 [1959], it was just breaking through so everybody could go anywhere they wanted to.  And the first, I--my--I met a girlfriend at church.  And she said, "Why don't you come visit our family in Culpepper for the weekend.  I said, well, "How do I get to Culpepper?" She said, "You can take the bus," cause I was working, and she was still in school.  And so I took the bus to Culpepper [Virginia].  She said, "We'll meet you there," and so I got off the bus.  And like everybody else, I went to the waiting room with everybody else, and I waited and waited.  So this man said, "Can we help you?"  I said, "I'm waiting for my friend to pick me up," 'cause I'd been there quite a while.  He said, "She's probably on the other side."  I said, "I beg your pardon?  "She's on the other side."  So I looked through this little window, and this nice little waiting room I was in, compared to that unpainted little waiting room over there, and there she was.  I said, "Why didn't you tell that,"--I had no idea, I had never thought about that.
Speaker 1: So they had a colored side on--?
Speaker 2: --That was my first encounter.  And we went downtown in Culpepper, and we wanted to go to a drugstore, and she was telling me which ones we could or could not go in.  I said, "Hmm, I don't like this," have not been back to Culpepper since.
Speaker 1: So you're getting a sense that this--what segregation is really about?
Speaker 2: And I think I came to Washington when it was just ending, so therefore, I didn't have to encounter so much.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what neighborhood did you live in, in D.C. when you moved there?
Speaker 2: I lived in Northwest on Kenyan Street, twelve--1223 Kenyan.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you like D.C. basically?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  I thought it was--we had gone to Chicago [Illinois] a lot because my relatives are in Chicago, but I thought Chicago was too big.  I was a little bit afraid of Chicago.  And Washington was a nice, small, sort of Southern town.  You can get around easily, you know--I thought you knew most of the people.  And they didn't have Beltway and things like that back then either, so everything was sort of--and you used the, everybody went by bus and streetcar.  They had streetcars back then too.
Story_ID: 6020
Speaker 1: Before you listed a number of agencies you worked for, and are there any stories, good stories from any of those jobs that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Let me think.  Well, one of my favorite places to work was the Peace Corps, and I don't know if I have any stories or not.  I know when I left my first job at Great Lakes [Naval Base, Great Lakes, Illinois], I cried and cried because I liked it so much.  And I wouldn't see those people again.  It was just heartbreaking.  And when I went to--the first international person I ever met when I was working at the State Department, they would have the, whenever the diplomatic people would come, we would get a chance to go to the diplomatic lobby and look over the railing and see them.  And the first person I saw was King Hussein [bin Talal] of Jordan.  And I always remember that.  And then when he got sick, very, very sick, one of the last people I saw, a month before he died, was when he was at the White House.  So I had great feelings for him.  We had fun, Peace Corps was a fun, fun place.  It was--at the time, it wasn't, it started in '63 [1963], I think, and I think I started to work there in the '70s [1970s].  And, but it was new, it was young people, fresh ideas, people who really wanted to do something to help people, and that, that feeling permeated throughout the agency, just a fun, fun place.  I enjoyed it immensely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I got to do my first traveling too, with the Peace Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, where did you go?
Speaker 2: We had several conferences.  I got to go to Vienna [Austria] and Rome [Italy].  And then my boss, at the time, worked for the Africa region.  I got to go to Africa, and that was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your boss in--?
Speaker 2: At the time, it was C. Payne Lucas and Walter Carrington.  They were head of the Africa region.  And then I went, on the second trip, I was working for Walter--Michael (unclear) who was director of the agency at the time, we went to Kenya to represent President [Ricahrd M.] Nixon for one of the anniver--birthdays, anniversaries.  And that was really nice.
Story_ID: 6021
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are you really paying attention to politics now at this point and who's who in the political world?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think it becomes, once you're in it, it becomes a part of you.  You can't let it go.  And people keep saying, you're out of it, do you care?  I said, but I do care.  I watch, I read, I want to know what's happening.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have-- what were your political affiliations in those days?  Did you--I mean, well, this seems like a, you know, a self-evident, to ask people like this (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I thought I was Republican because I believed that [President Abraham] Lincoln freed the slaves and this was what I want to do, and be with the party that dealt with that.  And I learned later that he actually really didn't, and that the Republican, you know, a lot of things about them I didn't like.  So I found myself pulling more toward the Democrat [sic. Democratic] Party.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you parents have a clear political affiliation in Waukegan [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was always assumed that they voted Democratic.  It was just what they did, although when they worked down the line, most of the people had worked a Republican.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in the--so were you, were you very much involved with politics or were just kind of casually involved in it?
Speaker 2: Casually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did it make a difference on a government job if the, if the, what?
Speaker 2: The administration changing did not.  I never noticed a change--I'm trying to think, which job did I notice it.  When I worked for [US]AID [United States Agency for International Development], I noticed that the bosses I had would leave and then would bring in new ones.  I said, oh, political, but it was okay with me.  Then I went to work for Peace Corps and they would leave, and I didn't like it as much because it was a change of party, and it would be a different sort of mentality, they would think differently.
Story_ID: 6022
Speaker 1: All right, now, Peace Corps and Vista [Volunteers In Service To America] , I know especially, busy, you know, they're--well, a lot of other departments too, but when the, the administration changes from one party to the next, the whole thrust of it kind of changes, is that correct?
Speaker 2: That's true.  Yeah, the programs change, the vision changes, yeah.  And they try to, just--you know, the budget process, they tried to get rid of some of the programs, tried to do, with Peace Corps merging into ACTION.  And that didn't work, so they unmerged it again.
Speaker 1: So you were with Peace Corps how long?
Speaker 2: I started in '69 [1969], and I left in '82 [1982], '81 [1981], '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's when you had a chance to travel during that period of time to African countries--?
Speaker 2: --I did.
Speaker 1: And did you, what did you notice about Africa especially that's, you know, that you--that surprised you, that you didn't know about?
Speaker 2: My first trip to Africa to Niger, or Niger as they call it now.  It was Niger when I was working there.  And we were going there to one of the Peace Corps conferences, and there was a group of us on the plane.  And they said that the plane would be landing soon.  So I'm looking out there trying to see--it was early in the morning.  So it was dark, and I'm looking outside to see what I could see cause I wanted to see what Africa was, and all I could see was the cows on the runway.  I said, oh, my, we are really in for--they were very--no bright lights.  They were sort of dim, but the cows were on the runway. And then when we got to where we were going, I was staying at a State house, which is a house furnished by the State Department, and it was very, very nice.  And they gave you a guard.  I said, why do I need a guard?  And I was afraid of the guard cause he would walk around at nighttime, you could just hear these little footprints going around.  But it was just, I loved it.  It was a beautiful country, beautiful people.  They spoke French which is not a problem for us because most of our Peace Corps people spoke French cause Africa, a lot of the African countries are French speaking; just loved it, loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what are the other countries again?  You went to Niger, you went to--?
Speaker 2: Liberia, Senegal--no, Ivory Coast, Ivory Coast.  That was on the trip then, and, and the second trip, it was to Kenya, only to Kenya.  That was, and then with the President [William J. Clinton], we went to several African countries on two different occasions.
Story_ID: 6023
Speaker 1: Okay, after 1984, now, you retired, right, you said, you--this was your first retirement?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You took a early retirement?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you plan to do after, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I retired, I was unhappy with my job.  I was working for HHS [Health and Human Services] in the Office of Civil Rights.  And I didn't think we were doing anything.  I kept saying, this, I mean I thought we'd be doing more.  I don't know what I expected, but we weren't.  So I--.
Speaker 1: Now, this is during the [President Ronald W.] Reagan administration?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And I said, now, what can I do?  And I said, well, I'm gonna work on a campaign.  And it hit me.  I'm gonna volunteer work on a campaign because if I'm unhappy, the only way I can do anything different to make a change is to change the whole thing.  So I went to work on the [Walter] Mondale- [Geraldine] Ferraro [1984 Presidential] campaign.  And I worked immediately in Ferraro's office and established wonderful friendships from that thing, from that office.  And enjoyed it immensely, but we lost that election.  And then in '88 [1988], I went to work on the [1988 Presidential] [Michael] Dukakis- [Lloyd] Bentson campaign, and we lost that election.  Then '92 [1992], they made me an offer to work on the Clinton campaign.  I said, no, because losing is difficult.  Oh, you work very long hours, very, very hard, very, very dedicated.  Then you lose, and you feel so good [sic, bad] about it.  I said, I can't do it.  And then they said, well, you could work in Little Rock [Arkansas].  That didn't appeal to me either.  And they said, you can work for James Carville.  That didn't appeal to me either (laughs).  So my friend said come, just give it a try, give it a try.  So I went down--.
Speaker 1: Not James Carville (laughs).
Speaker 2: --(laughs),Whom I love dearly
Speaker 1: He's an interesting person, a very interesting man.
Speaker 2: Oh, he's wonderful, wonderful, yeah.  And then the rest is history.
Story_ID: 6024
Speaker 1: --but I want to go back to--now, you attended school several, in several different places?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And some interesting places too, like--well, tell us about your--?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I always regretted until this day that I did not graduate from college.  So I took courses all over the place in an effort to at least keep me up to date.  And I attended Antioch College, which is located--the branch is in Washington, D.C., which is very, very good and very, very--they had a controversy going with it, but I enjoyed it immensely.  The teachers were very, very dedicated.  I took courses at agriculture department, Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Every time a course was offered, if I could take it, I took advantage of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, what were some of the courses you took--?
Speaker 2: A lot of management-oriented type courses.  And I don't know if I, as I look back, I think I was doing it so I could better myself in my job, but a lot of times, they were recommended to take them, from various supervisors, which I did.  And I took computer classes because at the--it was the beginning of the age of computers.  And it was just--kids nowadays, it's just second nature to them.  It was difficult for me to grasp all this and remember all this and, but I took classes in that.
Story_ID: 6025
Speaker 1: Okay, now, back to the campaigns, I want to backtrack a little bit.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna add, I want to backtrack too. I forgot, one thing that I remember my parents telling me is that they had lived through the Depression.  And that had a big impact on us because they were poor, and they were made poorer.  So we always poor.  And we saved, we scrimped because we thought we'd be poor again.  So always, that was always in the back of my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you didn't want to relive that (laughs) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: No, and I didn't know that, at the time that the Depression--well, of course, no one knew it was, maybe a one-time thing, hopefully, but, yeah, everybody had tales to tell about that, everybody.
Speaker 1: Was there ever a time that you feared it was coming, and coming back, I mean in terms of the political atmosphere and so on?
Speaker 2: Well, we--in my youth, you mean?
Speaker 1: No, as a grown person?
Speaker 2: Well, as a grown person, I keep worrying about different things happening in the economy.  The deficit concerns me, and little things like that.  But I think it's enough, people have enough things under control now that they can avoid it, hopefully, cause I think it would catastrophic for the world to undergo that again.
Story_ID: 6026
Speaker 1: Now, in '84 [1984], when you volunteered for Mondale-Ferraro [1984 Walter Mondale/ Geraldine Ferarro Presidential campaign]--?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: What was your--did you really, you were tired of the [Ronald] Reagan administration, I guess, in some ways?
Speaker 2: I was, and that's when I found myself really--at the other time, 'cause I had voted for [Richard] Nixon one year during this, my life time.  I did all my--most of my voting was Democratic, but I did vote for Nixon.  The man I was working for was a Nixon appointee, and he would tell me all the great things he did, and I was convinced that there were great things that he could do.
Speaker 1: Was this the first time that Nixon ran or?
Speaker 2: I think it was the second time?
Speaker 1: Second time.
Speaker 2: --Right before his, everything fell apart.  But then, as things went on, I loved [President Jimmy] Carter, I voted for Carter. And then when Reagan came on board, it, it just--things did not feel right.  And, unfortunately, he's now passed on, and we hear glowing, glowing remarks, but there were things about him that just didn't feel right.  So I decided I'm gonna do what I can.  I'm gonna work on the Democratic campaign.
Speaker 1: What are some of the things that--it's in the news as we speak, you know, they're--Reagan's, ex-president Reagan's funeral is, I guess being mounted now, and, but what were some of the--what's your assessment of--what were some of the things that bothered you about the Reagan administration?
Speaker 2: Well, now that, and I'm gonna go back to my mother.  You cannot speak ill of the dead.  So I can't say (laughs)--.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's not just him, but his administration and some of the things that you thought didn't--?
Speaker 2: I don't think he was active in civil rights as he could or should have been.  I mean we were doing very little, and I think the record will prove that very little was done at all.  And that was the main focus I had.  Now, internationally, I think he probably did a lot, that's what the records show, but nationally and domestically, I think he, we suffered a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, you were for the, the--?
Speaker 2: Office of Civil Rights.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you felt it was sort of frozen at that point?
Speaker 2: Frozen.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you thought that Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro would do a better job?
Speaker 2: I felt sure they would.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I was working on the campaign, things I would hear what they would say they were gonna do and what they wanted to do and things like that, pleased my ear.  They were gonna be active in doing a lot of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay--.
Speaker 2: And that they would also bring back more African Americans.  As I looked around the Reagan White House, there weren't very many.  I think Bob Brown was there, and--he may have been Nixon, but there were not very many.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking now, who was there, and I'm not coming up with a-- it must be somebody.
Speaker 2: There must have been, but it slips my mind at present (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't either. I can't think of anyone.
Speaker 2: And as I look back on the tapes they're showing of him now, I don't see very many African Americans in the cabinet or around him.
Speaker 1: And I really hadn't thought about that, you know, how--I assume there weren't that many, and now that I've really focused on it, I can't think of any.  There were probably some, I suppose, but I can't.  Anyway, so that campaign, and then the [1988 Michael] Dukakis [Presidential] campaign?
Speaker 2: I went to Boston [Massachusetts] for the Dukakis-[Lloyd] Bentsen campaign.
Speaker 1: So you worked out of Boston for that period of time?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And did you get a chance to meet these candidates, Mondale or--and Ferraro,--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Well, you worked in Ferraro's office?
Speaker 2: --Yes, I met them, all of them we met.  And it was just a hard campaign.  We wanted to win badly, Dukakis-Bentsen.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any reflections on Mondale or, or on Dukakis or Ferraro or--?
Speaker 2: I, as I look back, they said that Ferraro was ahead of her time, the woman pres--vice presidency.  And I think that, unfortunately, may have hindered the ticket.  I don't know for sure or I've heard people say that.  I think Mondale would have been an excellent candidate, excellent president.  Dukakis, he had some personality problems.  They didn't call him stiff like they called [Al] Gore and like they're calling [John] Kerry, but he was not the warm, fuzzy.  So it was difficult to get him across.
Speaker 1: I remember this one line in the debate that he, where they asked him what would he do if someone murdered his wife or something--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and he gave such a very--.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --logical, kind of calm response (laughs).
Speaker 2: And everybody said (mouth opened, shocked gesture), and that didn't help at all.  And there were other things that the campaign did that just kept getting worse and worse.
Speaker 1: Did you see, could you tell on the inside that the campaign was not generating--I mean can you tell it just wasn't--.
Speaker 2: I was feeling it wasn't doing it, that momentum that you, that you get, that you thrive on, was going away, slipping away.
Story_ID: 6027
Speaker 1: But in '92 [1992], when they were offering to, they wanted you to work on the [Bill] Clinton [Presidential] campaign?
Speaker 2: '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: '91, okay, yeah, it had to be a year before '92, yeah, okay.  So you said, you didn't--it was hard for them to convince you to--?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to move to Little Rock [Arkansas.]  I'd have to work on another campaign, and at the time, George [H. W.] Bush's, George Bush One's ratings were very, very high.  And I said, oh, no, not another losing campaign.  I said, I just can't do it.  And so I went down there, my friend talked to me, so I went down.  And I said, well, you know, Little Rock isn't as bad as I thought.  It's very, very open, very, very unsegregated, as unfortunately, I had thought.  And the--Bill Clinton, I had met him before.  As I said, he wouldn't remember, but I had met him, and I liked him.  And they said, he's a dynamic candidate and we're gonna turn this around.  I said, okay, so I did, went down to Little Rock and loved it, loved him, loved the campaign, loved everything.
Story_ID: 6028
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did your friend convince you to go to Arkansas?
Speaker 2: She said that they really had a good chance to win this election, that Bill Clinton was dynamic and great, and that I would love it in Little Rock [Arkansas].  So there I was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your friend convinced you that this is gonna be a winning campaign?
Speaker 2: They thought he had a very good chance, very good chance.  At the time I didn't, but I said, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: All right, now, you met--when did you first meet William Jefferson Clinton?
Speaker 2: The first time I actually met him was in 19[88]--during the [Michael] Dukakis- [Lloyd] Bentson [Presidential] campaign.  He was one of the top surrogate speakers.  And he and I shared an elevator.  And I met him then, but I had talked to him on the phone before because my boss, Sam Brown, I was working for him at ACTION, he would call the governor of Arkansas quite a bit.  They were friends.  They would talk on, talk on the phone, but he was just another governor at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so what was your initial impression of the campaign when you got to Arkansas.  You said Little Rock wasn't what you expected it to be.
Speaker 2: Well, I had only read about Little Rock, and the 'Little Rock Nine' and all the desegregation problems they had.  And I assumed that I would encounter some of that.  I didn't.  The campaign found us an apartment which was in walking distance from the campaign.  My husband eventually had my car sent down so I was able to ride around and see other parts of the city and as much of the state as we could.  But it, it was a good place.  The campaign was like most campaigns, extremely active, extremely obser--at first look at it, you'd say highly unorganized, but very organized, very busy, very dedicated people, and working for James Carville who is one of the most dedicated to winning.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I--why was that--I mean how many people would be at, say at a--did you have a big place to work out of and?
Speaker 2: We were in an old newspaper building.  I want to say the 'Gazette', but it was maybe another newspaper that was defunct.  And we were there, and we had three, four floors, very open, very busy, very cluttered is the word I like to use also, and just because people were there--my average day was like twelve hours and others worked longer than I did.  Seven o'clock staff meetings.  You started at 7:00 and you ended at 7:00 or 8:00 at night or later.
Speaker 1: So this was very intense?
Speaker 2: Intense, dedicated to win.
Story_ID: 6029
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the components of the campaign office?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked with [James] Carville in the war room area, which was--I called it, the heart of it, probably couldn't, but they had different state areas.  They had program areas.  They had issues areas, PR [public relations], Mrs.--HRC [Hillary Rodham Clinton], Mrs. Clinton had her office there too, finance had its office there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, James Carville is a very intense man.  He is, he's one of the great defenders of the Clinton administration, even when it was under attack.  He was probably the most able defender in the news media any way.  But what was your impression of James Carville?
Speaker 2: When I first got there to the office, I'm a quiet lady, as you may or may not be able to tell.  And James Carville is not.  And he would be ranting and raving and screaming and carrying on.  I said, my goodness, but one day after maybe day two or three, I went over to him, and I said, "You can yell all you want to, but I love you.  I love you,"--you--I just had a feeling this--he wanted to win.  And I knew it.  A lot of times in campaigns, people have their own agenda.  James' was to win.  And you knew it, and you felt it.  And that's what we did, but he's truly, truly gifted.  And at the time, you know, he was courting Mary Matalin during the campaign.  And I kept saying, well, that seems kind of odd, but they were in love, and she's a wonderful lady also.
Speaker 1: So the (unclear), well, I, that relationship has puzzled a lot of people.
Speaker 2: It has.
Speaker 1: You know, and it still, it still puzzles (unclear).
Speaker 2: It works for them.  Someone said they don't talk business once they're home, which must be, but they have two wonderful children.
Speaker 1: And they actually had a HBO television show about political--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 'K-Street'.
Speaker 1: Right, where they both, you know, were involved in there, she being a conservative and him being a liberal Democrat.  Well, you know, so would she come in on the campaign at that time?  Did she ever come in?
Speaker 2: No, she would call him, but never came in.
Speaker 1: Did he ever try to explain it to--?
Speaker 2: No, you can't explain love, but he never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They opposites attract and that's a true example of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any good stories about the campaign office.  With James Carville, I would imagine it would be a story every minute?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) We were too busy.  We were really too busy to--at least I was, to complain or to do things like that.  It was just a good feeling.  There were lots of young people, energetic people.  There probably were, but a lot of it has slipped my mind.  I probably can go back to some notes and maybe get some stories, but we worked hard.  The one issue that came about which one of the fellows, and I forget his name--oh, it'll come to me.  They all went to this club, and I, I want to say honky tonk, but it was a country sort of club.  And they wouldn't let one of the fellows in, one of the African American fellows.  And one of the--at the staff meeting the next morning, they, one of the--Gene Spurling I think it was, told us that we shouldn't be going back there if they can't, they didn't let him in.  It didn't stop all of them.  Some of them went back, but I never went to it.  But that was the only time that there was an incident of something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was--you were in the 'war room', and I mean I just can't imagine, there's not one--there's got to be--.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: --got to be millions of stories, you can focus on one story, maybe of how--.
Speaker 2: I'd have to think of it, darn it?, yeah--. (simultaneously).
Speaker 1: --of how an issue was spun or cut by James Carville or President [then governor Bill Clinton], or then, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, James was sort of the honcho and George Stephanopoulos was in there also.  And they would meet and talk and get it over.  And they would, we would watch news--the TV would be on all day.  And at 6:00 o'clock or 6:30 whenever national news was on, everyone stopped and watched the national news to see what was happening, to see what leading, to see what the issues were, see what people are interested in.  There were talks with the president on the road all the time--with the candidate on the road all the time, to keep him apprised of what was happening.  They would have polls to see what the polls were showing.  They would listen to that.  But a lot of yelling and carrying on (laughs).
Speaker 1: Can you get a, give us any of specific yelling?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll--a semi-dirty joke?
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Well, James Carville was waiting for someone to come.  He said, "Could you get so-and-so on the phone."  And I said, "Well, hold on a second."  "What's taking so long?  Is she coming or just making all the right sounds?" (Laughs).  That's kind of not so bad.
Speaker 1: That's kind of a one line, kind of a one liner that--.
Speaker 2: But he would, oh, he, he was impatient, but I mean timing is of the essence.  You only have so much time to do things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's really revved up.
Speaker 2: Oh, revved up all the time.
Speaker 1: I, I would--if those meetings were anything like 'K-Street' TV show, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he's a fast talker.  He's very athletic.  He would run every day.  He'd start the meetings on time at 7:00 o'clock, but a good heart, a very, very good heart.
Story_ID: 6030
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the toughest time during that campaign that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna say when the numbers were down for various reasons.  I guess Gennifer Flowers would be the main reason one time because when that came out, everybody had a--it just was not good.  But they worked it out, and went--.
Speaker 1: Now, Gennifer Flowers now, explain what that case was for?
Speaker 2: According to reports and records and everything, that she said that she was having an affair with Governor [Bill] Clinton, and she came out and said it during the middle of the campaign.  And what they did, they went on, what the Clintons did, they went on TV's '60 Minutes', and I think they said there was--I don't know if they said there was no truth to it or that it was over with, something.  And Mrs. [Hillary] Clinton was standing by her man.
Speaker 1: And that sort, was that like strategized in the war room, how they were gonna deal with it?
Speaker 2: According to later [law]suits that I've read about--and at the time, I didn't see all this strategizing going on, but they were saying Gennifer Flowers brought suit against James Carville and George Stephanopoulos saying that they were denigrating her character or something.  But I think the suit was thrown out.
Speaker 1: --Well, of course, the brightest moment was when he won (laughter), as opposed to the--.
Speaker 2: That was one of the brightest moments when he won.
Speaker 1: But when did you think they had turned the corner?
Speaker 2: Well, we--I was working for a--(interruption).
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead, yeah.
Speaker 2: The opportunity, Mrs. [Virginia] Kelly, President Clinton's mother, she would come by the campaign every day or every other day, and she--the first time I saw her, she had on, like a running outfit, and she had Clinton buttons all down the side.  She had made Clinton, big Clinton earrings out of the buttons.  She had a Clinton hat on, she had Clinton--she was a walking Clinton advertisement.
Speaker 1: So she was, she was supportive, I guess you would say (laughs).
Speaker 2: Totally, totally--
Speaker 1: She supported the campaign.
Speaker 2: -- and a wonderful lady, yes, indeedy.
Speaker 1: I was asking you what was the, was there a moment that you thought that the campaign had turned the corner and was actually going to--?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna say, yes.  And at the time, they decided to establish a pre-transition [to the Presidency] office because things were looking good.  And what they decided to do, they called it the Foundation or something like that.  And they asked--they came to me one day and said, "Betty, can you do shorthand?"  I said, yeah, but it's been, gosh, twenty years since I've done shorthand.  I said, why?  The man who's gonna handle the pre-transition office, the Foundation, needs someone who takes shorthand.  The lady who he has there now, can't it, won't take, won't do a lot.  I said, "Well, let's go talk it over." Because I had told myself, I'm gonna--whenever I take a job, I'm gonna have to like what I'm doing.  So I went over there and met with him and they asked me how come I wanted to walk--work over there.  And I said, I don't.  I want to stay where I am, but if you have, if you need someone with shorthand, I got it, if you want it, here it is.  So I went to work for him.  I left the war room reluctantly to work for Gerald Stern who was head of the pre-transition.  And that transition, pre-transition included Vernon Jordan, Warren Christopher, Henry Cisneros and a lot of other people were on the board.  And they were sort of formulating the transition.  And once President [William J.] Clinton won, Gerald Stern was taken off and Warren Christopher and Vernon Jordan together were put in head of the transition, and I was working for Warren Christopher--who was by far, one of the world's nicest, greatest men.  So I worked with him, and then I got to be closely involved with the--he was still governor, and then he became President-elect, so we worked very closely with the President-elect's office.  And he held an office in the governor's mansion.  They let him stay there until after he left.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me--now, I didn't ask you about George Stephanopoulos who's now a public figure--.
Speaker 2: ABC.
Speaker 1: --in the media, on ABC television.  What did you think about him and--.
Speaker 2: I met George in the [Michael] Dukakis- [Lloyd] Bentson [1988 Presidential] campaign.  He was twenty-six, very bright, very funny, very nice.  I worked with him again in the Clinton campaign; very bright, some of the funniness had worn off a little bit because he'd gotten more serious--very, very talented.  I've always been a fan of George's, always, always have and always will.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Tell me about the election, I mean the night he was elected, and what, you know, how you felt that night?
Speaker 2: Well, the numbers were looking good that day, so we were feeling pretty comfortable, not confident or--just comfortable that things may hopefully go well, but you, you never know, and as you, that last election, bore out you can't tell what's gonna happen.  We were all--they had TV sets set up in the campaign office.  And they were all, we would all go to the Square, I guess you would call that, in Little Rock [Arkansas], the capital--the Capital Building, Capital Office Building, and we were gonna have a rally out there.  And we did, and when the poll numbers came in, it was elation throughout the whole town of Little Rock, were very happy, very, very happy.
Speaker 1: Can you remember what you did that night or?
Speaker 2: I think we were up a lot of the night (laughs) because we knew we had to come to work the next morning because there was a lot still to be done.  But we partied hearty, shall we say.  We were very, very, very happy, not only for us in the Democratic party, but we felt good for the country.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of Ron Brown?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Ron Brown was quite involved in the campaign.  He was a campaign, I want to say Chairman, he may have been.  And I had known of him before because he had done a lot of other things.  He--President [William J.] Clinton depended on him a lot during that campaign.  And then he was nominated to be Secretary of Commerce, I think, (unclear) came--and Warren Christopher was doing all the hiring for the Cabinet.  So I got to meet him then also, but, yeah.  And when he died, it was just tragic, oh, tragic.
Story_ID: 6031
Speaker 1: How was it that you became President [Bill] Clinton's secretary in this transition period?
Speaker 2: Well, the joke is that I drew the short straw, but that's not true.  I was working for Warren Christopher who was heading all the transition, and we were in contact with President Clinton and his staff at the governor's office daily. And then when Secre--when Warren Christopher was made Secretary of State, I said, "Well, what are we gonna do?  Is our marriage over?"  And he said, "You're gonna working for the chief of staff, [Thomas F.] Mack McClarty," because I really didn't want a job.  I was happily retired, and I didn't need a job or want a job, but I said, if I can be of any help, I'll be glad to.  So I was gonna work for Mack McClarty.  So when Warren Christopher left to go back to California, and our job with the transition was over, they asked if I'd go work with the governor's office, and help them clean up to get ready to go to Washington [D.C.].  So I went over there. And my first time I actually met him one-on-one, with myself and him, he called downstairs and asked for his list of telephone calls.  And I was, one of the things I was doing was making telephone calls.  So I went upstairs and had my list of telephone calls.  And I said,"I'm gonna rub his elbow so I can say I've always rubbed elbows with the President." So he got the list, and I rubbed his elbow, which is--little did I know that I'd be rubbing it a long time after that.  But then when they started looking for staff within his immediate office, they asked me if I would like to be a secretary.  And I said, oh, "Well, geez, you know, I--well, I don't know."  So I called my husband, and I said, "They asked me."  He said,  yeah, give it a try, you can do it for a couple of years if you want to.  So I said, yeah.  So I did.  And I think part of it, the reason I had worked in Washington [D.C.] before.  I knew Washington.  Most of the people there had never been to Washington.  I knew the government.  I had worked for the government.  I was older than most, so I had a little more stability, and I was at the right place at the right time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were deliberating about who they wanted probably for quite a while, and those are probably, you know--so were you surprised that--?
Speaker 2: I was pleasantly surprised, and I said, "Well, I'll give it a try."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not realizing that I was gonna be the first African American to do this.  That hadn't even entered my mind.  I think Alexis Herman was the first one to sort of bring it to the forefront.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Now, she was on the transition team, right?
Speaker 2: She was.
Speaker 1: She became Secretary of Labor.
Speaker 2: Correct.  She worked at the White House before that though as special assistant to President for Political Affairs, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I mean were you--now, you'd worked in federal government before in a number of different positions on this, on three campaigns, and I mean did this intimidate at all being selected as presidential secretary, and then finding out that you're the first African American?
Speaker 2: You know, it really didn't.  The first day I went to work, the--well, we worked, when we came from Little Rock [Arkansas] to Washington [D.C.], we worked at the Blair House, to getting the inauguration and all that stuff done.  So we were busy doing that.  And that was an honor cause I'd never been in the Blair House before because you can't do it on tours.  And all this is beginning just, getting settled so we're gonna be working at the White House.  I said, hum.  So the first day I got to work that Monday--it wasn't Monday, whenever, after the inauguration, the next morning, after all the inaugural balls, I came to work, and there was a bit of confusion because all of us were new to the White House, and they had to get us cleared in.  Now, clearance then was not as difficult as it is now, but it still required getting through.  And it took a while.  So I finally got in, and they said, "Betty Currie, you work over in the West Wing, you'll be working dah, dah, dah,"--they told me, told me a room.  So I finally found it, and I opened this door.  And I said, "This can't be right."  I said this room--it was right outside, you looked out the door, and there was the Rose Garden.  And one side was the cabinet room and the other side was the Oval Office.  And it had two dozen fresh flowers sitting there.  I said this is probably wrong.  I'll just wait for someone to come tell where I'm gonna go.  So I sat there with my coat on and waited, and finally they said, no, "Betty, this is your office," ahhh.  (laughs).  And I said, "Well."  So that was a pleasant surprise.  And if proximity to the president is anything, my desk was the closest to his office.  And, but still, nothing, I wasn't intimidated, I was just--wanted to do a good job, wanted to do the best I could.  And he's extremely easy to work for, extremely gratified, whatever you do, and so it was a pleasure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't the kind of person that would be pushing and criticizing, and, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he didn't.  They said he had a temper, which I would hear him at times let out.  He never raised his voice at me, and I told somebody once when I did something wrong--it wasn't wrong, but we were doing speech books for the president.  And every Christmas, we would do a speech book, and every Christmas, we would be late getting it out.  We'd be at the, midnight Christmas Eve trying to get it mailed out.  So one year we got them done real early, and the man who was able to do it for us brought them into the White House and showed them to the President.  He said, the dates are wrong, that we had them in sequential dates.  And I said, oh, and the man who was there was turning pure white.  And I said, "President Clinton, it's not his fault, it's my fault.  I gave him this list, and I put in this order," which I had.  And he said, "okay, you'll have to re-do them."  So we had to re-do the whole thing.  But he never--he may have, once I turned my back, he may have said something, but never, he never raised his voice.  And the man that I took, let away with it, forever is my friend.  He said, "Betty, you didn't have to do that," which I would not have let him get, take the blame on that.
Story_ID: 6032
Speaker 1: What was the--how many people did you have on staff with you?
Speaker 2: On the immediate Office of the President, which is, one, two--there's probably in the immediate office maybe eight to ten people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the supervisor for that--?
Speaker 2: I was not the supervisor of that.  Nancy Hernreich was a deputy assistant to the President for Oval Office Operations.  So she was in charge of that.  She was his assistant in Arkansas, as the governor, for a while.  And she was sort of running the things from, in the governor's residence from--during the campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the hierarchy in the office, it was, what's her name again?
Speaker 2: Nancy Hernreich
Speaker 1: Okay, and then--.
Speaker 2: I guess, I was under that.  The president aide was under that.  We had various staff people.  Janis [F.] Kearney came under there.  We had this personal correspondants was under that also, but they were over in the East wing, just on the other side of the White House.
Speaker 1: Janis Kearney was the historian--?
Speaker 2: Historian, archivist.
Speaker 1: Archivist, okay.  Okay, so it's a pretty big, you know, what--?
Speaker 2: Small, intimate group.
Speaker 1: Okay, eight people.
Speaker 2: Eight to ten, yeah.
Story_ID: 6033
Speaker 1: Well, what was day-to-day life in the White House [Washington, D.C.] like?
Speaker 2: Well, every time I made a speech, I said, there are no two days the same, no two days.  Our average work day was twelve hours.  That was just the way it was.  I would leave, get to work about a quarter to 8:00 [a.m.] and get home about quarter to 8:00 [p.m.].  And luckily, I lived in Arlington, Virginia, which is a easy commute.  It's like, if I left early, I'd get there in fifteen, twenty minutes--fifteen at the max, and evening get home in ten.  The President [William J. Clinton], in the early days, he would jog every day.  And then he hurt his leg during the second administration so he wouldn't--or late in the first.  So he would come to work usually at nine o'clock.  That's when his body would appear.  He would be up all night reading or doing something else, but he would get there about nine o'clock.  That's when the official schedule started.  And every day the official schedule was--NSC [National Security Council] briefing and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] briefing, do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so every day starts with an NSC briefing and CIA briefing, okay.
Speaker 2: And I think President--everybody, everybody did (unclear) does it.  So if anything has happened in the world, you're brought up to date.  And the chief of staff would keep him informed.
Speaker 1: Well, what happens next?  This is a good way to follow this, as a, on a day-to-day level, like what, what usually happens next after he has that briefing?
Speaker 2: Well, the schedule would then start in earnest.  They would try to get as much--the only thing that they would do, they would do the CIA, NSC.  He would meet with his scheduler, and sometimes the press secretary, just to make sure things are okay.  He would always have phone and office time, which is his time to do his own thing.  We would schedule that to do the phone calls or anything he wanted to do.  And beyond that, the day would be, the schedule would sort of control the day.  If there's a state visit, then we, that was almost a whole day devoted to that because the visitor would come.  They'd have the ceremony in the South lawn, and then he would come over to the White House, to our office, and there's a lot of protocol going on.  And then they would meet early, luckily, early for the state dinner.  But any given day, his day usually ended about 8:00, 7:30 or 8:00 [p.m.].  Now, I understand current President [George Walker] Bush's day ends at about 5:30 or 6:00, but he starts about 7:00 in the morning.  He's at the office at 7:00.
Speaker 1: So there are tales of Jimmy, the [President] Jimmy Carter administration where he would be sixteen hours a day and that sort of thing.  Did you ever hear any, hear about that?
Speaker 2: I hadn't heard, but I wouldn't surprised.  This, it was very hands on.  For President Clinton, we'd give him twelve, yeah, and people who had worked in previous administrations, said that was just a normal day for the president.
Story_ID: 6034
Speaker 1: What are some of the memorable times that you--?
Speaker 2: Well, there are lot of, a lot of memories.  You know, if I--well, I won't, but if I had ever decided to write a book, I wish I had written down some of the things on a daily basis.  There were some goods times, and there were some bad times.  There were some times that I felt totally out of it, I mean out of the loop, out of--not out of favor, but just out of what's happening.  But, like when [Commerce Secretary] [Ronald Harmon] Ron Brown died [1996], that was historic, tragic, the whole thing.  Every gamut of emotions went through that.  And what happened, when I got to work there was a lot of, you know, whispering going on.  And I said, "Is something wrong? " They said, "No, no."  So I turned on channel four, NBC news.  And they said, we're breaking news.  We understand that Ron Brown's plane has crashed in surf of the sea, what--I forgot this country [Bosnia].  And, and I did like this--and I immediately called NSC [National Security Council].  I said, "Have you heard?  They said, "Oh, is it out yet?  I said, yes, it's on TV.  So they were keeping it under cover.  I think they wanted to verify that he had actually died in that, yeah. That was sad.  Alexis Herman came by, and she had actually just cried on the President's [Bill Clinton] shoulder.  When his mother died, it was also tragic.  He had several, several close friends to die in office.  When Vince Foster committed suicide, that was tragic, just so many things.  When the plane crashed into the White House, the thing about that, I got to work that morning, and the body was still in there and everything.  They finally took everything out.  And they came to me, and said, Betty, you're gonna have to move.  I said, "Pardon? " She said, "They found a package in the plane, and your windows aren't bulletproof."  Now, the President's windows are bullet proof, but mine's weren't.  I said, well, excuse me (laughs), so I left for a few minutes, and they decided the, the package was nothing that was going to explode.  But I learned then, how much they cared about me (laughs).
Speaker 1: Did you get on the phone and order a bullet proof vest?
Speaker 2: (Laughs), no, I didn't.  I was very, very cautious when I looked out, oh, yeah.  But it's, it's just one of the most secured places because he is always accompanied by--this, this was before 9-11 [September 11 terrorist attacks, 2001], four to six secret service agents at all times.  And whenever we had a crash, when somebody would jump the fence or something like that, they would surround him even more so--and just very, I thought very, very safe, except bombs bursting in.
Story_ID: 6035
Speaker 1: Now, this may seem like a mundane question, but how would you get to work, and did you drive yourself to work or did they have somebody come and pick you up and take you in a certain way or?
Speaker 2: I drove myself.  They allowed me parking in West executive, which was a blessing because I could just drive, past security, park a couple of feet from the door and walk in.  And in the evening, just walk right out.  And since we worked such irregular hours, it was perfect.  Now, when the wintertime came, we had--if we needed someone to come and get us, they would.  But during the times of--several times my intern, who had a four-wheel drive, would pick me up, which I'm forever grateful, because I can't drive much in the snow.  And on other occasions, I lived near a Metro, and I could take a Metro, and when, when everybody else couldn't get in, I could at least take the Metro and then walk an extra block to, to the White House.
Story_ID: 6036
Speaker 1: During President [William J.] Clinton's first term, there's a, since there seemed to be a media controversy around the power that Hillary [Rodham] Clinton had, that she was trying to--she had a health plan that she was, that she had auth--she was the author of mainly, I guess, and it was, it--I guess it failed the pass Congress.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what was your impression of that controversy about her being too pushy or being too, too active and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I thought it was wrong.  Mrs. Clinton is a bright woman.  She's a lawyer, and I think she thought she was doing something, what the country needed, what it needed then and what it still needs now.  I don't think she was overstepping her grounds.  I know first ladies traditionally, they do have roles that they played, but she knew that needed to be done, and she was trying to do it.  And I think, unfortunately, I guess some of the society members, male society members, want women to do certain things.  And they brought her down. And now health care is worse now than it was when she started.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she was probably--well, I think here--in fact, in history as you think--as I look, I can't think of anybody else, any other First Lady that had as, was as, that had as much career preparation--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she's a--.
Speaker 1: --as Hillary Clinton had.
Speaker 2: Correct.  She is one of the first, I think with a law degree.  And I think another First Lady that we have high regard for who was very, very active, was Eleanor Roosevelt.  And I don't know if--I don't think she got as much criticism, but Hillary did.  And she slowed down on it, and healthcare died.
Story_ID: 6037
Speaker 1: Okay, that seems like a--now, in the first, President [William J.] Clinton's first term, what would you see as, just, you know, from the inside, as one of the biggest victories, I guess?
Speaker 2: I can't remember if NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] was the first term or if the Middle East--the Middle East, his efforts on bringing peace in the Middle East was a big, big, big to-do then.  And he worked very, very hard at it.  And I think that's one of the big ones.  NAFTA, I think was first term also.  That was big, I have to remember, something with children.  There was always something going on in his, and he wanted to do as much as he could because you're not assured of a second term, so you do a whole bunch of things in the first administration.
Speaker 1: I know he formed Americorps in that first term.
Speaker 2: That was right.  And that, today is still thriving.  It went through a lot of ups and downs, and I think a lot of people wanted to get rid of it.  They wanted to kill the budget, but it's still surviving.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the whole idea of the corporation for the national service and--.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And the idea that people should volunteer on a regular basis, that was--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I don't know if VISTA [Volunteers In Service To America] is still, is alive and active, but it sort replaced or sort of did the same things as VISTA.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Very great.  Some of my friends still work for it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was founded the day the plane crashed on the White House--.
Speaker 2: Ah, that's good you remembered that.  That's right, yeah.  That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And all the Americorps people were assembled all over the country watching closed-circuit television and waiting for this ceremony, and it was delayed because of the plane crash on the lawn, and there was security--.
Speaker 2: You, oh, I had forgotten that, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was it like on the other side when the, when the--I mean inside the White House?
Speaker 2: We were extremely nervous, and because we were told that the White is in a no-fly zone, that planes can't get to it and all that.  So therefore, they had to re-evaluate what, what happened, and why it happened, and how this happened.  Now, my husband flies small planes, and he said, what the man did, he turned off his engine and just coasted in.  So you didn't hear it.  And he was under radar, so it wouldn't have been picked up.  I said, well, that's not a good thing to know because that could happen again.  So now I think they have far more secure ways to make sure it doesn't happen again.  And it did--luckily, President [William J.] Clinton and Mrs. [Hillary Rodham] Clinton were at the Blair House.  They were doing some sort of work at the White House, so they weren't in the bedroom.  So that was a blessing also.  It did a little bitty chip on the, on the Oval Office window, and it damaged the Jackson magnolia tree.
Speaker 1: So what--he hit the lawn, I guess, and slide into the White House--?
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as he came in, you know, a Cessna or something, right, a small plane?
Speaker 2: Yep.  And looked even smaller when I came to work, I said, gee, it's really small, but, of course, those small planes, which I never really trust--don't like to fly in.
Speaker 1: And I think also during that first administration, we had the, that little, that group in Texas where they had the burning.  They had to burn--the religious group that had their following, and they were in Waco.
Speaker 2: Waco, right.
Speaker 1: That happened during--and I think Oklahoma was--.
Speaker 2: David Koresh and Waco, Texas.
Speaker 1: Right, that, and that was the early administration, and that was a tragedy that [Attorney General] Janet Reno had, I think it was on her watch.  And it was, they tried everything, but it couldn't work.
Speaker 2: What was it, was there, did you hear or did you, were you privy to the strategy of the administration in that case, or did they?
Speaker 1: Well, no, I know he had been meeting with Janet Reno, but I wasn't.  And I do know that when, when the fire actually happened, the TV was on, and he was sort of standing behind it.  He said, "What's that, what's that?"  I said, "It's the fire at Waco, at this--," he said, "What?"  And he just stood and stared at it, you know, in disbelief also.
Speaker 2: So he didn't know that they were gonna storm the place.
Speaker 1: I think he may have been aware of it, but I think he was under the impression that it would be, would not be hostile, that they would be able to take them over without any loss of life.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they might be able to storm in and get the people out without burning the whole place down.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It didn't turn out very, like--.
Speaker 1: No, it was tragic.  And that seems so long ago now.  Isn't that awful, that, yeah.
Story_ID: 6038
Speaker 1: Now, as. as the Presidential secretary, do they--do you have to pledge, what kind of a confidentiality pledge to you have to make or is there any such thing as that?  Or they--I mean you're in a position, a very sensitive position.  People coming and going, I mean what do they--?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  I think a lot of it was also assumed that I would never, ever, ever.  But during, when I got a higher level clearance, I had to sign something saying that I would not write books without being cleared by NSC [National Security Council], that I would--everything would be cleared by NSC that I did.  And I'm assuming, that I'm sure that they're in one of the many documents I signed that I would not--keep everything a secret that I would know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they made you sign.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they didn't have to make me sign, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you did sign.  All right, I didn't really put it like that.  So at the, now this is nineteen, in 1996, the first term ended.  Now, did we miss anything in the first term that we need to discuss, you think?
Speaker 2: I'm sure we did after--it was four years.  But I think we hit the highlights.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And if I think of anything, I can call you back (laughs).
Story_ID: 6039
Speaker 1: All right, but in, in '96 [1996], I mean things, things seemed to be, you know, rolling along pretty well.  The popularity of, for the president [William Jefferson Clinton] is high, and, you know, it didn't, and I don't think it seems--it seemed as though the Republicans had an uphill struggle to, you know, unseat the president at that point?
Speaker 2: Correct, history has shown that very few presidents win the second term, you know, only, very few of them in history have done it.  So we had that working against us, but we had also that the numbers were showing that we had a pretty good chance of winning.
Speaker 1: Did you--well, you probably did not go to the [Democratic National] Convention or anything like that or?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I did, yes, it was held in Los Angeles [California], I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago [Illinois] in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Chicago, yeah, we went to Chicago, yes, we did go to Chicago for the convention.
Speaker 1: All right, did you have a role in the campaign--now, you had, you worked in the campaign in Arkansas.  Did you have--well, what, how did your role change in the '96 [1996] campaign?
Speaker 2: Did very, very little for the campaign in '96 [1996].  We were in contact with them.  They were maintaining schedules because he had to do a lot for the campaign as opposed to his official role, but, and when we got to Chicago, my role was mostly to assist him whenever I--anything he needed.  And since Chicago is my home, it was a fun time also.
Speaker 1: Now, what--speaking of that, like what did your relatives think of this position that you were in?
Speaker 2: It was funny.  My mother lived to see me get the job.  And she was very, very proud, and she had a chance to meet President Clinton. And, of course, she cried the entire time, just my mother.  But my relatives I think were very, very proud.  And I had cousins come out of the woodwork that I never knew I had, that sort of thing.  But it was just a quiet proudness that they were--and my daughter who worked for [US]AID [United States Agency for International Development], she said she didn't even tell her coworkers.  So, (laughs), which is okay too.
Speaker 1: Does she have the same last name as you?
Speaker 2: (nods head no).
Speaker 1: Okay, they wouldn't have known about it.
Speaker 2: They wouldn't have been able to put it together.  But it was, it was a good feeling.  It was good, but it was a quiet--
Speaker 1: Now, '96 [1996], [U.S. Senator Robert] Bob Dole was running against, runs against William Jefferson Clinton and, you know, what--did you ever, was there ever a point where you thought that, you know, that you all might lose or?
Speaker 2: Well, I just feel that the Republicans have a strong machine going, and you never put anything--I don't, beyond them.  They can do, they have a lot of money behind them.  They have a lot of tactics.  Bob Dole had been in the Senate for a long time.  He had a lot of connections.  He's a--I felt was a good running mate.  He was a veteran. He had been injured.  That was working on his behalf.  Clinton had had that problem of the draft dodging thing that keeps coming up every time, and it came up again during that time.  But we had a good campaign, and we were--and the numbers stayed high.  So it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, '96 [1996] was also a year where there was, we had some sort of 'Republican revolution' in Congress, led by [U.S. Congressman] Newt Gingrich, and they actually took over Congress in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I mean the Republicans took control of the House of Representatives.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, how did, what was the buzz about that in the White House?
Speaker 2: It was not a good feeling because when you're in a leadership position, there's just, there's just much more you can do.  And we lost that.  And all the senators and congressman that we were dealing automatically were taken to second-class positions.  And we had to deal with the Republicans to get anything pushed through.  And they controlled what went on.  So we had to deal with that.
Speaker 1: It was a interesting political climate because you had a popular president in office, people elected, I mean, no doubt that he was popular, but at the same time, you have this other movement, you know, with the, with the right-wing political commentators on the radio like Rush Limbaugh and others, and--.
Speaker 2: The conservatives, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They did a better job than we did.  I've always been--my major concern I had in this election and every election is getting people to get out the vote because if you don't vote, this is what happens.
Story_ID: 6040
Speaker 1: Okay, yes, so in the mid-'90s [1990s], I guess, what were some of the, the, I guess, more exciting things that happened or--good and bad, in the, in the [William J.] Clinton administration from the inside?
Speaker 2: Well, he was trying to set his legacy because he had survived the first administration. He had to set plans on what he could get done in the next, so with only four years to go and not in control of the Congress, he had to really plan what he wanted to do.  And Middle East, I think was still an issue because we hadn't resolved it cause we did lose [Israeli Prime Minister Ehud] Barak, was it Barak who was assassinated during that time, in the first administration?
Speaker 1: Oh?
Speaker 2: No, [Yitzhak] Rabin, Rabin.
Speaker 1: Rabin,  Rabin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was--.
Speaker 1: In Israel.
Speaker 2: --a real serious, serious setback for President Clinton.  He was devastated by that.  So he was working hard on that, trying to make sure that he could put things in (unclear) that he can't get done and win through the House.  It was just difficult, difficult.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was also like a lot of buzz in the media about the 'Whitewater', I think, scandal too.
Speaker 2: Now, you mean first or second or all?
Speaker 1: It, I think it just followed the whole--it was so persistent, you know, I mean once it was raised, it just kept following, you know.  And it would raise (unclear) and go down again (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: I think it started in the campaign, in the '92 [1992], in the early campaign, and they just, it would focus and go back.  And they thought that when Vince Foster committed suicide that he was killing some secrets that he didn't want known.  And then none of that came to pass to my knowing.  But it would come and go, come and go.  And we would have lawyers in a lot of the times too, working on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a, I know there's a whole, all the, the group of conspiracy theorists that say that more people died in the Clinton administration, I think during a period of time than ever before--I don't know if it's true or not, but (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: There were several deaths, yeah.
Speaker 1: --said, but there were a lot of deaths during the Clinton administration to people that were close to the president.  Do you have any thoughts about any of that?
Speaker 2: A lot of them were accidental.  A lot of them were heart attacks; a lot of them--I do not believe that there was intentionally doing away with people.  I think it was just the way things happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, did people discuss this in the White House, I mean about--did they feel--?
Speaker 2: The only one that was discussed, I think at length, was Vince Foster because it got the publicity.  And it was the one that hurt the Clintons the most.  He was very, very close to them.  And all signs that we knew that it was a suicide.  It was just a tragic.
Speaker 1: The president's popularity remained high during all this, though, which is unusual, I guess.  I don't think there's ever been--in fact, I know there's never really been an administration that has taken as many hits, you know.  And, but still the presidents remained like, popular.
Speaker 2: I felt that every day they were always trying to do something to get him.  For day one, I mean, they would find something.  I mean, I was afraid they were gonna go back to kindergarten class and find something he did.  But from day one, it was a constant battle just to stay afloat from what they were trying to dig up, continually digging.
Speaker 1: And I think there was an ongoing lawsuit with Jessica [sic, Gennifer] Flowers, and then the, for the other woman from Arkansas, who, the one that had the nose--
Speaker 2: (Laughter), and she still has a nose, [ref. to Paula Jones] yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, well, she had a nose job done, and--.
Speaker 2: What was her name?  I'll remember her name in a minute, yeah.
Story_ID: 6041
Speaker 1: Yeah, her, her case, and, of course, the, the big one that everybody remembers is the Monica Lewinsky case, in which you were implicated in that as someone who knew that she was coming and going or let her come and go.  So what do you want to tell us about that?
Speaker 2: About the Monica Lewinsky thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Very little, if I can, but it was something that happened that I wish could have been avoided, but I don't know if I could have avoided it.  I had known her, of course, a dear friend.  She was very nice to me during some of the travails that I was having when my mother [Vivian Ercell Williams] and my sister and my brother died, and then Bob [Currie] had an operation.  A lot of things had gone wrong.  She was very helpful.
Speaker 1: Now, that's all in a--let's not skip over that cause that's seriously, in a very short period of time, you know, I, I know I read about your brother dying, but your mother?
Speaker 2: My brother, my mother died.  My sister died first.  She had a heart attack. I was overseas in France.  She had a heart attack and died.  She was younger, much younger.  That was in May.  My brother--.
Speaker 1: May of--?
Speaker 2: Ninety eight [1998], I think.  I may get it wrong.  I keep getting it wrong.  And then my brother died in December of the same year.  Then mama died in April of the next year.  And then Bob had emergency surgery during that time frame also.  And there was something that happened.  It was just, I mean unbelievable events that I figured I was being tested for something and survived that.  And then this other stuff is happening at the same time.
Speaker 1: Now, Monica Lewinsky was an intern, right, at--?
Speaker 2: Correct, initially, she was, yes.
Speaker 1: And she came in, about what time did she start working there--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm gonna say it was during the--when the government shut down, and for some reason, I want to say November, and I may be wrong on the dates.  I think it was '97 [1997] [December 1995].  I'd have to double check my records.
Speaker 1: Now, to become an intern, don't you have to be fairly accomplished or you have to have a pretty good school record and be recommended by people and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: The intern program, ninety-nine percent of them are college graduates.  We do have some high school students, very, very rare.  They send in a resume with their accomplishments, and they are evaluated.  They're not the superstars of the school.  They're just average people who have average things that want to do something.  Some of them have connections to the White House; a lot of them don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but all the ones I've dealt with have been very, very bright, dedicated kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you first meet Monica Lewinsky?
Speaker 2: I was told that I met her at a party that Walter Kay, a friend of the president's.  But I don't remember her that time.  My first recollection of meeting her was when the government shut down, and we were all working, and the interns had to take on a bigger role because most of the people couldn't work.  And we were serving pizza that night, and President [William Jefferson] Clinton wanted a piece of pizza and she brought it down.  That was my first time, actually remember meeting her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the first time that you know that she ever really met the President?
Speaker 2: And myself too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So did--I don't know what you want to tell us about it, but did you have a feeling that something was going or did you--were you surprised by any of this or?
Speaker 2: Initially, I didn't have a feeling.  I, I just--President Clinton is a very attractive, warm, friendly man.  Everybody has a little crush on some--you know, how you have crushes on people.  And, and I assumed that it was no more than that.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, this is true--I don't know if it's always apparent to men that, that other men are supposed to be attractive, but (laughs), a lot of people, you know, say that about him, and say that he had a way of talking to people--.
Speaker 2: A warm--.
Speaker 1: --and even with men and with women, he would look in the eye, and you'd think he's talking just to you, and he really knows you, and he's, he has a, he really remembers who you are--.
Speaker 2: He does.
Speaker 1: --and, and people feel special, you know.
Speaker 2: He does.  He had a very good gift for that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in this situation, so you had a--you didn't really have a feeling that anything special was going on, necessarily with him and her because of the, you know--people always kind of feel special (unclear) (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: So, so when did you--did you, did you ever have a feeling that something was going on, until you, until it came out in the news or?
Speaker 2: There were times when I was aware that she was, I won't say emotionally involved, but emotional.  She would want to call and, or talk to him or see him.  And I couldn't put her through, and she would get a little bit irate.  Now, rarely would an intern call the president, and he had taken her, sort of, I thought, under wing because he did that to a lot of people, a lot of kids, a lot of people.  If he could help you, he would.  And at the time she had, she was looking for a job, things like that, and I'm thinking this is what's happening.
Speaker 1: Okay, just--.
Speaker 2: And when everything hit, and I swore to lots of people, nothing could have happened.  I was there, nothing could have happened.  And I swore to that.  And--.
Speaker 1: It was written that you, that you, I guess was the--you were the conduit for, for messages between, you know, Monica Lewinsky and, and President Clinton--.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: And, but were you also the conduit for messages between other people and President Clinton--as a secretary, I guess you would be.
Speaker 2: Well, true, yeah (laughs).
Speaker 1: So you didn't, I mean it wasn't just like that was the only thing--?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 6042
Speaker 1: But you didn't, you didn't think at the time, you're saying, that anything other than just a--?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a little bit concerned because she was sending more and sending little gifts and things like that, which is okay too because he's [President William Jefferson Clinton] a very gift-giving man.  He loves to give and he loves to receive gifts.  So he loves to give them and receive them.  So that wasn't so much of an issue either at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, so when the--this hit the news, I mean tell me about how you found out?  I mean that you really--?
Speaker 2: I'll never forget as long as I live.  I was watching "Nightline" one night, just--and I usually don't watch Nightline.  And I had it on, and they were saying something about Betty Currie.
Speaker 1: So how did you get--?
Speaker 2: I said, "What," I said, "what did they say?"  And my husband [Bob Currie]--it was, cause it comes on at 11:30.  It was late at night.  And they went on and on, and they had a big thing about Monica, the President and Betty Currie, and Betty.  So it was about 12:00 o'clock [a.m.] when it was over, and I promptly called the White House Counsel, Chuck [ref. to Charles Ruff], gosh, I forgot his name.  He eventually died.  I called, and I said, did you see this thing on "Nightline"?  He said, no.  He was in bed like most people.  I said, well, they had this whole thing about me and Monica and President.  And he said, "Well, let me talk to you in the morning."  So the next morning, I called him, and he apparently got the--you can get the videotape.  They tape everything for the President, so they watched it.  And they said, "We may have to get you a lawyer.  Do you have a lawyer?"  I said, "No."  "So I can get you a lawyer," and I'm still not thinking what for or why.  And I said, "Fine."  And they found me a lawyer.  And that's how it--that was the beginning.
Speaker 1: Well, did they, did they brief you as to why you might need a lawyer or what you might--?
Speaker 2: We were, they were briefing me about what they had, what they had reported, and we didn't know how accurate it was or anything more about it.  So they were gonna investigate that, but just in case, if anyone contacts me, I can always have them call my lawyer because the press, and once they, once one story has it, then the others start feeding on it.  So I would refer everything to the lawyer, which was a blessing for me cause I didn't know what to say, what to tell them.
Speaker 1: Now, what were they actually saying about you on "Nightline"?
Speaker 2: That there was, that he was involved with this intern, and that I had, like you said, been the conduit for it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, no more, no less than that?
Speaker 2: But that was basically it.  But the fact that they had used my name and had her name and they had dates and things like that, was a concern to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause to some, you know, some would cut it that you were just a conduit like you were for everybody, everybody that had to see the president or communicate with him.  And some would cut it that there's some conspiracy, you know, going on with you and, you know, Monica Lewinsky and, and, you know, in some, you know.  So that's the--so I guess that's why the probably, I don't know, wanted you, thought you were gonna need some counsel to--?
Speaker 2: Well, anyone, I think involved with the President, I think they wanted to make sure that I don't say anything that would be detrimental to myself or to him.  And that was, it would go through the lawyer, and, which was good.
Story_ID: 6043
Speaker 1: Okay, now, during the time of this investigation, this Monica Lewinsky scandal and so forth, I mean for the first time you are in this big public light, all of a sudden, and people are, as I said, many black people didn't know that [President William J.] Clinton had a black secretary until, until this scandal pops up.  And then here you are, and the media, the media there for, for the most part are saying, they really couldn't, there wasn't anything bad they really could say about you.
Speaker 2: I was very lucky.  They didn't.
Speaker 1: And they, you know, I'm sure some would try to find something, but they, every--all reports said how gracious you were and how hospitable, quiet, you know--dedicated, and, you know, all those, those are the adjectives that were used, you know, in the media.  And the way you comported yourself seemed to, you know, bear all this out.  There was no--but there had to be a lot of pressure on you during that period of time, at least one would guess.  But how did you feel, and was there--what kind of pressure was on you then?
Speaker 2: There were two pressures.  My mother [Vivian Ercell Williams] came here one day before she died.  She said, "Betty, what's this about you and Mrs.--President Clinton?"  I said, "Mama (laughs) there's nothing."  But she'd only heard bits and pieces on the radio and TV and everything like that.  I said, "No, no, no, nothing between me and President Clinton."  And then I had, I felt a little like people were blaming me for doing something.  And that was the hardest part.  I would look at some of my co-workers or my counterparts and different people, and it--not that they looked at me any different or acted any differently, but I kept saying, I got the feeling they doing like that or something [pointing a finger], but never, never said anything.
Speaker 1: Is it, was it like that they felt that you should have guarded the president better by not allowing the--(unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: That came, I heard people say that.  I heard people say, I should, yeah, I should have known better that this, dah, dah, dah.  Little things; nothing was ever said to me.  People were very, very supportive of me.  People were understanding, and one person I talked to, and that was Maggie Williams, who was Mrs. [Hillary Rodham] Clinton's Chief of Staff.  And she had undergone some problems with some records that Mrs. Clinton's law office lost, and they said that Maggie had taken some.  And she had undergone the same thing.  She said, "just keep your head up high, believe in what you're doing and go on".  So I did.  It was--many a prayer, my church was very supportive.  A lot of people wrote me, a lot of old friends that I hadn't heard from in years would write, and say, just keep it up.
Speaker 1: In retrospect, do you think there's anything that you could have done to--?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I really don't.  I'm gonna say, no.  Nothing I could I have done--.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause I was just thinking, you know, just wondering like, what would you--how could you deny the President of the United States from talking to who he wants to talk to or--.
Speaker 2: True.  That's what I was gonna say.
Speaker 1: How do you, how do you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, other than lying or say someone's not there, and that wasn't me.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did the press really hound you during this period?
Speaker 2: (laughs) There were times during the really bad part of it, my husband [Bob Currie]--they would be out early in the morning at my house.  And my husband and I concocted a way that I could slip through my neighbor's back fence.  They opened up a little plank in there.  And I'd go around this way and go to work--and he'd meet me at the other side.  We did that for several times, and then it was rainy and wet and muddy, and I said, this won't work.  They would be on the house all the time.  They would be--one day I went to church and came back, and this man was there.  I said, "What are you waiting for? " I came up and went to the top of the window, he said, "I'm waiting for you to come out."  I said, "I just came back in."  He said, "I didn't want to stop you when you came from church," which I appreciated.  I said, "I'm coming back down to go see my mother at the hospital."  He said, "Could you just get in your car and pull out and say, 'No comment'".  That's what I did.  Another time--I mean they were always there, always.  And my neighbors complains because by law they're not supposed to be on my property.  And, but they sit across the street on their property.  And then they would com--the police would come a couple of times and tell them they have to move.  And the first time, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] gave me a subpoena, I was coming home from work.  Bob had picked me up, and I was, got out of the car.  And I saw these two men in the backyard.  I said, who are those men coming out of our backyard?  And they were white men and, I (unclear) were there, they were dressed, they were dressed in suits.  I knew they weren't workmen.  They were FBI with their subpoenas.  So I took the subpoena and then promptly called the--Charles [Ruff], again the lawyer [White House Counsel].
Story_ID: 6044
Speaker 1: Now, who was your lawyer?
Speaker 2: Larry, gosh, just that quick, Weinstein--no, see, I forgot that quick, Weschler, it's like W-E-S-C-H-L-E-R, Weschler, he was my main lawyer, and he was recommended to me by Charles [Ruff], the attorney.  And I was very pleased with him, and he told me from the beginning, their main concern, their only concern was protecting me.  And I felt good about that.
Speaker 1: Now, this subpoena was to testify before a congressional investigation or the Ken Starr committee, Kenneth Starr--(simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: I think this--the grand jury--.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, well, so that happened--how much time expired between the time of this hit and when you had to go to--?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna say, I would say in the next day, but it's probably several weeks.  And they told me to expect them to come, that there were gonna be, issuing subpoenas and to expect it.  And I think I was the first one to get one.  And then I went to the lawyers, and I met with the lawyers, and I told them everything I knew, everything they wanted to--everything I could tell them.  And then we went to a hotel, and they--I met with members of the Starr committee or group and talked to them before I went to the grand jury.  And--.
Speaker 1: What was your impression of them?
Speaker 2: I think I cried the entire time.  I knew they were asking me things I didn't want to say.  They were asking me things I didn't want to answer.  They were telling me--I mean, my lawyers were very, very helpful to me, and they were with me, which unlike in the grand jury, they're not with me.  So therefore, they would help me answer questions, and I had to answer everything.  They told me I had to, and I did, but it was just hurtful, hurtful.
Speaker 1: Now, how--during the time, you're still going to work, right?
Speaker 2: Every day.  Well, when we were at the hotel, I think we were two days at the hotel, they told me not to go to work, and not to contact my office.  And my lawyer said, okay, she can do that.  So I didn't.  And I was a nervous wreck. I mean I had a job to do, and the, things that I had to do, and I didn't show up.  And I think my lawyer had called [White House Counsel] Charles [Ruff] and explained to him what was happening so they knew where I was.  But I couldn't talk to anybody.  Then we went straight to the grand jury.
Story_ID: 6045
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your--did you have any contact at all or did you know this Linda Tripp, the woman who--?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  When we first came to the White House in 1992, Linda Tripp was working there.  And she was one of the few hold-overs from the [President George H.W.] Bush administration.  There are some people whose, whose jobs you need to keep, to hold over.  And she was one of them.  And so she knew more about the White House than we did, of course, and we would always ask her, well, why and how come, and she would be able to--I thought she was very helpful.  Others who worked with her said she wasn't.  I had no problems with her at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She, she also, she had a story about another woman named Katherine Wiley who supposed had been in some kind of sexual encounter with the president [William Jefferson Clinton] too.
Speaker 2: I don't know if Linda did that or Katherine or her own sued.  But I don't know, eventually happened to that, but, yeah, she said the president had touched her or something, inappropriately.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, how, so you really don't have much to say about Linda Tripp or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not now (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Until I heard her, when they took me into the, I guess it was the grand jury, and they played--maybe this was with the lawyers in the office, I don't remember, they played her tape where she was saying these things about me.  And I said, "well, okay."  But I know she was saying these things to get information out of Monica [Lewinsky].  So, but, that did not sit well with me at all.
Story_ID: 6046
Speaker 1: Okay, you said, you were fairly, had a friendly relationship with Monica Lewinsky, and she was actually a friend, a friend (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: --I called her--I considered her a friend, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so in the beginning you're--now, when did you kind of come to the realization that some of what was being said is, was true, you know, actually and--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I refused to believe it because like I told everybody, I was there.  And they were saying that things happened in the Oval [Office].  I said, "That's impossible cause I was there."  And I was proven, I guess proven wrong, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, there was, I know the President [William Jefferson Clinton] seemed to be very convincing when he made his first press conference, and said, I did not, you know, you know,--?
Speaker 2: "Have sexual relations with that lady, Ms. Lewinsky."
Speaker 1: That woman, I think he said, yeah, right--.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was pretty, you know, and then--so, the staff, from what I've read believed him, you know.
Speaker 2: For sure, yeah, truly.
Speaker 1: Did he ever, was there ever a time that he publicly, you know, told the staff, you know, or did people just kind of find out through the media that--?
Speaker 2: I think once testimony started coming out from Monica and from Linda [Tripp], they started wondering how much truth there was to it.  And what he said was, no--on TV the other day they had a statement that people nowadays don't consider certain things to be sexual relationships.  So one thing they said, oral sex is no longer--and for that reason I--he was telling the truth, I guess, if you, if you're one of the people that believe in that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's a fine distinction you have to cut to?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you--how did he handle this?  Do you--well, I mean not that you would know, but what did it, what did it look like to you?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: Horrible, I would watch his face, and he looked drained and strained.  And immediately, and not too long after this all broke, he and the family went to vacation on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And people who were up there, saying it was horrible.  I mean that was a very strained, very strained.
Story_ID: 6047
Speaker 1: Did you have a close relationship with the First Lady [Hillary Rodham Clinton] at that time?
Speaker 2: We had--I wouldn't say close.  I wouldn't call her and say, oh, "Hillary, dah, dah, dah," but we saw each other every day.  We were cordial and friendly.  We were then and we are now, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now this, you know, I don't know--and then TV shows, I mean news programs speculate and comedy shows lampoon it in different ways and stuff, but how in the world did they deal with all this scandal?  Do you know, I mean--?
Speaker 2: I think once--you mean the Clintons?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think once she forgave him [President William Jefferson Clinton], I think it was okay.  And I think that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she forgave him eventually, and that's before the--because there was so much pressure on and at such a key time, and it was, things, you know, world, you know, affairs were happening and national things were happening and everything was going on, and yet he has to deal with this, you know--?
Speaker 2: Personal life and (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, which is, which would have been, wouldn't have been that much at all had he not been the President.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And also would not have been--it seems like, well, some of these have happened in the past, undoubtedly in the White House, you know--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from information we have now.  I mean things like this and other things that seem to be even worse or--.
Speaker 2: (laughs).
Speaker 1: --that are more, you know, sexually explicit in the White House and around the White House, and, you know, with presidents and so forth, and there's never been this kind of attention brought to bear on a president around those kind of things.
Speaker 2: Poor Clinton, he just, he just gets it, you know.  I think they were waiting for something.  That's what happened.
Story_ID: 6048
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--well, you know, how were the last couple of years in the White House [Washington, D.C.]?  I mean did things change as a result of this scandal to--I mean was it still functional, you know?
Speaker 2: It was very functional.  They were determined to make sure it was functional.  It took a lot out of a lot of people.  But it was functioning.  I never will forget, my girlfriend, we--those books I talked about, the speech books.  My girlfriend, Nancy (unclear), she said, I didn't get a year, 1997 speeches, was that '97 [1997]?  Or '98 [1998], I forgot which one.  I said, well, "why not because each year I did"--she said "that was the year you were so embroiled in this Monica [Lewinsky] stuff that I don't know what happened to the books."  And to this day, I have no idea what happened to all those books, we did one each year.  But I tried to go on.  I had to for myself, my own sanity, I had to go on.  And I didn't want to pretend like there was nothing wrong, but I wanted to pretend that we were gonna still work and manage and put this behind us.
Speaker 1: Was there a moment, I mean a time period that you remember when the actual clouds broke, and when some sun came through, I mean, cause I know the press was, was, you said, they were sitting out in front of your house and all that sort of thing--.
Speaker 2: They finally relented--.
Speaker 1: How long was, when did they relent?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember when they finally stopped, but I think once the grand jury stopped, they let me alone.  And then eventually, I heard, I forgot the day when they said that the President [William Jefferson Clinton] had made an agreement, and that it was all over because I was afraid that this was gonna go on and on.  They were gonna try to get more to, you know, keep it going.  But finally he made a agreement with them, and it was over.  I forgot the date, but yeah, it was towards the end of the administration, but, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now from, in the last year or so, I guess, of the Clinton administration, what, what would be--well, it had to be better after that (laughs).
Speaker 2: It was much better.  I'm trying to think of the things we may have tried to accomplish.  I can't even remember right now.  It'll come to me later, but it was a winding down time too.  We had so much to pack up, so much to do, so much--he was really getting into his library at that time too because they knew he would have one.  And he had completed eight years so he had a lot of stuff to think about.  I don't know if he was--he wasn't really writing his memoirs, but I think he was also thinking about what he was gonna be writing about himself.
Speaker 1: And interestingly enough, he, he's just written a book and was just in Chicago [Illinois] with the American Booksellers Association.  Yeah, Janis was at that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's due out, like this month, later this month, yeah.
Speaker 1: The twenty-second, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, we'll, we'll be able to read about his, you know, his personal reactions to all this, you know.
Speaker 1: For sure.
Speaker 2: Reflection--.
Speaker 1: They say it's covered, everything is covered in the book so I'm curious to read it too.
Story_ID: 6049
Speaker 1: Okay, something on the tip my tongue, the--so those last--oh, Al, Al Gore as Vice President.  We haven't mentioned Al Gore yet, and Al--many people have arm-chair quarterbacked his campaign, you know, his 2000 campaign as to why he--he actually won the popular vote--.
Speaker 2: Correct, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and still lost the election.  It's the first it's ever happened in history.  But many have speculated that it would not have been so close had he been willing to associate himself with the Clinton legacy and for, to some it--I mean he did not use President [William J.] Clinton in his campaign or he separated himself.  And is that--do you have any reflections on that?
Speaker 2: I wish he had.  Now, Al Gore is smarter than I am, and his handlers probably were, and I'm sure something was telling them that if you keep clear of Clinton, you'll get more votes or something.  But it was a mistake.  Clinton was then and still is very popular.  He, he energizes people.  And I think it would have been a help.  Now, I don't know if Al Gore has ever admitted that it was a mistake or not.  I don't know, but I feel it was a mistake not to use Clinton, but--and I have great admiration for Al Gore.  I think he's a great statesman.
Speaker 1: Yeah, apparently, most Americans did.  They voted for him, and that's, that's true.  And--.
Speaker 2: It's one of those things I hope never happens again, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a singular event that--it's been described as a coup d'etat almost--.
Speaker 2: But--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What was he--was he around the Oval Office much as Vice President?
Speaker 1: They had a weekly luncheon, a scheduled weekly luncheon.  And his office was right down the hall.  So he'd, you'd see him all the time.
Story_ID: 6050
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what were the last days like at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and--?
Speaker 2: (laughs), we were packing up.  President [William J.] Clinton loves, it's like I said, gifts and stuff.  So we had lots of stuff to pack up, lots of papers.  We had, by now, we had to do certain things with our papers we couldn't take away.  We had to leave them there at the White House, categorize them, put them in boxes and file them.  And there was a picture in the "New York Times" of President Clinton and I with all these boxes up the kazoo on my desk and him, him standing around.  It's, every Presidential office goes through--and administration goes through that.  They have to do it, and we had eight years of accumulation, so therefore, it was a little bit more.  Yeah, we not only cleaned out the Oval Office and the West Wing and the Old EOB [Executive Office Building], but also the residence in the main building.  So when the moving trucks came to pick up stuff, it was sad.  It was really sad.  And when he--when we had to leave, we were in the White House the last day, and he had to go to meet [George W.] Bush, and he left the Oval Office and walked down, and we just sat there and woo hoo-hoo, boo hooed.  And he said,  "It," you know, "it's a good time.  These things happen."  I'm think he--I was crying more that Bush had won, than, of course, that President Clinton was leaving, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because it was in suspense for a long time, you know.
Speaker 2: Ooh, oh, it was awful at work too because, just not knowing, just not knowing.  And not happy about it, and knowing, feeling that if it were any other state but Florida, it would have been okay.  And the Supreme Court which, just a comedy of events that happened, yeah.  I hate to use the word comedy, but--.
Speaker 1: Maybe tragedy would be (laughs).
Speaker 2: (laughs) more so, yeah.
Speaker 1: It depends on how you look at it, I guess, or who you are when you're looking at it.  So, I know Zena Pierre described the last days, and the staff was lined up, and he, you know, he talked to everybody.  Do you have a recollection of the last day?
Speaker 2: He came into the Roosevelt Room.  He went to various offices or had them come by, yeah--It was, it was sad.  And I think people were, you know, people who had been there for eight years especially.  And the White House is a wonderful place to work.  I'd recommend it for many people, if they want to, that it's a great place to work.  History, you can watch history in the making and in the unmaking as it may be too, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now since--when you left, can you remember the day that you left, your last day?
Speaker 2: I remember President Clinton left to go--by law we have to be out of there by noon on inauguration day.  And I think about like 11:30 we were packing up. And contrary to what a lot of people said, they said that we left the offices in a mess, I was still probably scrubbing and cleaning and wiping and getting everything perfectly clean for the lady who was gonna replace me.  Then that was done.  They were already down the hall, tearing down walls revamp because Bush was gonna have different walls at different places. They were pulling up carpeting and everything to change the carpeting. They'd come in to change the drapes, and we--yeah, they were--.
Speaker 1: Now, how did, you know, I think most--I don't think most people realize that all that happens, that they actually changed the carpeting in the offices?
Speaker 2: They brought in [Ronald] Reagan's carpet and put in there.  When we came there, we had Bush's carpet, [George H.W.] Bush One's carpet, and we kept it until we got out own.  But they put Reagan's old carpet in there.  And I think they put his drapes up there also.  So it had more a Republican feel, I guess, to it.  And then every president changes it to suit his own fancy, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something that--.
Speaker 2: But it was a mess.  I just pulled out of the driveway.  We had to all turn in our passes, and any keys that we have, and I think we did that the day before.  And they--our pass, in order to get in, they'd give us a code or something, we can get in, so we can still get in.  But all passes were taken, all security pins were taken, anything we had to get in.  They had a office set up in the Old EOB for everybody to get rid of stuff.  And that was a, an ordeal too, yeah.
Story_ID: 6051
Speaker 1: And, you know, how did you feel about--I mean, you know, how did that make you feel to give--you have access to the --?
Speaker 2: And then you don't.  And when, I went back one day to do a tour at Christmastime.  My friends let me come to watch at Christmastime.  And I had to go through immense security procedures to get in, when usually I'd just show a badge and come in.  "Oh, no, your name again, your date of"--I said, "Okay, yeah, yeah."  Back to reality.  It hits real hard.
Speaker 1: So are you ever invited to events at the White House [Washington, D.C.] or anything these days?
Speaker 2: Well, I just got a phone call.  President [William J.] Clinton's gonna have this portrait opening, revealing on Monday and the--George [W.] Bush's office extended an invitation for me to come to that.  There'll be, probably two hundred people, but, yes, I'll be there for that.  And then I went back, one day my girlfriend still works there, I had lunch with he-- met Ashley, who's President [George W.] Bush's secretary and some of his staff members; very, very kind, very, very cordial people.  But at Christmastime, my friend who works there, still lets us come in to look at the Christmas decorations after everything sort of quieted down.  And that's good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's, there's things I do miss about it, truly.  It's a beautiful place.  It's wonderful people, lots of fun parties.  There's nothing prettier than the Rose Garden at springtime, just, just gorgeous--the Christmas decorations--when they have state dinners, how they set up the tables, each one's--well, Bush hasn't had as many, but Clinton had some, how they do--each decoration is different, how the First Lady sits there, how they taste the food.  It's, it's good.
Story_ID: 6052
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that you, that you, when you look back on those days, is there anything that you would do differently than you did?
Speaker 2: I would try to--my family suffered as a result--I don't want to say, suffered, but I spent more time, I think, at work than I spent with the family.  I would try to adjust that to make it more evenly distributed so I could spend equal amount of time with the family.  They were very supportive, and then they understood.  But there are certain things that I couldn't do because, oh, I've got to be work, and I would hate to use that excuse; try to do better.  One, and I gave a speech once, and I said, I wish I had taken more time to learn computers more because when I came, computers were in the mainstream; when I left, computer, everybody had it.  And I didn't have time to catch up with that, so I'm still trying to catch up with that now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so most of your--you didn't, I take it you didn't do a lot of typing and so forth?
Speaker 2: It came and it went.  When he [President William Jefferson Clinton] would rewrite a speech, I would do that.  I would do a lot of things for him, but, and there would be times where it'd be a lot of typing there.  But we had an office that did that.  We had a speech writer's office that did the speech.  But when he wanted to change it at the last minute, there I was retyping it, State of the Union addresses, things like that.  But someone else usually did the letters, and he would handwrite a lot of those.  And he wanted something done, rarely could I type a letter and send it out.  I'd have to send it down for someone to record it, type it, you know, the whole process, nothing is sent out without being recorded.
Speaker 1: Now, they--as I recall, they stopped the practice of recording all of the meetings and that sort of thing after [President Richard M.] Nixon's--or did, do they still record?
Speaker 2: They record it, they don't do it by a recording device.  They do it by writing it down.  The president's aide writes down every meeting he has, what time it started, what time it ended, who attended the meeting and what subject.  So that's all in the archives.
Speaker 1: So it's not done on tape or anything.
Speaker 2: No tape, no tape.
Speaker 1: So it's no tapes of all the, you know.
Speaker 2: And the first day I went there, I asked the lady, Patty Crusack (ph.) who was [George W.] Bush's secretary, I said, where do they do the taping?  She said, there's no tape.  I said, well, any tape on my conversations?  She said, no.  I assumed that they were still taping.  It stopping, the taping.  And, of course, you watch some of these TV movies they make, and everything is taped or recorded, but it's not.
Story_ID: 6053
Speaker 1: Well, since the end of the [William Jefferson] Clinton administration, have you come in contact with any of the people that worked with or, you know, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked on his transition.  By law he's allowed six months of transition, which he did in Washington [D.C.].  I did that with him.  Then I went to New York to sort of help him set up his office for a couple of weeks up there.  I talk to him whenever I want to.  I'll call and leave a message; he'll call me back.  There's been several events here in Washington, where he's been to that a lot of the staff have come to.  He's gonna be here, I think June fourteenth for a [U.S. Senator John] Kerry event.  I may or may not go to that.  But, yeah, he's accessible and available.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I miss some of the staff people I used to work with though.  A lot of them got married with kids, it's just time marches on.
Speaker 1: Okay, how--now, what have you done since he's made his transition?
Speaker 2: I've moved to Hollywood, Maryland.  I've come to the quiet life, I call it.  I still get to the District maybe once or twice a week to get a shot of culture a shot of  what's happening.  I've joined several boards down here.  I serve as a volunteer in several organizations.
Speaker 1: What kinds of organizations do you like to volunteer for?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd--I volunteer for "Dress for Success", which I believe in that, the Community Development Corporation, Sotterley Plantation which is a plantation not too far from here which has one of the few working slave cabins.  And I joined the, St. Mary's Women's Board, which they--every, everyone does a little bit, something, which I like for each of them to do.  And I've been nominated of being a trustee for the College of Southern Maryland, which there was a little problem because [Maryland governor Robert] Ehrlich [Jr.] didn't want to approve because I worked for Clinton, but I understand that he's now reconsidering so that that may happen.  We'll see.  Just getting--it's, it takes a lot of time.  And another thing I'm learning to do, and my daughter said, which, what all people learn to--all old people learn to do, is play bridge.  And it's not as easy as I thought (laughs).  But it's fun.
Story_ID: 6054
Speaker 1: In terms of the highlights and as far as you're concerned, and, you know, that you, the things that you remember?  Is there a story or anything from the White House [Washington, D.C.] that, about a state dinner or something, an event or somebody's visit that stands out?
Speaker 2: [Nelson] Mandela's visit because when he came, that was, when everyone asks me, who's your favorite person you met?  And I--bar none, it was Nelson Mandela.  And when I go to schools with the younger kids, I have to remind them who he is.  I say, "You don't know now, but you will.  You will learn all about him.  This is a great man."  And when he came in, they had a choice of--they got through the front door at the state dinner, state visit, and they can go back out the front door.  And I told the aide and the President [William J. Clinton], please let him come by my desk cause I want to meet him.  And they said, no problem.  So he did and, of course, it was just wonderful.  And I had the pleasure of meeting him I guess maybe three times or mo--or more during our entire administration because he was a very close friend of the President's.  And the state dinners were all very, very good.  I only went to two, so I can't say that, and but just very nice.  And I was told, I went to the one with Nelson Mandela, and I left, and those who stayed later said they danced and partied 'til the wee hours of the morning.  And I--(laughs) went home, but missed that, just, just good.
Speaker 1: It's got to be tough partying to the wee hours of the morning--.
Speaker 2: Tell me, and they're working (laughs)--.
Speaker 1: --and working twelve hours, so that--.
Speaker 2: Well, if you're the President, your house is right there, so all you got to do is roll out and come on to work, but the rest of us had to go home and change and come back, but, yeah.  It was, they had a carnival at the White House which was wonderful, on the South grounds.  That was fun.  I know once--what was it?  It was the Oklahoma bombing, they gave us a, a plaque that they wanted us to plant, to put in the Rose Garden--or no, South lawn.  And we had to get approval from the head usher, and it was difficult.  So we finally sort of put it in a place where it could seen, not by him, but by others, yeah.  The, just everything you touch, put in the Rose Garden has got to be, I mean security wise, especially even now, but they had to be okayed.  You can't just drop something, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or pull up a plant or anything, yeah.
Story_ID: 6055
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about Chelsea Clinton.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I know they, they did a, it seems they did a pretty decent job of protecting her, you know.
Speaker 2: I thought they did an excellent job.  When Chelsea, when I met Chelsea, I think she was twelve, a sweet, sweet girl.  And she was wonderful, mannerable, very nice.  And from the time I met her till the time I left the White House, very, very sweet, very, very mannerable.  Whenever she'd come by the Oval [Office] to bring her friends, she would always introduce me, give me a hug, just a nice, nice lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wish her well, and I tell her every time I talk to the President [William J. Clinton] or the others, I ask how she's doing.
Speaker 1: And what about Vernon Jordan, now, he's one of the President's best friends.
Speaker 2: Personally, I've had a crush on Vernon Jordan since I met him when he was head of the Urban League, and that's a hundred years ago, I guess. He is a good friend of the President.  I've always been impressed with him.  I've always had--admired him.  He's done a wonderful job, and he is a friend of the President, and I worked for another family, the [Robert] Rubins [former Treasury Secretary], he was a good friend of theirs.  So I've known of Vernon a long time.  And he and his wife, Ann, are just, I call dear friends, really dear.  And if I have a problem, I feel that I can call Vernon.
Speaker 1: Okay, and one, one of the family members of the Clinton household, you actually have custody of right now, and that is--?
Speaker 2: Yes!
Speaker 1: Socks the cat.
Speaker 2: Mr. Socks, yes, indeedy.  We should call him.  Maybe he'll come (laughs).
Speaker 1: He was calling us a little while ago.
Speaker 2: I know, he's very vocal.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Socks cause he seems to have a role (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Socks is a wonderful cat, and when I take him on visits to various nursing homes or schools, everyone's surprised how laid back he is.  He's laid back.  He is a good cat.  He--a little overweight, but that's okay.  He comes when he's called.  Well, he comes when he's called if you hit the cat food can because he's motivated by food, but just a very good cat.  He doesn't--a lot of cats you can't pick up or take public, Socks you can.  He doesn't scratch you.  He's good.
Speaker 1: And I hear--I've read that he didn't get along with the Clinton dog, Buddy--?
Speaker 2: Initially, you're right in that assumption.  But it took a lot of work, by a lot of people, and eventually, they got to respect each other's territory.  And they can walk into a room and ignore each other.  Now, Socks lives with a dog here, and they get along fine.
Speaker 1: So you actually take him into schools and so forth?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  The only problem I have when I take him to school is that he gets car sick on the ride.  Other than that, he's fine.
Story_ID: 6056
Speaker 1: Ma'am, well, we always ask people this question, and that is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Today and always, is that we will get along with each other.  I, I'm very, very concerned about black-on-black crime.  I've always wondered why.  And it's, apparently, it's getting worse as opposed to getting better.  I worry our youth, especially the male, black male, not getting educated.  The figures show that females are far more, going to college far more than the black male.  That upsets me a lot.  I'm concerned that the black people as a group don't vote as much.  And when I do, "get out the vote" thing, I go to these homes, and people say, my vote doesn't count.  And I hope as a result of the 2000 election, people realize that every vote does count.  They are not motivated by things that are happening, that, you know, it doesn't matter what I say or do, they're gonna do what they want.  And you've got to try to convince them that it does matter.  That's my concern.  That's a serious concern, and wherever I go more or less, I tell people that.  And if I can do anything to help you, I will.
Story_ID: 6057
Speaker 1: What would you consider the highlight of the, of the [William Jefferson] Clinton administration as far as you're concerned, from where you stood?
Speaker 2: The one thing that I consider, it's not a policy, but when President Clinton was giving one of his speeches, when he's talking about his staff, he said he's gonna have a White House that looks like America.  His cabinet will look like America and his staff.  And he kept that promise.  I think he has had more minorities in his office and his staff than ever before.  And I know it's true before, and I know now, and he kept that promise.
Speaker 1: (pause) Okay, and President [William J.] Clinton has been like the, America's first black President.  I, I forget who coined that, but it was one of the people that--(simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Toni Morrison, I understand was the first one to coin it.
Speaker 1: Yes, Toni Morrison, you're absolutely right.  Toni Morrison, and it's been repeated over and over again.  And, now, I heard, I mean, what do you think accounts for this close association between, you know, the black community and President Clinton?
Speaker 2: I think, number one, he has a lot of soul.  He has a lot of soul.  He, and he lets, it shows.  He has a deep feeling for people, and I won't say just African Americans, but all people, all minorities.  And he's not afraid to let it show.  And a lot of people I think have, you know, they don't minorities, but they--if they get in the way, they're gonna step away, and keep on going with their own.  But Clinton is not afraid.  One thing about him, I remember, he had, was giving a speech or was somewhere, and he was, was quoting something in the Bible, and someone said, no, that's not quite right.  And Clinton said, oh, but it is.  He said, well, I think you made--he said, no.  So he got the Bible out, and there it was, what he had said.  He, he's not a scholar of the Bible, but he knows what he knows, and that's one of the things he knows.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) some black community.  It's in, it in the book--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --no, it's not.  That's not in the book.
Speaker 2: (laughs), But it was.  And he's comfortable.  He's comfortable with, with anybody he meets, anybody he meets.  And like you say, he'll look you in the eye and make you feel like you're the only person in the world.
Speaker 1: So, that accounts for the--is there anything as a secretary and as a black woman in the office every day for those eight years, is there anything that you thought that the administration should have done or that you, that wasn't done or was a way of doing something that should have been done that you thought?  I mean is there any--do you get what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I do know, and it was in George Stephanopoulos's book, and it reminded me.  I had forgotten.  When O.J. Simpson was found not guilty, they were gonna immediately set it, to say or do something in support of, not in support of O.J.  And I told George then, I said, "George, you can't do that.  There are a lot of people who believe O.J. is innocent.  You've got to be very, very careful of what you say."  And so they did, they were.  But they immediately were gonna jump--and I think that's the advantage of when you have other people around because when you're making decisions, you're hearing mostly one type.  You got to make sure you get--all voices are heard.
Speaker 1: So that culture or voice would not have been heard had you not been there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not, and they may have said something they later regretted, yeah.  They toned it down a bit, yeah.  And there're probably a lot of incidents like that, that may have happened.  We would, when we would invite people to certain events, we'd have to make sure that we didn't leave out people that were important, people of color, people that were his close friends.  And so often if you don't ask people who know, they'll be omitted.  And that could be a--not good for him.
Speaker 1: Do you have any feeling about the [George W.] Bush administration.  They have two prominent African Americans in real policy-related positions, Condoleezza Rice and--?
Speaker 2: Colin Powell.
Speaker 1: Colin Powell, right.
Speaker 2: When we first came to the White House, Colin Powell was, I think, the [Chairman of] Joint Chiefs of Staff.  So I had a chance to meet him, and he is wonderful.  He is a humorous man.  He is a very bright man, very good at what he does.  When he accepted the job with George [W.] Bush, I was pleased that there would be a, an African American with such a high-level position.  That's one of the highest posts you can have in the administration.  I think he's been under-utilized, my personal opinion.  And I, I think that he, his light didn't shine as much as it could have.  And Condoleezza Rice, I had the pleasure of meeting her when she came by the White House right before they took office, very charming, very--and my friends who still work said, there's no one brighter, smarter or nicer than Condoleezza.  She's known the Bush family for years.  She served with [George H.W.] Bush One in some capacity.  I think she's doing a good job.  I really do.  I don't know if her hands are tied or not, but she gives the impression that she's in control.  And I hope that's the case.  And I hope history--not that I want Bush to get all kudos and everything, but I hope history proves her and Colin well for their sake.
Story_ID: 6058
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look at, back over the years that, in government, and including the [William J.] Clinton administration, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Gosh (laughs), I hadn't thought of my legacy.  But I want people, when they mention my name to say that she did the best job she could.  She was a good secretary.  She was a good worker.  And she was an honest woman.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything that you would do in life differently if you could do it over again?
Speaker 2: I would have completed college.  I don't regret not to, but I, I would have because--and I tell everybody that be--you know, you can do things without a college degree, you can, but you've got to get educated.  And I would have done that.  And then there are some times I wish I had spoken out more on different things because it's so easy to--and I'm not complacent or anything, and I do speak my mind, but there was a time when I was a little bit more complacent, and I wouldn't speak out, on whatever injustice I saw.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you think of a time that you can share with us or?
Speaker 2: I have to think on that.  But there were, I remember there were, there have been times that I've seen things happen, and I didn't say anything.  And never again will I let that happen, and I tell people the same thing.  It's not popular, but it's right.  And you've got to be able to--.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get--I didn't get a chance to--I didn't ask you this, but when, did you get a chance to attend the March on Washington in '63 [1963] when, or did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was working for the postal service at the time, a department down at, the main post office at twelfth and--thirteen and Penn.  And I went to work that day, and my boss said, "Aren't you gonna go on the march?"  And I said, "Well, gee, I don't know."  He said, "You'd better go."  I said, "Okay."  So I walked down the street and joined right there on Pennsylvania Avenue or maybe it was Constitution [Avenue], Constitution, and made the march down to Lincoln Memorial, and stood there under a shade tree and watched it all.  Then I went again to the second one, the anniversary that Donna Brazile had, I forgot when that was, the anniversary, ten-year was it?  Or twenty?
Speaker 1: It was in '93 [1993], I guess or, no, 2003, I guess it would the--?
Speaker 2: No, there was one before that.
Speaker 1: Oh, '93 [1993], I guess.
Speaker 2: No, before that.
Speaker 1: Eight-three [1983]?
Speaker 2: It must have been '83 [1983] cause Donna Brazile, she was only a kid at the time.  It must have been '83 [1983], it was the twenty years.
Speaker 1: He says '83 [1983], I think he's probably right.
Speaker 2: And so I went to that too and enjoyed that.  But, yes, every time I look at the March, I keep saying, not realizing how historic it was then.  And now you say, you were part of it.  And that's why you got to catch your dreams as they come by, just do it and be a part of things.
Story_ID: 6059
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about the Million Man March in '95 [1995], were you--?
Speaker 2: I wasn't a part of that.  Now, why wasn't was I?
Speaker 1: Well, it was a million man march, number one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughs) but there was a women's, they had a million--a women's march also did that.  I didn't, I missed that.  And my girlfriends went to that.
Speaker 1: And I think that was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, and my girlfriend, and my daughter went to that, yeah.  Now, a lot of my girlfriends went to the Million Man March (laughs) for lots of reasons (laughs).
Speaker 1: Because there was a million men.
Speaker 2: They said the statistics were in their favor (laughs), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember anything significancant on that day, you know,  (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: I remember just traffic, and unfortunately, in Washington [D.C.], you get to, when you have a Million Man March, oh, what it's gonna do to the traffic.  And I really was thinking about Ronald Reagan's funeral [June 2004], what was it gonna do for traffic, which is awful, cause Washington is a small city, and anything just backs up terribly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had a good feeling about the Million Man March.  It went very, very well.  It was a good march.
Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of what?  Well, what are you, what would you--?
Speaker 2: It was well organized.  There was no violence, and they came away--I thought they came away with a good feeling afterwards.  I think they tried to do another one, but I don't think it materialized, not too long ago.
Story_ID: 6060
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't covered that you think we ought to, that you want us to know about?  You were aware of--?
Speaker 2: As much as I enjoyed my time at the White House, there were times when I felt like I told you earlier, a little bit left out.  And I don't know, and I don't want to use the word racial, but it could been, overtly or something like that; never felt it with President [William J.] Clinton.  I felt any time I had any questions, I can go to him.  A lot of times, they would have events, I would not be included on it.  I would wonder why.  They would do things I wouldn't know about.  I would wonder why.  But it was not as bad as other jobs I've had because I did have the boss there, and I, if I needed to, I would go to him.
Speaker 1: So, you know, some of it, at times it could be like the America that we're used to and--.
Speaker 2: Truly.
Speaker 1: And, without--and you're saying that President Clinton did make a difference in that equation.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He did, and a lot of things he didn't know about.  And I think if he did, he would have changed even more things.  Good man, I want to let people know that.  Someone, I'm always asked if I'm ever gonna write a book.  Everyone asks me that, and I've told many times that I don't want to because what I want to write, nobody wants to read, and what people want to read, I don't want to write.  But I do want people to know that President Clinton was an excellent man, a good friend, a good boss.
Speaker 1: Okay, at the--now, I know you're still active and involved in stuff, but I, and you don't want to think about this now, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Other than my hard working and my (laughs)--I'm a, I never consider myself a public person.  I'm a very private person, and I'd like for this to sort of just blow over, and just remember that Betty Currie was the first African American secretary, and she represented our race well, and that she was the first of many to come along, I hope.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much, ma'am.
Speaker 2: The pleasure's mine.
Story_ID: 6061
Speaker 1: Socks, this is Socks Clinton Currie.  His adopted name is Currie--Socks, better known as the former First Cat.  You want Mr. Socks to say a few words (laughs).  He won't (laughs).
Story_ID: 6062
Speaker 1: Tell us who this is, please?
Speaker 2: This is Vivian Ercell Williams, my mother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, name and who it is and what date it might have been shot.
Speaker 2: Probably was taken about 19--gosh, I don't know, '90 [1990], maybe 1990.
Speaker 1: [Betty Currie's mother, Vivian Ercell Williams, ca. 1990.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6063
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my sister, Esther, taken in probably in 1990--probably 2000.  We were modeling for a multiple sclerosis fashion show.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie with her sister Esther, ca. 2000.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6064
Speaker 1: Okay, it's President [William Jefferson] Clinton with Nelson Mandela and myself when, Nelson Mandela's first visit to the White House in 1993, early in the administration.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie with Nelson Mandela and President Bill Clinton at the White House, Washington, D.C., 1993.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6065
Speaker 1: Betty Grace Williams, class of 1957, Waukegan Township High School [Waukegan, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's high school photo, Waukegan, Illinois, 1957.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6066
Speaker 1: Oh, in the print, in the print dress is my niece, Leslie, and my daughter, on the other side is Toni Mitchell, Leslie Baldesar (ph.) and Toni Mitchell.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's daughter Toni Mitchell, and niece Leslie.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6067
Speaker 1: That's my niece, Camilla.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's niece, Camilla.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6068
Speaker 1: That's my sister Iris, Iris Williams.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's sister, Iris Williams.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6069
Speaker 1: That's my sister-in-law Gladys, married to my brother Teddy [Theodore Williams].
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's sister-in-law, Gladys Williams.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6070
Speaker 1: That's my daughter and myself, Christmastime.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie and her daughter, Toni Mitchell.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6071
Speaker 1: Underneath that is my brother, Theodore Williams, and his daughter Camilla.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's brother Theodore Williams, and his daughter Camilla.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6072
Speaker 1: That's my sister, Laura's family.  My sister, Laura, she died of breast cancer.  That's her family, all of her children, four children.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's nieces and nephews.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6073
Speaker 1: My sister, Iris [Williams], and myself and my sister-in-law, Gladys [Williams] at a fashion show.  Iris made most of the clothes at the fashion show.  She was quite a seamstress.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie with sister Iris Williams and sister-in-law, Gladys Williams.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6074
Speaker 1: That's Bob, my husband, Bob, and my niece, Leslie again.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's husband, Bob Currie, and niece, Leslie.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6075
Speaker 1: My niece, Davie, who graduates this afternoon from high school.  That's her in elementary school.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's niece, Davie.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6076
Speaker 1: Davie again, on the boat.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's niece, Davie.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6077
Speaker 1: That's Bob and I at one of our wedding pictures we had.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie and her husband, Bob Currie.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6078
Speaker 1: That's mama, Vivian Williams.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's mother, Vivian Ercell Williams.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6079
Speaker 1: My sister, Esther, her husband, Davy and a lady who sings, and I forgot her name, professional singer that we all know (laughs).
Speaker 2: From Waukegan [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: No, I think she's from Chicago [Illinois] or New York.  I'll have to call Esther and find out.
Speaker 2: Mavis Staples or, I can't (unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 1: Who is, wait a minute?  Doing the dog, what's his, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Oh, Rufus Thomas.  That's Carla Thomas.
Speaker 1: That's right (laughs), I take a long way for me to get there, don't I.
Speaker 2: That's Carla Thomas on the left?
Speaker 1: [Betty Currie's sister Esther, brother-in-law Davy, and Carla Thomas.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6080
Speaker 1: My daughter, Toni [Mitchell].
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's daughter, Toni Mitchell.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6081
Speaker 1: My brother-in-law, James Hawkins.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's brother-in-law, James Hawkins.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6082
Speaker 1: My sister Esther and myself, at a Happy Mother's Day celebration.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie with her sister, Esther.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6083
Speaker 1: Davie again.
Story_ID: 6084
Speaker 1: Esther and Gladys [Williams], my sister and sister-in-law.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's sister Esther, and sister-in-law Gladys Williams.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
Story_ID: 6085
Speaker 1: And my nephew, Omar--my great-nephew, Omar Ishmael.
Speaker 2: [Betty Currie's great-nephew, Omar Ishmael.  From the collection of Betty Currie.]
