Story_ID: 4920
Speaker 1: Hello Mr. Church.  My name is Samuel Adams.  I'm the--I will be the interviewer.  Ms. Julieanna Richardson will be the observer and Scott Stearns will be the videographer.
Speaker 2: Should he keep going? Keep going.
Speaker 1: Keep going, you can get this down. while I adjust this.
Speaker 2: I'd like for you to give us your name, spell it for us, your date of birth?
Speaker 1: No, go one by one.  Go one by one.
Speaker 2: Robert T. Church, Sr. is my name.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us sir? And the middle name.
Speaker 2: T-H-O-M-A-S, Robert Thomas Church, Sr.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September the 26th, 1909.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In Athens, Georgia, Clarke County.
Speaker 1: And what is our location today the city and address?  The city and address of our location today?
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: Your address.
Speaker 2: My address here is 901 Carver Drive, Fort Valley, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And your occupation sir?
Speaker 2: I retired but I retired from the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture, USDA and the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] as County Agriculture Agent.
Speaker 1: And today--.
Speaker 2: He was an educator.  You can say that, educator.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Educator.
Speaker 1: I was educated--my early education was in Athens, Georgia public school there up to the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: That's okay sir.  Go on.
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?  Today's date, could you give me today's date?
Speaker 2: I graduated--.
Speaker 1: Today's date.  Give it to him Sam.
Speaker 2: March 17th.  Today is March 17th, 2002.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  March 17th, yes.
Speaker 2: 2002.
Story_ID: 4921
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue I guess.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Vegetables, variety of vegetables, especially those that--root vegetables, turnips, rutabagas, sweet potatoes, leafy vegetables would be cabbage, collards, turnips, salads, lettuce, tomatoes.
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: One day at a time.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: I've been various places, vacation, Bahamas, Nassau, Florida.  Last year Christmas time we went out to Las Vegas [Nevada] for a little vacation.
Story_ID: 4922
Speaker 1: Beginning with your mother, her name, tell us about her and then your father?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Pearl Billups Church.  She was married to my father Arthur Church.  There were three children.  I, myself was the oldest, had a brother was next to me and a daughter yeah, who, who was the baby and that's the family unless you want me to go further.
Speaker 1: The names?
Speaker 2: Name--oh, my brother's name was William Church and my, my sister's name was Eva, Eva Church.  She married Vernon Howard, her last name would be Howard.  That's the family tree, immediate family tree.
Speaker 1: What about your mother?  What did your mother do and what type of woman was she?
Speaker 2: My, she, my mother was a very strong woman.  She was a housekeeper.  She was a community leader, church worker, mission society, etcetera.  My father was a farmer and he was a sharecropper.  He owned--although, we had forty acres of land he had started buying.  When the [Great] Depression came he lost that.  He couldn't keep up the papers to send us to school, etcetera, etcetera.  So he gave it up.  And after, when the recession was over the lady asked him if he wanted to retake, you know pick up where he left off and go ahead and pay for the farm.  We were out of school then and of course we could help you know.  So we redeemed that forty acres.
Speaker 1: So can you tell me about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I didn't know my grandparents except my grandmother.  My grandmother was on my father's side, was named Malinda Church.  I don't--she had about five husbands I believe and I believe the last one was a Parks, Malinda Parks.  She lived to be 106 years old.  She died in Chattanooga, Tennessee with one of my aunts.  My, on my mother's side I knew my grandfather [Lewis Billups] who at one time married my grand, my daddy's mother, my, which would be my grandmother because they soon separated and that's about all I knew of her.  But she was a proud old lady.  She was small in stature.  She had hair, her hair grew down, way down her back straight and she was light colored and very fine old lady.
Speaker 1: Was she Native--was she Indian?
Speaker 2: Her name was Melinda, whichever one of those names you want to call her, Malinda, Malinda Church, Malinda Moon, and another one, Billups and I can't remember the other one.
Speaker 1: Was she part Indian?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Do you remember which tribe she might have been--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Do you know why she was married so many times?
Speaker 2: Why she was red?
Speaker 1: Why she was so, why she was married so many times?
Speaker 2: Well she was, I don't know.  I really couldn't say because I just know that's part of her history.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever tell you any stories about your grandparents that you can recollect?
Speaker 2: My, my mother on my mother's side I knew my granddaddy.  He was, lived in Atlanta [Georgia] but he was a, came from a farm.  He grew up on the farm and went to Atlanta.  And he had his little business I would say buying vegetables and peddling them throughout the city to people who--vegetables, wood or whatever and he had his mule and his wagon.  He did--a lot of people had things to be moved, transferred you know from one place to another, he did that as I, when I got big enough to know him.  And he used to come down home to the farm and whatever we had to do, whatever, we were chopping cotton or pulling corn or harvesting potatoes and whatnot, he jumped right in and helped.  He, he was a stylish old man.  He, I guess he was a ladies' man and perhaps that's the reason why he and grandmamma didn't make it, perhaps (laughs).
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Lewis Billups.
Speaker 1: And what type of relationship did you have with your mom first?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well I was the oldest child and they always said that he got all the best attention.  And of course I don't know about that because the punishment that she used to put on me I couldn't, you know, for wrongdoings I don't know if I was a favorite child or not.
Speaker 1: Well how did she punish you?
Speaker 2: With a switch or a belt or whatever she got her hands on.  She was a high tempered person.  And she'd tell you to do something you had to do it or else you got the consequences.
Speaker 1: What type of relationship did you have with your dad?
Speaker 2: Dad and I were good friends.  I mean we were, we were close.  He taught me a lot of things on the farm, you know, about animals, about cultivation.  At that time we, I came up we were plowing the mules and I could--I was always the--people say I was the best plow boy in, in the community.  People who would chop cotton behind me said I, I was the person who covered up all the grass and they didn't, they loved to get on the row that I plowed.  I--my dad had a, my dad had a--we grew wheat and when I got up to be say fourteen, fifteen years old I remember he hired an old man to cut the wheat you know.  He cut with a cradle like that and this old man was just fooling around, just fooling around.  I said, I told my daddy I said give me a cradle and I'll get behind that man and make him give you a day's work, and that's what he did.  And that, that old man didn't come back anymore because--and I went ahead on and cut the, cut the wheat crop.
Story_ID: 4923
Speaker 1: So what was the community like that you grew up in as a child [in Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It was a very close you know, relationship with the people and the community was very good.  Everybody looked out for, for the other person.  And when I was a kid if I did something wrong and, you know, or other people had the privilege, had the freedom to reprimand me without any hereafter.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory?  Your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was we used to play hide and seek you know as children.  And my little sister [Eva Church Howard], we hid from, my brother [William Church] and I hid from her and she couldn't find us and she went, got on the road and started walking, walking on down the road, had to go cross a bridge, creek, the swamp you know.  And my daddy [Arthur Church] and them came home they said "Where is sister?"  We said "We've been trying to find her.  We don't know where she is."  And boy he was excited because that was his baby.  And we got--we went out to the road and we found her little tracks where she went down the road and she went on through this, across this bridge and on across.  And we found her coming back.  She turned around coming back to the house.  That, that's something that we were reprimanded about, something I'll never forget.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any other fond childhood memories that you have that--?
Speaker 2: That's, that's one.  Another time we were coming from school, had a big storm and washed the bridge away and we--boys would get out of school and run ahead of the girls.  We'd go swimming in, where this bridge had washed away and I couldn't swim.  And I, the boys were riding the boards you know, get on the board and ride.  So I got on the board and when the board started going down I jumped off fifteen foot water.  And they say I came up two times and a young man by the name of Stonewall Witcher pulled me out and saved my life.  That's another memory I shall never forget.
Speaker 1: Any others?
Speaker 2: Well, my brother and I used to spat quite a bit.  You know he wanted to have his way and I wanted to have mine and he'd go into a tangent and I didn't want to hurt him.  I was being the oldest.  I ran, you know, got out of his way until one day I--we were out to the barn and he went on one of those tangents.  He, he started a riff and I said "I ain't gonna run no more."  I just grabbed a bridle and started to beating him.  He never, he never bothered me anymore.
Speaker 1: Your understanding of school--.
Speaker 2: Spell Witcher, Stonewall--.
Speaker 1: Stonewall Witcher?  Stonewall Witcher?
Speaker 2: Witcher, Witcher, W-I-T-C-H-E-R.  He was, I think he moved to Chicago [Illinois] during the migration period.
Story_ID: 4924
Speaker 1: What is your first memories of school, elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well I started school when I was six years old and I went to I believe--we went to Shiloh School.  You know it was in the church area and on the church grounds and was named Shiloh School.  And we were there in a one room school.  Teacher taught all the grades.  And we--as I remember Ms. Francis Foster was my first teacher.  She was the lady that lived in town and she drove her horse and buggy out to the country to the school and that's where I got my start in education.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was, was not too bright.  I made it, I passed but I don't know, I could write.  I, I excelled in writing you know.  They said I had the prettiest handwriting in the school.  We went to fifth grade I believe there, and then we went, then we went to another place called the Judy Jackson School.  Ms. Jackson was the principal.  She was a person more or less like Charlotte Hawkin Browns, brought up, made her own you know, developed a school.  And she got [Julius] Rosenwald funds, etcetera.  And she taught us not only books but fine arts and appreciation of music etcetera, etcetera.  We did, we did a little ceramics--and that's where I learned to play basketball.  And we had a, I had a coach by the name of Mrs. Jones who was from Kentucky.  Her preach--her husband was a preacher and he was, he was transferred to, he got a pastorate at one of the churches in town and she was a school teacher.  She got a job at our school--that was our coach.  Her name was B. J. Jones, I never will forget that.  That's where I learned.  And Ms. Julie was the principal.  She was strict and thorough and she wanted her students to be that same way.  So she wanted us to excel.  So when we finished the ninth grade instead of going, sending her students to high school in town, she wanted them to go to other schools.  Although her husband was the principal of the high school, she wanted us to go--she sent students to Payne College--I mean Haynes Institute [Augusta, Georgia], Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia] and, and other schools.  But somehow or another she wanted me to go to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] so I went to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Why did she want you to go to Hampton? Why did she want you to go to Hampton?
Speaker 2: Well she had connections there.  She knew people there and she thought, saw something in me I guess and she wanted me to go there.
Speaker 1: So what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: Me?  I was a timid little boy, you know.  I, I didn't bother anybody, I didn't--but I was interested in reading and things like that.  I remember my father, I was, I had overheard him say "Better keep that boy in school 'cause he, every time you see him he got his head in a book."  I remember that.  So it was that kind of background that urged me to go on.
Speaker 1: Did your parents encourage you to read?
Speaker 2: Yes, they didn't disturb me.  If anything I wanted to read I just read it.  And they didn't disturb me.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you started Hampton?
Speaker 2: I was, I was, must have been, I must have been about seventeen and that was, went to Hampton to finish high school.  They had the academy at Hampton at that time and that was in 1927 when I went into--I finished in '30 [1930] at Hampton High School, Hampton Academy.  Then after then I went on into college.
Speaker 1: What type of high school was it?  Was it really tough, was it--?
Speaker 2: It was, it was really, it was different.  We had white teachers for one thing.  It was something that I had never experienced before.  And they made you get your lesson and if you didn't get it, you had to repeat.  I think I repeated psychology or something like that, some of those I repeated--and business problems.
Speaker 1: What was the first time you ever been in contact, that close contact with white people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I mean as far as education.
Speaker 1: So now you're in--
Speaker 2: How was it different?
Speaker 1: The white teachers that you had compared to the teachers you had before, was it, how was it different?
Speaker 2: There was no difference because those people were from New England.  Most of them were from New England.  And they were conscientious, they had knowledge of the hardships that we were going through you know as, as a race and they were trying to prepare us lift ourselves, become good citizens, achieve and to just, just be all around students, all around people.
Speaker 1: Was there any one teacher that you remember specifically that may have had influence on you?
Speaker 2: I remember we called him Pop Bradley.  Pop taught history and he called on you and he'd ask you about fifty questions.  And so he called on me this morning and he started questioning me about this, the lesson.  And I must have stood up there don't know ten minutes or more.  When he got through he said "Church?" he said "You missed one question.  If you hadn't missed that question you'd got an A."  So that--I remember Pop Bradley.  I remember Ed Smith, the coach, I tried to play football and he had taught physical education, and I went out this morning, and--.
Story_ID: 4925
Speaker 1: So while you're in high school [at Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia] as you're matriculating through do you have plans on going to college or what are your plans at this time?  What's going through your mind on what do you want to do?
Speaker 2: Oh I wanted to go to college, yes and I barely missed not going to high school at Hampton.  When I--three weeks after I got there, they had a strike.  And you know how the students were striking for better accommodations, more social privileges, more you know discipline, lowering the disciplinary rules, etcetera. And we had a strike.  Well I didn't know anything.  I'm a country boy coming from--and I just followed the crowd (tape interruption) so I, I came back home.  The closer I got home the worse I felt 'cause I knew what was going to happen.  So when I got there, they--I told them what had happened and I didn't know.  They had been trying to get in touch with me you know from home.  They'd heard about it, read about it in the paper and so forth and told me that they wanted me to stay but I was home then.  Then the more and more I wanted to go back.  So my father [Arthur Church] called me in the room.  It was Sunday morning and he asked me if I wanted to go back to Hampton, I told him "Yes.  But I'd like to stay around home a day or two you know see some friends," and so forth.  So they put me on a train and I went back.  I didn't come back home no more until I finished high school.  Then I went back, went to college and got four years in college.
Speaker 1: So after finishing high school and now you're twenty one years old.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 4926
Speaker 1: So when you get to college [Hampton Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], what do you think you want to do when you get there?  What do you want to be and become?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to be a--take agriculture.  At first I did not because of the, you know the drudgery of farm work, etcetera, etcetera.  And of course I had a vocational lab teacher who inspired me to take agriculture, become a teacher and so I took agriculture.  And then of course you had a chance to work you know as part of your training, to pay for your training.  I mean you got credit for it in your, your work and that kept me in school.  After, after the [Great] Depression in 1929 you know things were mighty bad finance--economically you know.  My brother [William Church] went to Voorhees College [Denmark, South Carolina] and my sister [Ruby Church Howard] came here to Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] to finish her high school work.  And I being the oldest, I had to hustle for myself so I, in the summer I went to camp up in New Hampshire and I worked summer camp and I--back at school I did everything I could to stay in school, pay my bills and--such as the boys, you know, had shoes they would--I'd pick up shoes and carry them to the shop, have them fixed, carry them back.  I got a commission for that.  I cleaned up classrooms, I worked at a farm, milked cows, a dairy, school had a big dairy and I milked cows, had hogs, I fed hogs.  And night watch you know we had big poultry plant night watch and I had so many hours there.  And coming back to cleaning, cleaning rooms and etcetera.  I cleaned some of the same rooms that Booker [T.] Washington cleaned and that was, you know, that was done well.  He did his well and that's the way he got into school.  So I went--traveled the same road.
Story_ID: 4927
Speaker 1: And you said there was a teacher that inspired you to go on and be in agriculture?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  And Ms. Judy, Ms. Judy Harris, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the agriculture teacher?
Speaker 2: His name was Walter Pope.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little about Mr. Walter Pope and how he influenced you?  Can you tell me a little bit about Mr. Pope and how he influenced you?
Speaker 2: Mr. Pope attended Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and he came back to Georgia and he became a vacation teacher in the same community in which he grew up in.  We all, his parents knew my parents and we were like family more or less.  And I--and with Ms. Judy's you know encouragement, inspiration and whatnot, I went on to Hampton.
Speaker 1: Did Mr. Pope keep in contact with you?
Speaker 2: Mr. Pope moved to New Jersey.  He left about the same time I did, time I graduated.  And he lived in New--I visited him when I would go, be going north to my camp up in New Hampshire.  I would stop in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and go cross over the Camden, New Jersey where we, I would go out there and have a meal.  We'd talk about old times.
Speaker 1: So you were very fond of Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Very.
Speaker 1: And his influence?
Speaker 2: He was my--.
Speaker 1: How did that affect you while you were at Hampton?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Just ask him about his feelings about Booker T.
Speaker 2: Your feelings about Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 1: Well all I knew about Booker T. Washington you know he had already established Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I was just following in his footsteps in my having to clean those rooms, same rooms.  Holiday Inn guest house and when he, walking to school, walking from his--West Virginia to Hampton and all those things inspired me.  If he could do it, I could do it too.
Story_ID: 4928
Speaker 1: So how did you do while you were in Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in college?
Speaker 2: How did I do?
Speaker 1: Tuskegee--he said Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Oh I passed.  I said, as I told you before.  I wasn't a brain student, I passed.  I made one A in college and that was in physical education.  I say I made one A in college, the rest of them Ds and Cs.  And those classes I failed in I had to take them over.
Speaker 1: So were you fond of the agriculture department and the classes they made you take?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the classes that you had to take while you were in the agriculture department?
Speaker 2: Oh I took animal science, I took poultry.  I took agronomy, gardening and livestock production, livestock breeding, all those kind of classes.
Speaker 1: And did you make any close friends while you were at Hampton?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.  As I told you John Sengstacke from Chicago [Illinois] was my roommate and my, a very good friend.  Daniel Crockett, another good friend of mine, R. O. Glover (ph).  And Crockett and I played football together.  By the way, I didn't tell you I played football there.  But I wasn't a star.  I was just, I made the rest of them play.  But had some lasting friends, I mean we, we down through the years we corresponded and there was--John passed of course and I hadn't been to Chicago since.
Speaker 1: Remember any stories during your Hampton time between you and John Sengstacke while you were there?
Speaker 2: Well John you know had, he was, had plenty money and whatnot and good clothes and, and he'd let me wear his pretty ties.  I never will forget.  And when--one day he came in he wanted to put--looking for a special tie and I had the tie on.  So we, we would fall out, but we were good friends.
Speaker 1: You remember any stories while you were at Hampton you want to share?
Speaker 2: Any stories?
Speaker 1: Yeah, football or real your other friends that--Mr. Crockett.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Crockett, Crockett played end--Glover played tackle and I was a guard, I played guard and we were on the same side.  And I would, was a running guard.  I'd come out of the line and run interference for the ballcarrier.  And somebody grabbed me one day and was holding me and I just turned around and my fist and knocked them out.  And went back to the line, Glover said "Somebody hit me in the face."  I said "Hit you in the face, what?"  Then I said "Somebody was holding me and I just hit--I'm sorry."  And that was it.  He came to Georgia and worked until he passed away.  Crockett is, I don't know whether Crockett is living or not.  I lost contact with him but he lived in Raleigh, North Carolina.  And I used to go on my trips up to Hampton we would stop in Raleigh and he was in charge of the school for the blind, deaf and you know.  And he'd always give us overnight accommodations there and we'd talk about old times.  But he's been here to see me and so has, so has John.  John been, had been, had come down and of course Glover worked in Georgia and we saw each other.
Speaker 1: So while Mr. Sengstacke was at Hampton was he into publishing and working with the newspaper while he was there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  His Uncle Robert was owner you know of ['Chicago] Defender', Robert S. Abbot, and John was his favorite nephew.  And when he passed you know everything went to John.
Speaker 1: Did he work at the newspaper at Hampton?
Speaker 2: I think he probably, might have been on the 'Script' you know the Hampton paper, he might have been.  I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 4929
Speaker 1: So now you're about to graduate.  Do you have any idea what you want to do after you graduate college?
Speaker 2: I wanted a job.  I wanted, wanted to teach.
Speaker 1: You're wanted to teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know where you wanted to teach?
Speaker 2: I wanted--the supervisor of education came to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and they wanted to see all the Georgia graduates.  And he told us not to worry about a job 'cause he want all of them wanted--he had a job for all of us who graduated, come back to Georgia.  I was, I was--and Mr. Taber, Albert Taber was my first employer for vocational agriculture.
Speaker 1: What school?
Speaker 2: Was he-what school was he?
Speaker 1: What school?
Speaker 2: He from?
Speaker 1: No, what school for vocation?
Speaker 2: Where did I work?  Oh, I was at--my first job was in Washington, Georgia, Wilkes County, 1934.  I went to work and in August, I didn't get paid until October.  I began to frown you know and I was very much disappointed.  At Christmas time I went home, packed up all my clothes and went home for Christmas.  It was just forty miles away and told Mama [Pearl Billups Church] I wasn't coming back.  I wasn't going back down there.  So, yes you are.  See, get all your dirty clothes out there and wash them and pack up.  So time to go back I went back.  I stayed there for oh about two and a half years and I went on down to Jenkins County.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like while you were teaching there?
Speaker 2: While I was teaching there I was, I become disgruntled, dissatisfied.  I was supposed to teach agriculture, vocational agriculture.  I wound up teaching science, spelling and even had me to keep study hall plus coaching and all that.  Of course those kids had never, never been, they had a--didn't know anything about basketball, they didn't know anything about football.  We organized a little football and I taught them football and they didn't win any games but they got the experience.  So I was proud of that.
Speaker 1: So what made you decide to leave that school and come down further south?
Speaker 2: No, you see they, they would move me from place to place you know.  If you were dissatisfied or you were, the people were, were dissatisfied or you're having problems with the community or the Board of Education they would move you somewhere else.  So I, I was dissatisfied, I wasn't getting my pay and of course I knew my pay was coming down from the state.  But the principal held my pay until he could pay everybody.  Or the superintendent I'd say, till he could pay everybody.  So I raised hell about that and I got to be a bad boy there, see.  So my supervisor Mr. Taber moved me to Jenkins County.  In Jenkins County I was a principal and vo-ag [vocational-agriculture] teacher.  So I, I was there about two years principal, yeah.  There I was transferred over to extension.
Speaker 1: Was Mr. Taber black?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was a black man?
Speaker 2: Black supervisor, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was over the black schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah I believe so in the state, he had the whole state 'cause later on he got some, some more assistants you know assistant state supervisors and so forth and so on.  But he was the head man vocational agriculture for blacks.
Speaker 1: So how did you transform the Vocational-Ag department at the school you went to?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't like being cooped up in the classroom so I wanted to be out you know with the farmers.  If I was going to stay in agriculture I wanted to be out with the farmers where I could exercise myself and more freedom, more freedom.  And I could go casual in school you know had to wear like a tie and shoes shined, britches pressed, etcetera, etcetera.  And I just liked extension.
Speaker 1: And how did the kids like the class, going outside and having a farm?
Speaker 2: How was that?
Speaker 1: How did the kids like the class, having to go outside and having a farm?
Speaker 2: We had, we had fun.  The kids I, I got along with them very well.  I was, you know, more or less principal and, and--up at, up at Wilkes County the principal and I were the only two men in the school and I was single and you know I, I played around with many teachers (laughs).
Story_ID: 4930
Speaker 1: Now extension, the concept of extension.  Where does that come from?  Where did that begin?
Speaker 2: My work in, in Jenkins County in, in 1938 I was given the county I had, I worked with the county agent there as Vocational-Ag [Agriculture] teacher and I worked with him.  And the--Mr. Stone, P. A. Stone, whose pictures you saw while ago knew me.  He was in fact, tell you the truth, he was my county agent when I was a boy growing up and he went to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and he also influenced me about Hampton.  And I just got out there and started working with the farmers and the 4-H Club members.  We had, 4-H Club we had livestock project with the boys.  We had the cash show was one thing and first year I didn't, I didn't do too well but later on I, I took prizes.  My boys or the kids that I taught took first place, second place, had top prizes.
Speaker 1: Now I want you to describe what the 4-H Club is and what they do?
Speaker 2: Well the 4-H Club is, first thing is we have a motto, making the best better and taking what you have, taking what you have and making it better.  Then we had a pledge we, we learned, we taught them, "I pledge my head to clearer thinking, my heart to greater loyalty, my hands to larger service and my health to better living."  That's the four, four Hs.  And that's a concept of the, you know, the agency.  And I took them to camps, took them to various parts of the state you know for contests that we were in and we won.  Won some, we lost some.  But the most was we won.
Speaker 1: What type of contests were these?
Speaker 2: Contests in various things, we had soil judging, we had poultry judging, we had livestock judging and we had public speaking and all those kind of contests.
Story_ID: 4931
Speaker 1: Could you describe the painting and who it is and who did it?
Speaker 2: This painting here of my wife [Ruby Summer Church]?  That's--.
Speaker 1: We know her name but who is the artist who painted that?
Speaker 2: That was one of her professors over at the college.  I, I don't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, we can get it from the painting.  Do you remember when it was painted?
Speaker 2: Probably in the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 4932
Speaker 1: Explain the history of the 4-H Club, talk about that.
Speaker 2: Well as I said before you know what the, making the best better is, was the, was the, taking what you have, making--upgrading the quality of life and so forth.  And we, we, we--and in our, in our training we wanted to excel in the contests but the main thing was to excel in making manhood, good citizens and etcetera, etcetera.  That, that, that's the, that's the idea of train them so that they can upgrade themselves and upgrade everything around them for a better quality of life, good citizenship and so forth, cooperation and things of that nature.
Speaker 1: So around this time you become, follow in the footsteps of Mr. P. H. Stone and you become a county agent [of agricultural education for the University of Georgia, Athens, Georiga].  Explain to us--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I became a county agent.  Stone was a county agent, came to my house, I never will forget when I was a little boy about nine years, ten years old.  And he rode a motorcycle through the county and I wanted to be like that.  I wanted to do that.  Wanted to get out, talk to folks, see them, help like he did, like he did my family.
Speaker 1: So what was your impact as a county agent on the families in the area?
Speaker 2: Very good I think.  If I wasn't successful they would have kicked me out.
Speaker 1: What types of, what types of service do you provide as a county agent?
Speaker 2: What type of service?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh well I, I, I, as a county agent I worked with them and helping them to make the best better so to speak.  Better crops, better livestock, helping them to have a better quality of life.
Speaker 1: Do you have any good--.
Speaker 2: Home improvement, things of that kind, education, the children and oh, cooperative, buy land, build homes and become well-rounded citizens.
Speaker 1: Do you have any good stories of some of the families you met while you were a county agent?  Any interesting story you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I met a man who--a Mr. Snead--he lives out this way, who at, at that time he was in--lived in town.  But he kept cows, kept a cow and you know, chickens and things that, to help feed his family.  He had a large family.  One night when I was referreeing, officiating a football game over at the school he came over and wanted to see me.  So I said "Well I'll talk with you just as soon as this half or during halftime."  He told me he had a cow that was, was having problems with calving.  He asked me would I come over and help him.  When I got over there the calf was so large he, you know just couldn't deliver it.  So I pulled the calf, pulled him out, and we got to be good friends thereafter.  He got a--I helped him to get a--I encouraged him rather to buy a farm out here and he had an old house, shackly house and I helped him to get a, get a nice home, brick home with modern facilities.
Story_ID: 4933
Speaker 1: Please continue to explain the services you provided to the area as a county agent [of agricultural education, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Pick up where I left off?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As I told so before, the farmers were having problems getting their peanuts harvested you know so they could take it to market.  They were the last to be served by people who had machinery to do that kind of work.  I said "Let's forget about that.  Let's buy our own."  So I organized a co-op and they picked, they borrowed money and bought a machine for themselves, thrash their own peanuts, the big farmers you know farmers who had big allotments for growing peanuts.  They could grow them but they couldn't get them thrashed till maybe say--they, they'd pull them up in October/November.  They couldn't get them thrashed 'til maybe last of December, first of January.  Well rain's gotten in there, animals you know roam, destroyed probably half of them.  So we got this machine, they thrashed their own peanuts, paid themselves, paid for the machinery and rendered a great service to, to the community.  That's the kind of work that I was in.  That's the kind of mark that I left in Jenkins County [Georgia] and they continued that.  When I went to Athens [Georgia] in the extension service, worked, when, when I went back home they, for a couple of years I had a program there of, of, of farmers producing Grade A milk, Grade B milk for supplementing their farm income.  So I got people who had cows take care of that milk, set it out on, help keep it in cool places, set it out the next morning, the truck come along pick it up.  End of the month they got a check.  It's you know helping them with their farm expense, etcetera.  That's the kind of, that's the kind of work you did.  We had 4-H Club members with poultry project and we'd give them fifty chickens.  They'd rear those chickens under our supervision and we'd take them to the shows, some of them to shows.  The rest to have at home, more eggs for the family, excess they have them for sale, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So what was the economic situation around here with the farmers?
Speaker 2: In Peach County it was, when I came here it was pretty--?
Speaker 1: What year was this sir?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, I came here in 1948.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did the same thing over and over, try to get something going you know, buying land or improving the farm or improving the farm, improving the livestock or making some inroads to their economic situation by sale of livestock, sale of hams and eggs.  Just usually in those kind of things.
Story_ID: 4934
Speaker 1: In 1949, you begin to participate in work with the [Peach Couty, Georgia] Ham and Egg Show?
Speaker 2: No, I had been, I had Ham and Egg Show in, in Athens [Georgia] where I, just where I was transferred to when I left Jenkins County.  I had a Ham, first Ham and Egg show that's, that's we've ever had.
Speaker 1: In Peach County you were the director--?
Speaker 2: You, the first Ham and Egg Show that you had was in Jenkins County?
Speaker 1: In Jenkins County yeah.  The first one, I had a show first, I had a show in Jenkins County.  Then when I went to Athens I had a show.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when this, this position kind of became available they transferred me here to take charge.
Speaker 2: And what, how did you make it different for them as director of the show?
Speaker 1: Well as director of the show the big thing was we had a night the 4-H Club was to exhibit their talent, a talent show.  And we packed the, this, the auditorium full of people cause they kid, parents come to see their kids perform and friends, etc., etc.  Then before I came here the only hams, eggs were sold were the prize eggs and the farmers take the, took the rest of them back home.  Well I said that, that doesn't work.  I said they put all this energy in, in producing and they got to take it back home.  I said let's have a big sale, that's when the auction sale started.  And they sold, and then they, they'd bring, bring then hams and sold five of them, take the rest back home.  They sold all of them, but he got money in his pocket.  He can buy, go back and buy some furniture for his house or, or a piece of appliance you know for his family so, so that, that was a big difference.  And those two things was the two big differences.  And we got, we got, you saw the pictures there we got cooperation from the local people downtown, we got cooperation from Macon [Georgia], we got publicity from Chicago [Illinois], 'Pittsburgh Courier', 'Atlanta [Daily] World', 'Atlanta [Journal] Constitution', 'Macon Telegraph' and ['Fort Valley] Leader-Tribune', local people.  We got wide publicity and that was, that was, those are some of the things that we--they, they already--we continued the, the publicity for it. The show already had its publicity because it had been, been publicized in, in 'Life' Magazine, had been publicized in 'Atlanta [Journal] Constitution' and what not.  But they, they didn't have--'Atlanta [Daily] World' was the only, only black paper I think mostly carried it.  But we had all kind of publicity before with the, with the big white concern.
Speaker 2: So a major purpose of the Ham and Egg Show was to raise money for the farmers in the area, people were--?
Speaker 1: No, it's more or less to raise money for the family, for the producer see.  We, we took 2 percent of the sales for the operation of the show and of course we solicited the ads and things like that otherwise to, too, too--for the promotion of the show too and for giving prizes and so forth to the producers with prize ham or prize eggs or prize whatever.
Speaker 2: And can you tell us some stories about some of the winning hams and eggs?
Speaker 1: Well--.
Speaker 2: And the sizes of these?
Speaker 1: What we tried to do was bring quality, quality into the, the production.  I mean into the exhibits.  I, I noticed all the pictures are not, but some of the, some of the hams were raggedy, some of the meat was raggedy and we taught them how to trim it down, make, make it you know better quality, better appearance for the show, for the exhibit.  At the same time cured right so we'd have quality there.  Those are, those are some of the things.  And of course that brought on better relationship because a lot of people wouldn't come, wouldn't come this way, would come to the Ham and Egg Show.
Speaker 2: So not only--you actually trained when you came here, would train them on how to prepare their foods better?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Were there any specific classes on it or did they just come and you just gave them the suggestions?
Speaker 1: You mean the people, the local people?
Speaker 2: The farmers, the farmers that would come?
Speaker 1: The farmers become interested because they wanted to win the prize, you know.  It's a--it was competition.  At the same time was a, it, it was giving them a better quality of life, quality of meats for them families.  And of course they, they, they got a reputation you know with, by doing a good job.
Story_ID: 4935
Speaker 1: Now during this time you go back to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], get your master's degree.  In 1958 you receive your master's degree?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: What makes you go back to further your education and get your master's?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was economics for one thing--get more pay when you have a higher degree.  And of course to learn more techniques, more, more methods of teaching and more methods of preserving, thrift, all those kind of things.
Speaker 1: So what was the experience like being an older student, working on your Masters degree at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Being an older student?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I got along with the rest of the boys.
Speaker 1: Pretty good?
Speaker 2: I had plenty of company.  Yeah, 'cause we used to, we used to--see you couldn't go to the university.  They sent us out to Prairie View, Texas to improve us, work on our--and then Tuskegee.  Tuskegee had, had extension classes here at Fort Valley [State College, now].  And then after they, they stopped coming here we moved over there once a week.  Every Saturday morning we'd meet here at five o'clock to go to Tuskegee to take a class, or one or two classes from--get back here about two o'clock in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Now did--.
Speaker 2: Two classes.
Speaker 1: Now did you want to go there?  Was there any desire to go there because that school was founded by Booker T. Washington?  Was that in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that, because of its history, because of its reputation, because of people that are strong teachers and so forth.  Dr. [George Washington] Carver was there and several others.
Speaker 1: Did you ever receive any teaching from Dr. Carver?
Speaker 2: No, he was in the lab.  He stayed in the lab.  I've been to his lab, been through there.  And he had, and they had, they had--before I came here they had Dr. Carver here for a speaker at the [Peach County, Georgia] Ham and Egg Show.
Story_ID: 4936
Speaker 1: Once you get your master's degree what do you think you, that will be able to make you do now with your degree when you come back with your master's?
Speaker 2: Well I came back with my masters, I don't know if I did anymore because I had the degree--oh sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: And prestige more or less.  That had a lot to do with it.
Speaker 1: Did it help you with the farmers? Working with the people as a county agent?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now the farmers you dealt with, were all those black farmers?  Did you ever deal with any white farmers?
Speaker 2: I dealt with both.
Speaker 1: Now how was it when you dealt with the white farmers?  How were they when you--?
Speaker 2: I was accepted.  When the county agent that was here, Mr. Swan (ph.), we got along fine, passed away I was next in line for being the chief county agent.  But I was passed over and a man was brought in who had less education and he was given the top job although I had master's, he didn't have a master's.  So they said I couldn't handle it the reason why they didn't give it to me.  But when this man came he had to go back to school to get his master's.  I was the only one here, I took over the county.  But I was never given any credit for it.  I never (unclear).  It's one of those kind of things.
Speaker 1: So did he get the job because he was white?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So even though while he was in school you had to do his job?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did it all.
Speaker 1: So what was it like when you went to a white farm, a white farmer's house and talked to him about improving his stock and his--?
Speaker 2: Well most of the work that I did at that time they were, were growing barley, experimenting with barley in the--so I had to go take soil tests and take tests of grain that they had grown, send it to the lab, have it analyzed, so forth.  Also would give them advice on types of fertilizer you use and how much, so forth.  I was--being in the meat business I was called on to teach, help with the butchering of hogs, also with the castration of pigs and hogs, cows so I got to be quite proficient in that.  I, I would do sometimes fifty heads of hogs in, in, in a day.  I would give--first came here, cholera you know was, was prevalent among animals and I gave shots for that.  I gave--as I say castrating pigs, castrating cows, castrating big hogs, so forth, that was, that was my specialty.  That's kind of service I rendered to both black and white.
Speaker 1: And your relationship with the white farmers did they trust you and respect you when you would give it?
Speaker 2: I heard them, heard tenants from some of these farms say to me that they were, they would trust my judgment than trust the other man's judgment.  Now that, that's what they, they would, that was, that would get back to me from you know tenants who were out there on the farm.  I did have problems with one tenant, one white farmer, big plantation owner down in Jenkins County [Georgia].  He worked, he had a farmer with him who was a very good farmer and I talked to the man about buying his own farm and doing business for himself.  And of course the word got out that I was trying take his tenant and it was rumored that my, my body might be found down in the swamp.
Speaker 1: Were you scared at all?
Speaker 2: I just got my little pop gun, put it down in my, my car and rode home.  Of course I told the, told the mayor, I told my counterpart county agent what happened.  He said don't worry about it.  Said don't worry about it, ain't nothing going to happen to you.
Story_ID: 4937
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s], the, the end of the '60s [1960s] when the Civil Rights Movement starts really picking up does that affect your job and how the works going on in this area?
Speaker 2: It did.  We--for instance I was given a twenty five dollar raise from my county.  Instead of me keeping it to myself I told my supervisor and my supervisor did.  So I got to go back and figure this thing over, budget--he cut, he'd already gotten the budget out, went back and cut twenty five dollars a month off of my salary.  That was after the civil rights.  Well another instance was when I camp, 4-H Camp we had camp, we went to, we were going down to Dublin [Georgia], a segregated camp and they built Rock Eagle [4-H Center, Eatonton, Georgia] up at North Georgia, up in middle--below Macon [Georgia].  And when civil rights come on we could go anywhere we wanted to.  So they sent the, the forms out, where do you want to go to camp?  We said we want to go to Rock Eagle--we wanted to go where the facilities are.  And before the, before the application got there I got an announcement back that Rock Eagle is full.  I said "Well we can't go to Rock Eagle, we won't go nowhere this year."  Then I got to be a bad boy.  We had a meeting down at Americus, Georgia and as soon, when the meeting was almost over with he started lambasting the black agents for not cooperating with the, the camping, the 4-H Camp.  And it might have been different if it had been private but he did that before everybody.  So when we came out the meeting I said "Boys we need to have a meeting", all the guys in the same, in my district.  So we waited 'til he came out and we told him we had to have a meeting with him.  Said "We don't, didn't like what you said in there about us not cooperating cause we cooperate with everything and we had the privilege of going to the Rock Eagle camp where they had all the facilities.  And we feel like we ought to go."  I said "My leadership can't help me to help my people do what is best for them my leadership ain't worth a dime."  That's what I told them.  From then on I had to, every time we went to a meeting, "Church you ought to retire.  Church you, you done put in enough time to retire.  You're sixty years old."  Every time I'd go to a meeting they were--I said "Well they're picking at me so I will retire."  So I got out.  I had bought me a little farm.  I had paid my social security which was a--they--nobody in the supervisory condition--positions encouraged but I bought this little farm, I paid social security.  When I got out I got more money being retired than I did while I was working.  And I, when I got sixty two I started drawing my social security.  So that was, it was a blessing in disguise I say, but it hurts you know when you are forced.  Now a lot of my co-workers told me that I ought to sue you know even when, even back when I didn't get the position but I just went along.  And I, I knew I didn't have any backing if I had sued you know or, or--and officials came down here from Washington [D.C.] to interview me about the conditions and I told them just what I told you. But I ain't heard no more.  But I just got on out of cause then I could do things, other things that I wanted to do.  I wanted to tend to my little farm.  I grew watermelons and cantaloupes, grew cotton, corn and I had my, I was in the ham and egg business.  I had that experience.  I had hogs and I sold feeder pigs.  My pigs were, ain't bragging but they were so good I didn't have to carry them to the show, to the ring, to the auction ring.  When I drove up it was a southern man there from Tennessee, a buyer.  He come out there and looked at them and he said give me a price.  Top price and I just unload them and go on back home.  I didn't have to wait around for the auction.
Story_ID: 4938
Speaker 1: There is something here I definitely want to touch on.  It's amazing that almost a half million dollars you brought here from HUD, [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] to upgrade the substandard housing in Fort Valley [Georgia].  Please talk about that.
Speaker 2: That was in, I was--in 1970, let's see yeah, 1974 I believe it was, I became a city councilman.  And in working with the city council as a city councilman I did a lot of things to--I was a, I influenced and got the help from the other, the mayor and other officials to, to make a lot of improvements, sidewalks and, and you know muddy areas where there were no sidewalks.  The overhead bridge you know bypass over there I guess in the, in--off, off [Georgia State Route] 96 where the big freight trains used to come in here and you know park and stay there sometimes a half and hour.  And fires and what not would get out and the trucks couldn't get over.  We built this station on the other side, other side of the track we called it and we, we also initiated an overhead bridge so that the traffic wouldn't be balled up when those freights would stop.
Speaker 1: Can we hold on one second, 'cause you're not going to be able to finish this story, we're gonna change the tape.
Speaker 2: We've got two minutes.
Speaker 1: You've got two minutes, he's in the middle of it, I just wouldn't start--go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And as a, as a city councilman I was appointed to an area planning commission, headquartered in Macon [Georgia].  And I, then I got on the Board of Directors.  They elected me the board, one, one of the Board of Directors.  I had to go to Macon twice a month to meetings there and they would give me money for various counties you know.  It was an area thing you know.  And they would give grants and what not.  I said "Why can't we get some?"  So I proceeded to get the HUD grant and we got $490,000 to upgrade forty nine houses--upgrade the houses in the Vineville area [of Fort Valley, Georgia].  And of course in '84 [1984], yeah '82 [1982], I ran again and lost.  But the project went on for a year or two.  I think it's depleted funds now but I got that money for upgrading those houses.  We did everything from bathrooms, kitchen appliances, roofing, additions and things of that kind for, for family comfort in those, in that area.
Story_ID: 4939
Speaker 1: I want to know when you ran for city council [of Fort Valley, Georgia], how did that decision come about, you to run for city council?
Speaker 2: Well for a number of years a lot of blacks had ran for city council and other you know positions, governmental positions and they lost.  So Clayborn Edwards one of my cohorts soon he was elected, got the votes and they will--he went into--I think he was supposed to go into the office at one time I don't remember one month but he had to go through the courts in New Orleans [Louisiana] and they ruled in his favor that he won.  From then on we, we got ourselves organized and won places we were--we had three, three councilman, three whites and three blacks on the council.  And what--with a white mayor. Then [Rudolph] Carson ran and he became mayor so we had, had a majority and we went on from there.  And that's, that was more or less breaking the ice you know in, in all positions--the county commissioners and etcetera, etcetera.  But blacks got on the county commissioners and became county commissioners and councilman always had a--since that time we've always had representation on the, on the governmental positions.
Speaker 1: Now when did you run? What year did you run?
Speaker 2: I ran first in 1974, that was--and I ran again '74 [1974], '87 [1978] and I ran again and I lost in '82 [1982].  I ran two, two four year terms from '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Now did you then, then you got involved in political life.  You said there was one other black councilman before you, right?  There's Clayborn Edwards and--?
Speaker 2: Clayborn and, and Rudolph Carson.
Speaker 1: Were before you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you were the third one to sit on the council?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: When you, when you ran for, I mean when you started your political life were there things that you found out that were surprising?  Did you like it being a councilman?
Speaker 2: I liked it in a way that I found out what was going on and we had no recourse you see.  And we were there, we could stop that.  We could have programs of our own in the interest of black people that we could sponsor.  Just like the people had the walk the town in the mud, no sidewalk, got that.  And we got the bridge as I told him you know where the freight train would not hold up traffic if something, emergency comes up over there you know with the train, long freight train being there and so forth.  So there were some, some incidents wherein that, that caused some you know friction.
Story_ID: 4940
Speaker 1: You said it developed in the late 1880s, the [agricultural education] extension program.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You said it developed in the 1880s, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if I'm very well-versed on the, the--I have known, but you know things move out.  Mainly it was designed to help people help themselves by Dr. Seaman [A.] Knapp years ago, back in the '80s [1880s].  And of course from there it spread you know to, from state to state.  Then the congress created a law where the extension service to take information from the, from the research station and the agriculture college to the farmers so that they might improve themselves.  That's, that's the purpose--.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: --and it was just you know--go ahead.
Speaker 1: And the county agent that person, was that part of the county agent program, was that under the extension service?
Speaker 2: Yeah, county agent under the extension service.  One was a, one--one of the laws was the Smith-Lever Act [1914] and the other one was the Smith-Hughes Act [1917].  The Smith-Hughes Act was vocational agriculture.  The Smith-Lever was for extension.  Vocational agriculture was taught in the classroom but we teach out on the field, see.  The Smith-Lever, that's the extension.
Speaker 1: So you were, your life was spent more teaching out in the field?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Story_ID: 4941
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back also the [Peach County, Georgia] Ham and Egg Show.  When I was talking to Ms. Taylor earlier she was saying that you know--and you had mentioned there was a fine arts component and everything.  Was the Ham and Eggs, was it for kids or was it for adults or was it for both?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Both?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  We had kid's exhibit, had kids to win prizes.  You notice the little boy with the, the eggs and them and he, he had the top eggs.  We taught them that, how to, how to select eggs and for show, cleanliness and size and uniformity and those, that kind of thing.  You wouldn't put brown eggs and white eggs, this, that, those kind of things we, those are the kind of things you taught in the 4-H Club.  And we taught other projects but that, that, that that were not in the Ham and Egg Show.  For instance I spent, I sent the first black boy to Chicago [Illinois] to the 4-H Congress in Georgia.  He was in photography.  He had a project in photography and he won this local, state and was, went to Chicago for the national.  Won five hundred dollar scholarship.  Won summer work at the 'Atlanta [Journal] Constitution' and now he's in his own business down here at Savannah, Georgia, a photographer.
Speaker 1: You talk, you started to talk about Robert Church and you didn't finish it.  You said that he was one of you know he had won a prize.  I mean not, I'm sorry sir, that Mr. Crooks, Cook, Dr. Crooks--Cook, no Cook.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Cook was my public speaker prize winner down in Savannah, Georgia.  I don't know what year it was but, and he was a 4-H Club boy.
Story_ID: 4942
Speaker 1: I wanted to understand the farming community a little bit more, you know farmers both black and white. Were there, was it a situation that when you were a county agent [of agricultural education, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] were most, was it a, most of the black farmers working for white farmers or did black farmers, were there some black farmers that had their own farms and they were wealthy farmers?
Speaker 2: Well there were well to do, you say when were (unclear).  So some, some had acquired land through their own efforts.  Some were, land was handed down to them.  They become heirs and like that, see.  And they were more or less farmers who believed in education, believed in keeping up with the time.  So they bought tractors, they bought other equipment that would enhance their farming business.  So we, we were out there to help them any way we could.
Speaker 1: And your co-op program helped that way too?
Speaker 2: Co-op?
Speaker 1: The co-op you were talking about?
Speaker 2: The co-op was down in Jenkins.
Speaker 1: Jenkins County [Georgia], it wasn't here..
Speaker 2: That wasn't here [Fort Valley, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now when you came here, what year was it?
Speaker 2: 1948.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--okay, you did say that.  When you came here, can you describe this area because it's called Peach County [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What, like why is it called Peach County?
Speaker 2: Because the peach was, peaches were the, the main industry, industry--I mean what, enterprise or what you, whatever you might call it in, in, in this, in this area.  That's where it gets it name from, Peach County.  It was--at this time, at one time all of this was, Peach County was a part of Houston County [Georgia], a part of Crawford County [Georgia] and a part of Taylor County [Georgia, sic, Peach County was formed from Houston County and Macon County].  So they cut it out Peach County in nineteen, nineteen--1925 [sic, 1924].  It's one of the younger counties in the State of Georgia.  And Peach took its name from the main crop.
Story_ID: 4943
Speaker 1: When you became affiliated, what year did you become affiliated with Fort Valley [State College, now Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Fort Valley State?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well I, when I graduated from Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], got a job in Georgia, we had to come to Fort Valley to get certified and I spent one summer down here in 1934.  I got certified to teach in the public schools and I came, I think I must have come in June, yeah.  Probably June and spent a summer here and, and I got certified.  I got a job over in Wilkes County [Georgia] as Vo-Ag [vocational agriculture] teacher and from then on around.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever--you taught at Fort Valley didn't you?
Speaker 2: Taught?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Only thing I taught was more of a workshop.  I had a workshop and of course that was after I retired.  But I, but the main thing is the Ham and Egg Show that, that you know cemented our relationship for Fort Valley State.
Speaker 1: And Fort Valley State, can you talk about that college and its importance to the black community and to this area?  The importance of Fort Valley College?
Speaker 2: I'm not--.
Speaker 1: The importance of Fort Valley College in training people?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about its history?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  I do know that Dr. [Henry Alexander] Hunt was, was the president and of course he passed.  Dr. [Horace Mann] Bond came.  Dr. Bond invited me to, and then they got the agricultural departments to set that up.  He invited me to come and be a teacher here but I turned it down because I was--what they could pay me I was making more where I was see, so I didn't come.  But I finally got here after a number of years later due to the fact that the--Mr. [Otis Samuel] O'Neal passed--Mr. O'Neal's retirement see, and that's the way I got here.  My sister [Eva Church Howard] finished Fort Valley State in high school.  And of course after we moved here my wife [Ruby Summer Chuch] had, had a normal degree and she went back and got a B.S. degree and a master's degree.  Got a B.S. degree in home economics I believe and a master's in education.  So we've been here in and out and she taught over there.  She taught the demonstration school over there for a number of years.
Story_ID: 4944
Speaker 1: Sir, are there any other things that you're proud of that you've done all your life you know that you've accomplished that you, you know that, that you are proud of?
Speaker 2: Well I have, I'm proud of the fact that I have lived and I have worked and I have helped people to better themselves both youth and I've inspired youth.  I'm here in the, in the area now [Fort Valley, Georgia] where I rent to college students.  I have twelve apartments here that I rent to college students where they can go to school cheaper than they can having their own apartment and they get freedom, so forth.  Lot of things they have advantage of not being on, in the dormitory.  They study you know without disturbance and all those kind of things, I'm proud of that.  I'm proud of my family, educated my kids, all have B.S. degrees.  My daughter has a master's degree from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].  And proud of my work with [Peach County, Georgia] Family and Children's Service where I was, worked for twenty five years as a board member.  I received board member of the year award in the State of Georgia.  I was honored on, on my retirement too with a luncheon with officials.  Lot of folks came.  I was--when we first went into the, when I worked--first went on the Board they had no blacks.  When I left twenty five years, it was about 50/50.  See some of the pictures in there that, of the staff.  We were in the upstairs in the courthouse and all of them--one lady went up those stairs had a heart attack.  She survived of course but we got busy and got another place, moved down on [U.S. Route] 341.  That place got too small.  Then we moved down in the old, took the old school you know where they had, you know, abandoned and integratedthat school so we got that school.  Now we have plenty of room, facilities, everybody got his own office and I'm proud of that.  I'm--what else?  I'm proud of that co-op I was telling you about.  I got those farmers to, to help themselves, save themselves and to make money. I'm proud of the 4-H Club boys and girls that I've trained who have achieved and who, who are upright citizens and make, make, taking their mark, made a mark in their history and in their personal life.  I could go on lot of things that I've done.  I've been, I don't like to brag oh I did this and that and the other but I have been in a lot of folks' lives to help them.
Story_ID: 4945
Speaker 1: So the other thing, you were a member of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering if you could tell about that organization and also when you joined?
Speaker 2: The Boule is a social organization as you know.  It was, I believe about the oldest, one of the oldest fraternities.  And we take in members of right qualities, maybe financial, maybe achievements, etcetera, etcetera, and we have a foundation where we give scholarships to people, young people you know going to college.  And we don't give one year, we give four years.  If you, you can win one of those scholarships and keep your grades up we give you a scholarship for four years.  And we have those kind of things, that's, that's one of the main projects.  Right now we have, have a campaign on to raise ten million dollars by the hundredth anniversary, should be in, in '74 [sic, 2004].  And we're asking every member to be a, at least intermittent fellow and that, that calls for a thousand dollars a year, thousand dollar membership.  And next is the (unclear) membership of five thousand and then it goes on up to, up to ten thousand dollars.  I'm a member, I'm a, I'm a fellow.  You saw it in there on the, my, in my den there.  And that money goes for scholarship.  And we take, well we have a lot of fun.  I mean we go to Boules and we go to picnics and all those kind of things.  You know about--.
Speaker 1: A little bit. I was just wondering when did your organization get started?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Do you know how it got started?
Speaker 2: Well you know a group of men got together of like qualities like I said and decided they needed something for, so that they might fellowship and do something.  At one time it was very exclusive, very exclusive you couldn't even--but I'm not going to say the quality has declined but the economic side has, has come down, see.  It still costs a lot of money, yeah, in the membership.  My dues are due first of April.
Story_ID: 4946
Speaker 1: What do you want--well you can say what do you want to be remembered for but what do you want to be remembered for, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh well I would like to be remembered as first a good citizen, as a Christian.  I'm active in my church, deacon board, etcetera, like to be remembered as a good person, a good citizen, a good family man.  A good, well the politics--I'd like to be remembered for those things that I was able to initiate and those that I was, had the--I worked with others to initiate to bring to a reality.  And my, like my fellowship with my fellow man, be remembered as such.  And I mentioned the people I've helped right, all that?  I guess that's what I'd like to be remembered by.  Got so much you forget some of it.
Story_ID: 4947
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes or concerns for the black community?  Your life has been spent helping people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But do you have, when you look forward and you see where black people were when you started--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and where they are now--.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --looking forward do you have hopes or concerns for them?
Speaker 2: I have hope--hope that we are going to do better, hope that we will keep on climbing, and keep achieving.  But there are a lot of things, lot of stumbling blocks out there.  Got to get together.  We got to be able to trust each other.  We got to be able to work and must have--you know we, we, we are easy to start things you know, but we don't keep them up.  You know little while we're--it's dead.  But we got to perpetuate the good and keep on rising.
