Story_ID: 508860
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer, Neculai Burghelea the videographer.  I will have you introduce yourself and spell out your full name.
Speaker 2: My full name.
Speaker 1: With the middle initial, what it stands for.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  I'm Cleveland Aleridge Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], C-L-E-V-E-L-A-N-D, A-L-E-R-I-D-G-E, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E, No R on the end.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay and your date of birth?
Speaker 2: January 1st, 1946.
Speaker 1: New Year's Day.
Speaker 2: I was the first baby born in 1946 in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Nice.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November the 20th, the year 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The location, 543 Wire Mill Road, Stamford, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Investor.
Speaker 1: Investor.
Story_ID: 508861
Speaker 1: These are very basic questions.  Favorite food.
Speaker 2: Barbeque ribs.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The, the early Fall, September, October.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Light blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And lastly, your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: I can, I will, I must.
Speaker 1: Is that what I read up there?  No.  I read something up there.
Speaker 2: No, that's, keep going no matter what, and that was an expression Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] used.
Speaker 1: But I can, I will, I must, where does that come from?
Speaker 2: When I was in my first year of business school with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I had in my estimation, failed my first finance exam.  And I knew why, because I didn't know how to use a slide rule.  And I didn't have enough time to finish.  So I went back to my room, I sat at my desk for about five minutes.  I took a three and a half by five [inch] card and I wrote the phrase, I can, I will, I must and I tacked it above my, my desk, and I got an A minus out of that course.  So that was the year--that would have been 1967 and that phrase has been with me ever since.
Speaker 1: It's like the little train that I think I can, I think I can. I can, I will, I must (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I can. I can, I will, I must.
Story_ID: 508862
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) by talking about your mother's side of the family, and we're going to go back as far as we can, as far as you can remember--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on that particular side of the family. So we will start with your mother's name.  And if you can spell that out for me, her date of birth and her place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother was Lucy Hagins, H-A-G-I-N-S, Christophe, C-H-R-I-S-T-O-P-H-E.  She was born Lucy Mae, M-A-E, Hagins, H-A-G-I-N-S [Lucy Hagins Christophe].  She was born in Stilson, Georgia, S-T-I-L-S-O-N, which is approximately thirty miles outside of Savannah, it's rural, Georgia.  She was born on June 6th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Now was--you said rural Georgia.  Was it a plantation, was it--or just a rural farm?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, it was a small plantation owned by her family, about forty acres.  And truly a farm, a working farm.
Speaker 1: And what did they, they farmed everything that they could sell?
Speaker 2: They farmed, they raised hogs and had cattle, they had cotton, corn and tobacco.
Speaker 1: So it was a pretty large, I mean they--
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: It was a working farm--
Story_ID: 508863
Speaker 1: So is that how her [Christophe's mother, Lucy Hagins Christophe] father and the family made their living on the farm at that time?
Speaker 2: In part.  But my grandfather was a jack of all trades.  First and foremost, he was a minister.
Speaker 1: What was his name?  And this is your mother's father.
Speaker 2: Richard I. Hagins [Richard Hagins], Reverend Richard I. Hagins.
Speaker 1: And his date of birth?  I have September 19th, 1888.
Speaker 2: That sounds correct (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But however he was born in the late 1800s.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And you know him as a minister.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I did not know him at all.
Speaker 1: But I mean but the story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So continue to tell me about him.  He was a minister--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in a small town in Georgia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. He was a minister traveling literally a circuit within rural Georgia, although his principal church was about five miles from the family farm.
Speaker 1: Do you know the name of the church, his church that was five miles from the farm?
Speaker 2: Longstreet, Longstreet Baptist Church [Hutchinson Longstreet Baptist Church, Bulloch County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: So he was a Baptist, basically an evangelist because he traveled around, was he?
Speaker 2: Well not an evangelist.  It's just that what you, you would find certainly in those days, was that a, a minister might conduct his ministry through several churches with a principal church in his case, but then I think about once a month he would, he would travel to another church.
Speaker 1: So is that how he made a living?
Speaker 2: Yes, that and the--
Speaker 1: Farm.
Speaker 2: --and of course a working, a working farm.  And on top of that, my grandmother was a teacher.
Speaker 1: Now your--and her name.
Speaker 2: Lillie Mae Hagins [Lillie Young Hagins].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so we, and we have her date of birth from, from what you've given us.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was a schoolteacher.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Where did she go to school to become a schoolteacher?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Where did she teach?
Speaker 2: She taught at a one room elementary school in rural Georgia, outside of Stilson [Georgia].  And it covered literally all the grades.
Speaker 1: So did they ever talk about--you--and let's get--you met them, or you did not meet them.
Speaker 2: My grandmother, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your grandfather, yes.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, no.
Speaker 1: But your grandmother, did she ever talk about her mother and father?  What they, what they must have done, your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: I, I, I have no recollection of--no I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did she ever talk about her life as a teacher?  Are there any stories you can tell me that she may have passed on to you about what it was like for her to teach in a one room school, all grades?
Speaker 2: Simply that it was, it was a labor of love and frustrating (laughter).
Story_ID: 508864
Speaker 1: Okay, so moving forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We will talk about your, your mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] and her childhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did she ever relate any stories to you about her childhood growing up on this small farm?
Speaker 2: So many.  My mother comes from a very extended family.  My grandfather, Richard I. Hagins, had, had, had four wives.  And none of those marriages dissolved through divorce.  He just, he, he outlived them.  And my mother was the product of the, of the fourth marriage.  So across the entirety of the, the Hagins clan if you will, as related to, to Richard Hagins, there were at least twelve children.  And they all more or less grew up together.  Now at the time my mother was coming along on the farm, there were, let's see, my Uncle Frank [Henry Hagins], my, my Uncle Eugene [Eugene Hagins], which was her elder brother.  My Aunt Maggie [Maggie Hagins] and my mother, so there were four there.  But then there was so many other relatives that were always around.  And as I said, it was very much a, a working farm.  And in a relative sense, the, the family was, was well-to-do, but I just, I emphasize the word in a relative sense.  Because you know, they worked very hard in growing tobacco, you know having to work that tobacco, getting it to market.  I do remember as a child, you know with my little cotton sack in the summers picking cotton, weighing it.  I can recall being on the tobacco sled, getting into the smokehouse where the tobacco was being smoked, and I can recall going to the auction in Statesboro, Georgia, and hearing the auctioneer.  In every sense, you know what we, what we see in movies today with the sold to America.  And those, that was all very exciting.
Speaker 1: Now was it odd for an African American man to be at State--
Speaker 2: Statesboro.
Speaker 1: Statesboro fair selling his goods?
Speaker 2: No.  You know clearly the, the preponderance of the people that I can recall seeing there were white.  But there were other small farmers around and, you know, they had to work to, to try to get the, the economic fruits of their labors as well.
Story_ID: 508865
Speaker 1: So do you know how the family acquired the land, the forty acres?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My [maternal] grandfather was born to Mary Hagins.  And Mary was never married.  She--what is the name--Jim Davis [David Thomas Beasley], the white landowner.  Richard Hagins was the product of those two.  And Jim Davis really liked Richard and before he died, he gave Richard that forty acres.
Speaker 1: Do you know if he had any other siblings on the other side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.  You know it's interesting that I'm, I'm, I'm just now starting to probe and to find out because way back when--this was not things that the, that the old folks talked about.  And before my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] died, I, I started to get more of an understanding.  And we have family reunions on my mother's side every two years.  And, and now with the advent of the computer based tools, I have started to, to, to probe into that history.  And one of the, the databases I was interrogating just earlier this year, I was able to start to get a sense of Jim Davis and to--I'm working to try to trace his tree (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What have you found out so far about him?  Go ahead, take a drink.  Jim Davis.  What have you found out so far about him?
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: He was also in this town, in Georgia.
Speaker 2: He was in Georgia, yes.  I was able to find out, and I can't remember the name, his mother's name.  Which then took us back to the, took us back to the--I would say about the 1830s or so.  And I do know that he had other children.  Of course he was married.  But that's about where I am right now.
Speaker 1: Now did he have someone else with your, with Ms. Mary Higins [sic.] outside of Richard?
Speaker 2: Other than Richard?
Speaker 1: Other, other than Richard.
Speaker 2: Not by Mary, no, no.
Speaker 1: So that was the only child that they had together?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And so he--then your grandfather inherited this forty acres.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now do you know if he had any relationship with his father at all?  Did--during those--when he was a child?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I can only assume that there was some relationship because I have heard that, that Jim Davis liked Richard and was prepared before he died to bequeath him, you know, the property.  So it suggested that there was some form of a relationship.
Speaker 1: Now did Richard get to attend school?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know that he had any formal education.  But he, he certainly was beyond what was typical of African Americans in those days, so he picked it up someplace.
Speaker 1: So he was obviously very fair skinned.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you know whether or not he lived as black or white?
Speaker 2: He lived as black.
Speaker 1: He lived as black.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I can recall my mother saying that perhaps by dint of, of you know, birth, he was not very fond of whites.
Story_ID: 508866
Speaker 1: Okay so let's talk about then your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And your father's name?  And his date of birth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cleveland Aledridge Christophe [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.], the same as mine.
Speaker 1: And he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born on May 23rd, 1911.
Speaker 1: Now your father did have the opportunity to go to school because he himself was a college professor.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.  And my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] did as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your mother did as well.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But your, your--okay so let's just go back to your mother.  Your--where did your mother end up going to, to school?
Speaker 2: Well she first went to school in that little one room shack.  And then later she went to, to the Mather, M-A-T-H-E-R School [Mather School; Technical College of the Lowcountry] in Beaufort, South Carolina, which was across the, across the river.  She actually went to boarding school there.  And my uncle, Uncle Eugene [Eugene Hagins], who was the--it was interesting.  Of the four children that Richard [Richard Hagins] and Lillie [Lillie Young Hagins] had, two took education quite seriously.  That was my Uncle Eugene and, and my mother.  And the other two, my Aunt Maggie [Maggie Hagins] and Uncle Frank [Henry Hagins] did not.  So Uncle Eugene and my mother both ended up over at, at Mather.  They had to work to be there.  And my mother was always, always felt strongly indebted to and loved Uncle Eugene because even as a youngster over at Mather, he had learned to cut hair and to do various and sundry other things in order to provide her with some pocket money, and also to, you know, provide for their education.  So she finished school in Beaufort.  And then subsequently went to Savannah State College [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  And by then my Uncle Eugene had married and my mother moved in with them and he supported her as, as she went through college there.
Speaker 1: And then your, your--and so then afterwards your mother became a teacher and we will later--
Speaker 2: Right. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) get into where she taught.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 508867
Speaker 1: But then to talk about your--go back to your father's [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] side and his father [William Christophe].
Speaker 2: His father was a pharmacist, a druggist in Forrest City, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Now had he gone to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], or--
Speaker 2: I have no idea where my grandfather began.  I didn't know him, where he learned his, his craft.  That would be more than interesting to, to, to try to find out--
Speaker 1: But he only had a couple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but he was the only pharmacist in Forrest City, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Wow.  But he would, then he would, he would only had, have had a couple of places to go to school.  Or he would have been an apprentice of someone.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  If I, If I had to, to guess, he learned through apprenticeship.
Speaker 1: Now do you know anything about his father?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  My father had a estranged relationship with, with his father and his stepmother.  My father's mother died shortly after he was born.  And his father remarried shortly thereafter.  And I can remember my dad talking about certain aspects of his upbringing.  The fact that you know before he would go to school in the mornings, he had to get up and clean the yard and feed the chickens.  Go and open up the pharmacy, and then walk to school.  But by the age of eleven or so, he had had a falling out with his stepmother.  Either his stepmother had a falling out with him, and he essentially was put out of the house.  And he, he ended up moving to, to Pine Bluff, Arkansas, and was, was taken in by a person that I always knew as Dr. O'Brien [ph.], who was a pharmacist in, in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And my dad lived in a, in a little room there behind the pharmacy.  Worked in the pharmacy and, and then went to--finished up his elementary and his, his high school there in, in, in Pine Bluff.  And subsequently, subsequently went to, went to college there and education was always a very, very big thing for him.
Speaker 1: And I'm assuming Mr. O'Brien was African American.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was a pharmacist, the on--was he the only pharmacist in Pine Bluff?  Is it a--
Speaker 2: He was the--I'm just--I'm reflecting on that area.  That was on the west side of, of Pine Bluff.  That was the principal pharmacy owned by African Americans in, in Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: And the name of it, do you remember?
Speaker 2: West End Drug Store [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  West End Drug Store.
Speaker 1: West End.
Speaker 2: I remember when I was growing up, my, my father would on Saturdays, Saturday evenings, take us over to the West End Drug Store.  And my dad would sit in the back of the pharmacy talking to Dr. O'Brien.  And my brother [Quinton Christophe] and I would amuse ourselves in the comic section of the, of the drugstore.  And Dr. O'Brien was always very tolerant of us, you know, going through the comic books (laughter).
Story_ID: 508868
Speaker 1: So your father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] then went off to college.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And at what point do you know that he met your mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe]?
Speaker 2: At, at Savannah State College [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  He was a, he was a young professor there.  And, and my mother was attending school there and they married in must have been 1944.
Speaker 1: So once they married, did they move then back to Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What, what gets them to--what happens?
Speaker 2: He, my father was always, always driven by two things, three things.  The love that he had for his two sons, the understanding, the appreciation of the power of the importance of education, and trying to figure out how to scratch out a better economic existence.  So much to the chagrin of my mother, Dad was always on the outlook for an opportunity that would provide him the chance to earn just a little bit more.  And I don't think that my mother was very happy when my father announced that he had an opportunity to economically advance by moving, you know, some seven hundred miles to, to Pine Bluff.  As I indicated, my mother had absolutely just tons of family around the Savannah [Georgia] area.  And she loved it there.  Nonetheless, in, let's see I would have been about two years old, that would have been about 1948, when we picked up and, and moved to, to Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Your brother [Quinton Christophe], is he your younger brother?
Speaker 2: Younger.
Speaker 1: Younger brother.
Speaker 2: Yes, he's four years younger than I.
Speaker 1: Okay so he was born in forty--you were born in '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], he was born in '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: In '50 [1950], okay.  So go ahead, you were just telling me about your--them moving to Pine Bluff. So she didn't want to move (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moved to Pine Bluff when I was two, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he did.  And he went there for a better opportunity.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Because he was--the opportunity to make more.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 508869
Speaker 1: Now what are your, what are your earliest memories of Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory is our house on, on State Street, which was, it was, it was unique.  Unique in that it was just off of the main street of town, one block over.  And it, it, it literally straddled the two communities, white and black.  The--all of our neighbors to the right side were white, and then as you went--and actually now that I think about it, the most--the adjacent neighbor on the left side, the Henrys [ph.], were white.  And then one block over, everything was black.  We lived about ten blocks from the, the Catholic elementary school where I started when I was four years old.
Speaker 1: So can you recreate State Street for me?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You said on one side you had white neighbors, on the other side were black neighbors.  Who were some of the other people in the community?  Some of the other black people in the community?
Speaker 2: On the, on the left side one block over, the, the housing stock was pretty poor.  Our house certainly stood out relative to what was a block over.  And the entire section that if you were to make a left turn, literally became dirt streets.  And it worked its way all the way across to what we called the Texas Bottom [ph.].  Through areas that I loved to play in as a, as a youngster.  Lots of weeds and trees and there was a ravine that cut through there.  We used to take our BB guns and, and go in there and play.  And it was, it was a pretty poor area.  But then I had lots of friends.
Speaker 1: Both black and white?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Only black.
Speaker 2: No, I remember, I'm now working my way through the entire black side, yes.  But my neighbor immediately adjacent, the Henrys, were poor whites.  But we played together.  I remember Douglas Henry [ph.].  And I kind of--he was a little older than was I, but I kind of grew up with him.  And we always had a close relationship.  And as I would have other African American friends that would visit, Douglas would always be part of our playing, but he had to my knowledge no relationships with some of the people in the immediately adjacent areas that I was describing.  It was, it was just kind of a, a unique, a unique circumstance.  I knew none of my neighbors on the right side and going up.  The, the only sense I had of, of any of them was in the early days when I had a paper route and I, I actually was privileged to kind of break the barriers a bit with the Arkansas Gazette [Arkansas Democrat-Gazette] when I was given that little territory around there because that meant I was collecting from, serving and collecting from whites and theretofore that just hadn't happened.
Story_ID: 508870
Speaker 1: You were talking about the Arkansas Gazette [Arkansas Democrat-Gazette] and your paper route and groundbreaking that you were able to deliver to what was the white side of town.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Ever harassed?
Speaker 2: No.  I actually did quite well.  I had, I had two paper routes during my youth.  One was the Pine Bluff Commercial, which was the local newspaper, and then Arkansas Gazette of course was the, the big statewide newspaper.  The--I started with the Gazette.  I was eight years old and if there was one thing my--(clears throat) excuse me--my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] emphasized, it was the importance of work.  He had always worked and he and my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] were always very supportive of, of my working.  So I, I was able to get this, this, this paper route.  The interesting thing about that was it was a morning route.  And that bundle of papers was dropped off at my front doorstep at about four o'clock in the morning.  And it was before day.  And I would get up and I would roll those newspapers.  And then my, either my mother or my father would take me in the car to deliver those, those newspapers.  And then on Saturdays I would get on my bicycle and go around and, and collect.  It was a very formative experience.  And then as I grew a little bit older, I moved, shifted away from the Arkansas Gazette to the Pine Bluff Commercial and an afternoon route.  And there I would, you know I was then old enough to have the, the paper bags on the side of my bicycle.  And that route was all the way on the other side of town, my initial route.  So I would ride about five miles over beyond the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and deliver those, those papers in the afternoon and sometimes get home around dark or so.  And then on Saturdays went back out to collect.
Speaker 1: Now did the people who employed you at the--for the paper route, did they know that your father was a professor at the university?  You think that's one of the reasons you got it because you were his son?  What allowed them to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I--
Speaker 1: For you to deliver in that neighborhood then?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question.  I don't believe that my customers particularly related me to my family or my family's circumstances.  Now I suspect that they, they saw in me an industrious young man who was appropriately respectful (laughter) and very importantly got them their papers on time.  But you know I never, I never had a problem.
Story_ID: 508871
Speaker 1: Now did you stand out amongst other African American families? Were you like, were you the one that--the family a lot of people looked to for the, you know, looked up to I should say.
Speaker 2: A number of families would.  We were--we certainly stood out relative to the other African American families in my adjacent neighborhood.  We did not stand out relative to the families five miles away that lived around the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  Which raises an interesting point because while I said my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] was pretty unhappy about moving from Savannah [Georgia] to, to Arkansas, I think she at least initially, was also unhappy about moving from the initial home that, that we had there at the college to the house that my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] bought on State Street because my mother had developed a network of friends that were around the college and here he was moving her again, thinking that he was doing the right thing in elevating the, the, the standard of, of living.  But something that was important to her--just he didn't think about the same way.  Perhaps by dint of how my father grew up, he didn't have either close family relationships, nor just given how hard he always worked, did he have the type of friendships that my mother had.  And that was always a source of, of a tug and pull between the, between the two of them.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people in the neighborhood surrounding the college?  Can you remember any of those families and what did they do?  I mean were they mainly teachers?
Speaker 2: Mainly teachers.  I can think of John Howard [John Miller Howard] who was the--John was in charge of the arts there at the college.  I can remember the Lovelaces, Mr. Lovelace [Ariel Lovelace] was the head of choir.  I can remember Strong [Harold Strong] who was the band leader, President Davis [Lawrence A. Davis, Sr.], the president of the college.  The Evans [Earl Evans], he was the dean of students.  I had a lot of friends out there.  I had--and it--the area around the college was relatively speaking more affluent and certainly a different educational standard than the area where I lived.  And so in the area in which I lived, State Street, and the schools that I went to around there, our family stood out.  Stood out in terms of relative affluence, relative.  And certainly stood out in terms of educational aspirations and academic achievement.
Story_ID: 508872
Speaker 1: During this time, can you remember whether or not your parents were political?  Were they involved in any community relations sort of with the white community?  Were they at the point--did they talk about voting?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] was always an activist.  My--I didn't know my father in the early years as a, as a teacher.  By the time I can remember, he had moved from being an instructor to being the business manager of the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  And as such, he was, he was literally on call seven days a week.  Again, this was the principal black college [HBCU] in Arkansas.  And even though it was state supported, I can recall he was always scrambling trying to keep things glued together.  I can recall him having to on occasion drive forty-eight miles to Little Rock [Arkansas], to the state capitol, in order to get funds so that he could come back and meet payroll at the, at the college.  And he would drive like a maniac in, in, in order to, to do that.  He--I remember when there were racial tensions and my dad was kind of at the forefront in doing what he felt was important in protecting the school and protecting his, and protecting his family.  My father was always a proponent of, of blacks moving ahead, at times to my mother's [Lucy Hagins Christophe] chagrin.  Because my mother's attitude was one more of let's do the right thing, but let's not rock the boat.  And my father was always prepared to be out on the, on the front line of whatever the result of which was sometimes you know, loss of job.  That certainly happened to him in later years when he was teaching again at Savannah State [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] and, and decided that there was an opening as superintendent of, of the city schools and he decided he was going to apply for it, which upset my mother mightily because he ended up losing his job and having once again to move and she felt, and I know I, I'm moving forward--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --but it's important context.  She felt that her position as a teacher there in the city system was in jeopardy as a result of the audacity of my dad in applying for a position that obviously was not gonna go to a black man.  So yeah, he was always interested in, in voting, voting rights and you know all of those things.
Speaker 1: So your mother kind of agreed with the ideology of Booker T. Washington, sort of gradually things will happen.  Whereas your father was a bit more of an agitator.
Speaker 2: My father was clearly an agitator and my father did not, he didn't know fear.  And because he was a very hard working loner who had very few close friends, he--it didn't bother him if people didn't like him.  Whereas my mother was--just given the nature of her upbringing and her closeness to her own family and so forth, was very different in that respect.
Story_ID: 508873
Speaker 1: So then were there other, like did other political people meet at the house?  Did your father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] ever have any sort of round table discussions with people coming to the house to talk about sort of strategies or, or working--?
Speaker 2: Not so much at the, at the house.  I know that he would periodically get together with--one person he was very friendly with was Wiley Branton.  And Attorney Branton worked with Thurgood Marshall on the, the various pursuits that ultimately ended up with the, with the Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision.  And subsequently the, the movement to integrate Central High School [Little Rock Central High School] in Little Rock, Arkansas in '53 (1953).  And I know that my dad and Riley would get together and, and talk about things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea at the time as a kid as to what they were trying to do?  Did that register with you?  I mean I guess I'm asking--
Speaker 2: Not, not, not in the early years.  I just knew my father as a hard working person and as I indicated, emphasizing always the importance of, of education and I remember my father's very strong belief that through education and hard work, you could overcome any obstacles.
Story_ID: 508874
Speaker 1: So just moving ah- forward a little bit, what sights, sounds and smells are there that remind you of growing up in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) The sights I can recall most vividly were the, the vacant lot across from our house, where as a kid I loved to play.  I can recall all of the areas surrounding the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], where again I had, I had close friends and I loved to ride my bicycle out there and stay overnight with Louis Lovelace [ph.] and, and things of that nature.  Smells, the smells in Pine Bluff were never quite as vivid to me as the smells in Savannah, Georgia.  Savannah had, had Union Bag [Union Bag and Paper Company; Union Camp Corporation].  And that produced when the wind was right, a god awful smell.  We fortunately didn't have that in, in Pine Bluff.  I can remember the smell of flowers that my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] grew in her yard.
Speaker 1: Sounds.
Speaker 2: Sounds.  I can think of the, the, the train, the freight trains crossing Main Street.  Probably six or seven blocks from our home.  It's amazing sometimes when we're driving on Main Street, you'd have to come off State [Street], turn onto Main and then over in order to go to the college.  And there were times when we would end up being late because there was this humongous freight train crossing.  And some of these trains were quite, quite, quite long and you could be sitting there fifteen minutes or so.
Story_ID: 508875
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember any of those lines?  Wasn't it like the Columbus [Columbus and Greenville Railway]?  There was a--I mean I can remember the same thing.
Speaker 2: Cotton Belt [St. Louis Southwestern Railway] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Trains passing.
Speaker 2: The cotton, the Cotton Belt was the, the key one.  And something else I hadn't thought of for quite a while is the fact that we had a railroad station.  And this was still in an era when, when trains were a, a principal means of transportation.  And I remember when I was about--how old was--my, my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] was working on his Ph.D. out at South Dakota State [South Dakota State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; South Dakota State University] in Brookings, South Dakota.  And my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe], brother [Quinton Christophe] and I traveled by train twice for the summer out, out to Brookings.  And it was very exciting.  Had to go down to the train station and board the train and go to I guess Little Rock [Arkansas].  And there we would change and pick up another train that, that took us up through St. Louis [Missouri] and ultimately to Chicago [Illinois] and then up that way.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the difference in riding the train in the South versus when you crossed the Mason-Dixon Line (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  We, we had more freedom as to where we could sit once we were in areas somewhat to the north of where we started out in Arkansas.  I very much grew up in the segregated South.
Story_ID: 508876
Speaker 1: How was all of this registering with you, though?  Did you--how did it--did you feel--I mean I'm sure you, you didn't, but well just how did it all register with you?  That there was two societies where you could sit, you know--in one part of the country you could, you know you could only sit in the back.  The other part you could sit wherever you wanted to.  You lived in somewhat a segregated society.  Did it make you feel anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We clearly, we clearly lived in a segregated society.  But I didn't feel deprived.  I felt that our schools were good.  Granted, I didn't, I didn't know the relative standard.  I know that the Pine Bluff High School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas], I could just look at the property and never got a chance to go in.  But just from the edifice itself, you had a sense that it, it, it had more money behind it.  It was of a higher physical quality.  But I, I grew up with teachers that cared about us and there was a sense of, of, of community.  And I felt that what I was getting was, was very good.  And I was happy within the context of my community as, as I knew it.  I knew there were places I couldn't go.  I knew that there was certain fears that I was supposed to, to have.  But I, I accepted it for, for what it was.
Speaker 1: And what were those fears that you knew you were supposed to have?
Speaker 2: Well, I was aware that you know periodically there were lynchings.
Speaker 1: In Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No, not so much in Pine Bluff, but because you know we took the newspapers and we read, whether it was Emmett Till or you know things that, that you know occurred.  We were aware of it.  And I was aware that there were some things that--there were certain lines that it was wise not to cross.
Speaker 1: So you were--now I'm gonna have to jump back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because I just wanna pickup on the Emmett Till.  You were only a boy when that happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: That happened in '55 [1955], you were born in '46 [1946].  But you have recollection of it happening?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.  You know you--and there was a, there was a, there was a kind of a fear in the air.
Speaker 1: What was your understanding as to what had happened to him as a nine year old?
Speaker 2: That he had made what was considered inappropriate overtures to a white woman.  And that was not gracefully accepted.  And it was something that I was aware of because I never went through a period as some boys did where I didn't like girls, okay.  I never went through that period.  As far as I can recall, I was always interested in girls, so yeah that registered with me (laughter).  Understand where my place was.
Speaker 1: So had your father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] ever had any conversations with you about what's appropriate and not appropriate with--
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't recall either my father or my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] discussing, teaching anything other than right and wrong.  But they--it was interesting.  They were always concerned about my safety and, and, and wellbeing.  But unlike the way kids grow up today, my parents gave me tremendous latitude to learn how to deal with the world on my own terms.  And while I can't recall discreet conversations that we had about, okay where, where is that line beyond which you are unsafe.  Whether by osmosis or by just conversations I don't recall, they certainly gave me the foundation for understanding how to, how to, how to navigate, and to navigate with relative safety.
Story_ID: 508877
Speaker 1: So before we talk about your elementary school [Indiana Street School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and then high school [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I--some of the people I've interviewed that were in the--from the South, have felt that we perhaps lost more than we gained with integration because they feel that black people may have lost the ability to, in schools to function in leadership roles and so and so forth.  Do you have any comments on, on--from your own personal experience?
Speaker 2: I have very mixed feelings.  On the one hand, I'm a very strong believer, and I know that, that my parents [Lucy Hagins Christophe and Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] would have felt the same way, in full openness of opportunity.  That said, there is no question in my mind, but that the schools that I went to and the quality of teachers and the caring and the sense of community, that a lot of that's been lost.  And I even think about you know, my college days.  I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And you know this was 1962 and by and large we weren't going to anything other than black schools [HBCUs] in those days.  Well today it's, it's vastly different as I look at my two kids [Jean-Paul Christophe and Kimberly Christophe] and the opportunities that are available to them.  And some of the things that they felt they missed as a result of you know, the fact that today kids have, you know, full freedom of choice.  So yeah there's a--is it preferable to have the, the full availability of opportunity?  Yes.  But from my own perspective, there are some things that were lost in that process.
Story_ID: 508878
Speaker 1: Okay, continuing the last question along those lines.  Was--do you know of a reason as to why your family would not migrate north as most families, as a lot of families were doing during that time, that they chose to stay in the South?
Speaker 2: I think the, the, the answer is the economic opportunity for my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.].  I mean as a college professor, you know he traveled the southern black college [HBCU] circuit.
Speaker 1: Let's name just--go through where he actually worked in the years that you can--
Speaker 2: Over the years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) over the years if you can remember
Speaker 2: Okay. Savannah State College [Georgia State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia].  He was there actually twice.  Probably 1944, it was during that period that he met my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe], 1944 through about '48 [1948].  That's when we moved to Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  There was Arkansas AM and N College [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff] in, in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  And he was there, say from '48 [1948] until, until he went to South Dakota State [South Dakota State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts; South Dakota State University, Brookings, South Dakota] to get his Ph.D.  And that would have been, that would have been the late 1950s.  When he got his Ph.D., he I believe came back to Pine Bluff and was only at Arkansas AM and N for a year.  And then went to Mississippi Valley [Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, which at the time was Mississippi Vocational (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mississippi Vocational, MVC, and ended up being Mississippi.  He was there for two years.
Speaker 1: And what was his role there?
Speaker 2: Teacher.
Speaker 1: Teacher.
Speaker 2: Professor, economics.
Speaker 1: Professor of economics, okay.
Speaker 2: From it being out in the middle of no place, and he would come home every other weekend.  It was about a two hour drive, two, two and a half hour drive from Itta Bena [Mississippi] back to Pine Bluff.  We never moved all during, you know the period that--from the point that we moved to Pine Bluff when I was two, until I graduated from high school [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], we stayed put in, in Pine Bluff, notwithstanding the fact that my father subsequently was in several different places.  He then went from Mississippi Vocational College to, back to Savannah State.  And that's when two days after I graduated from high school, the family moved back to Savannah, Georgia and I went off to, to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  My dad was at Savannah State from '61 [1961] until he made what some people consider to be the mistake of applying for the position as superintendent of schools.  And he lost, he lost his job there and then took a position at Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University] in Huntsville [Normal, Alabama].  And Dad was there for about three years, and then went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And was there for a couple of years.  Then received a position at the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], the first position that he had outside of the South, again as a, as a teacher.  And he was there until he finally, he finally retired.
Story_ID: 508879
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Several.  The first was St. Peter's [sic. St. Peter Catholic School], a Catholic school in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  And I started in the Catholic school because I had learned to read by the age of three.  And my parents [Lucy Hagins Christophe and Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] were interested in me going to school, but they wouldn't let me in public school before the age of six.  And once the Catholic school saw that I could read and count to a hundred, they let me in.  So I was always very young relative to the, to the rest of my classmates.  I moved from St. Peter's when I was, when I was of public school age I went to the, the school [J.C. Corbin Laboratory School] located on the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] campus.  And I was there from the second through the fourth grade.  And then in the fourth grade I moved to Indiana Street School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] where I continued all the way through grade, grade six.
Speaker 1: Who taught you to read so young? How did you--
Speaker 2: My mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe].
Speaker 1: Your mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother.
Speaker 1: Now was your mother responsible for taking care of you during the day or did she have help, how did that work out?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have help.  My, my--that was part of the reason I suppose that, that I went to school at such an early age.  And my mother started teaching--I'm trying to remember.  She--her first teaching job was in fact at Indiana Street School.  And she must have, she must have started teaching when I was in the third grade because at that point I was still out at the training school as we called it, at the college.  And my brother [Quinton Christophe] was in nursery school out there.  And then when Mom started teaching, I then followed her to Indiana Street and my brother started there in the first grade and, and I was in the, in the fourth grade.  So we would ride over to the school with her in the morning.
Speaker 1: Now in the Catholic schools also segregated, correct?  Or was that an integrated school?
Speaker 2: The Catholic school--I believe that Catholic school was somewhat integrated, yes.
Speaker 1: Well it was, it was private, they were paying for you to go nonetheless.
Speaker 2: That's correct. Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 508880
Speaker 1: So then at Indiana Street School [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] is where you--is that where you really started to be influenced by teachers, or had that occurred prior to--at the training school [J.C. Corbin Laboratory School] at the college [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]?  Where would you say you were most influenced by the people that were teaching you?
Speaker 2: Indiana Street School.
Speaker 1: And who were some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that stage.
Speaker 1: Okay, who were some of those teachers?
Speaker 2: I had two, Mrs. Joneses [ph.] in the fourth grade, and in the, in the fifth grade.  And actually I had Mrs. Jones in the sixth grade.  And the second Mrs. Jones in particular, was a tough taskmaster and, and disciplinarian.  And I did very well.
Speaker 1: Now would you say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even though I was a cut up.
Speaker 1: Were you cut up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's--the type of student you were, you would consider yourself a cut up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I--as a result of several things.  One, my relative youth.  I was always two years younger than my classmates.  Two, I was small.  I really didn't stop growing until I was a sophomore in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But in, you know in those early years, I was, you know, relative to the other boys and so forth being two years younger, I was just, I was small.  Three, I was not particularly athletic, even though I always wanted to play baseball and, and those things.  And I was always considered one of the smarter ones in, in class.  So I sought to differentiate myself by being smart, but with a counterbalance of wanting to be accepted.  So that put me in the cut up category.  And you know I, I, I pretty much succeeded.  I could hang out with the bad boys and, and so forth, while at the same time, knowing how to knuckle down and do my work.
Speaker 1: So did you, you--outside of Mrs. Jones, the Mrs. Joneses, were there any other teachers that you would consider to have had an influence on who you would later become?
Speaker 2: Yes, but not elementary school.
Speaker 1: Not elementary (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Still we're talking about elementary.
Speaker 2: Because, yeah now so--yeah because that was only--now here I'm focusing on, you know, years, school years four, five and six (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--four, five and six, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 508881
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then off to junior high school.  And in--I went to junior high school at Merrill [Merrill Junior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].
Speaker 2: And what year would that have been?
Speaker 1: That would have been--
Speaker 2: Was it '62 [1962]?
Speaker 1: Sixty two [1962] let's, let's say five.  So we're back around '57 [1957] when I went over to Merrill.  I was there for two years.  And at that stage, Merrill had both the junior high school and the high school together.  And the new school was built called Southeast Junior and Senior High School [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], which was a lot closer to where I lived on the east side, and was only about five blocks from Indiana Street [Indiana Street School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  So that school opened just as I was going into, into high school.  That would have been my ninth grade year.  High school was considered nine through twelve.  And so I finished up at Southeast High School.  I have no particular recollection of, of junior high school and, and teachers that had that much of an impact on me.  I know I had some good teachers over there.  And I have very fond memories of going to Merrill.  I have more of a recollection of my high school teachers, whether it was Purcell Stigger [ph.] who taught English, or Mrs. Stevens [ph.] who taught, who taught government and the social sciences, or Mr. Gilliam [ph.] who taught the sciences, or, (laughter) or Mr. Hill [ph.] who taught industrial arts.  And I did all of those.
Story_ID: 508882
Speaker 1: What were your dreams at the time in high school when you were at Southeast [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I remember the Sputnik [Sputnik 1] era.  That had a very profound impact on me.  And here we're probably looking at--I might have been at Merrill [Merrill Junior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] at that point.  But I mean I was just absolutely blown away and in awe of, of, of how something like this could, could happen.  And I don't recall any of my friends taking the level of interest in this that I did.  But I, I have always had kind of a, what I consider to be a practical approach to, to things like computers and courses like physics and chemistry.  It always meant more to me if I could do something practically with it.  And when, when, when those satellites went up, I was starting to take physics then.  I was absolutely in awe of taking what I was learning in physics and grappling with the formula and being very proud of being able to predict when Sputnik was gonna pass overhead and go outside with my young brother [Quinton Christophe] or my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] and say there it is, and we can see it.  And I was able to, you know, predict the orbital, or calculate what the orbital path and so forth would be.  And, and I just thought the coolest thing in the world would be to be an aeronautical engineer.  And I was reading about Wernher von Braun and I remember his biography, 'I Dream the Stars' [sic. 'I Aim for the Stars,' Wernher von Braun].  And that was--so I thought that's what I wanted to do.  Even when I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] my initial thoughts were that I was gonna be an aeronautical engineer and I got the reality that, that I either didn't have the--either the, the mathematical aptitude or the mathematical background, whatever the case might be, to be able to deal with that.  And I figured I, I was always determined I was gonna be successful at something.  So if that isn't gonna work, you'd better start finding a Plan B.
Story_ID: 508883
Speaker 1: So did the family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe].  My, my mother came from a, a line of highly religious people.  Her father [Richard Hagins] was a minister.  Her favorite brother, Uncle Eugene [Eugene Hagins], was a minister.  And he had a--from all outward appearances, a very successful church on the east side in Savannah [Georgia].  And then in Pine Bluff [Arkansas], it was just natural that my, my mother would belong to the, to the Baptist church there.  And you know I would--she would take me and my brother [Quinton Christophe] to Sunday school.  And I was always active in the church, a speaker, a junior deacon.  And a lot of people felt when I was growing up, I was gonna be a minister.  My father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] rarely went, but my mother, yeah, insisted that we go and I would sometimes try to figure out how to get out of those long church Sundays because you start at 9:00 in the morning for Sunday school and then church services would start at 11:00.  And some of those ministers could be awfully long winded.  And, you know, sometimes you wouldn't get out 'til 2:00 and 2:30, and that was not my idea of how I wanted to spend the entirety of a, of a Sunday.
Speaker 1: And then some families would go back for the evening (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then sometimes, yeah we did some of that too.  I did as little of that as possible (laughter).
Story_ID: 508884
Speaker 1: So during the time, I mean I'm not exactly sure about the dates you gave, if you can help me out.  Was Central High School [Little Rock Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas]--they were trying to integrate that at the same time they were building Southeast High School [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No, now remember Central was in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We are forty-eight miles away in, in Pine Bluff [Arkansas].  I can provide some color to the, the whole Central High School thing.  My father's [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] brother, Leroy Christophe, my brother [Quinton Christophe] was named after him.  Leroy was also an educator, Dr. Leroy Christophe.  And he was when I was growing up, first he was principal of Dunbar Junior High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior and Senior High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School] in Little Rock.  And then subsequently when this fabulous new school was opened called Horace Mann [Horace Mann High School; Horace Mann Arts and Sciences Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas] for blacks, he was the first principal of Horace Mann High School.  When the idea of integrating, post the Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision, when the idea of integrating Central came up, it was my uncle Leroy who sent the kids from Horace Mann to Central, the infamous eight [sic. nine].  And of course he lost his job.  And ended up moving to Wilmington, Delaware to become a principal of a high school there.  But no I, I remember that period.  In terms of Southeast, I can only imagine that the, the, the powers that be in, in Pine Bluff were starting to read the tea leaves and, and, and part of what was going on was an attempt to perpetuate the separate but equal.  And so the idea of this new school, Southeast High School, clearly was an improvement in a couple of senses.  It was a new facility with, with more things than Merrill had.  And it was also more within the community in which I was living on the east side, as contrasted with what we had had in Pine Bluff previously, which required that all of the kids you know, go to this one school, which was quite a distance for a number of us.
Story_ID: 508885
Speaker 1: So during those years, when did you--I mean you've always known you were going to college.
Speaker 2: Yes, there was never a question about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Never a question.  But was there ever a question as to whether or not you'd try to, let's say be like James Meredith and enter a white institution?  Or did you always know you'd go to a black one [HBCU]?
Speaker 2: No actually I didn't. (Pause) I, I actually applied to and was accepted to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].  Now why Syracuse, I honestly don't recall.  I, I, I think, I think that the combination of my interest in aeronautical engineering, I was very serious about that.  So that I can recall going through the course catalogs in the counselor's office and seeing that they had some things that sounded interesting.  I mean you didn't do college visitations and stuff like that in those days.  That coupled with the fact that Jim Brown had gone there.  And my Uncle Leroy [Leroy Christophe] was a big football fan.  And I can remember on occasion when he would either visit from Little Rock [Arkansas] or we would be with him on a Sunday afternoon.  It was always thrilling to sit down, he had one of the first televisions that, that I'd ever seen.  And, and they were starting to, to put football on television then and so I would sit with him and watch Jim Brown, and I knew Jim Brown had gone to, to Syracuse.  So there was a sense of I might be accepted there, and by the way they have programs that, that I could be interested in.  So the direct answer to your question is I didn't take for granted that I would go to a predominantly black college.  I got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--I can almost say purely through happenstance in the sense that my--the summer between my junior and senior year in high school [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas], I won a National Science Foundation summer scholarship in chemistry.  And the place I was selected to go to was Howard.  And so I spent a very impactful summer at Howard, and there was no question after that, that that's where I wanted to go to school.  Notwithstanding the fact that I subsequently applied to, I think I only applied to two colleges, Syracuse and Howard.  I was accepted at Howard and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: So did you have any feelings at all about--because it was '62 [1962] that you were starting--
Speaker 2: Starting college, yes.
Speaker 1: --college, and that James Meredith had been accepted to Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi] that same year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he was both, I mean you were both in the South.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you look to him--I mean did you look at him in one way or the other?  Did you think it's great what he's doing, or it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought, I thought it was great what he was doing.  It was, it was not something that I was either encouraged to pursue, or something that I, you know I was on about my life and whereas I'd been a pioneer in almost throughout my, my adult life.  It, it was not something that I, that I, that I, I set out to do.  It's just that as I, as I pursued certain interests, I naturally found myself as a pioneer.  Whereas, had I elected to seek to in effect integrate a school in the South, to me that would have been seeking to be a pioneer.  And that, that wasn't the way in which I, I kind of configured my path, at least at that stage.
Story_ID: 508886
Speaker 1: So when you arrived at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in '62 [1962], can you remember who was the president of the university?
Speaker 2: Sure, James Nabrit [James Nabrit, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And then let's talk about your years there because I know some significant things happened.
Speaker 2: I--it was--now that was indeed a formative experience.  And I would say that that started that summer that I was in--the two and half months that I was at Howard.  It, it, it just--probably more than anything else, Howard shaped my path.  Now in fairness, clearly the foundations that I established by dint of both family and by education in Arkansas, allowed me to move up north, so to speak, to, to Howard and, and, and to progress.  But in terms of the transition from the world that I had known to the world that I came to know, Howard was absolutely the beginning of that.  That summer I saw things, I saw people, I saw blacks that they were just different.  And different in what for me was a very positive way than anything I'd ever experienced.
Speaker 1: Can you give me one example?
Speaker 2: That summer at Howard, just the, the way these kids that were in that National Science Foundation looked, talked, behaved, I--first of all I was in the midst of a real group of high achievers.  Now I had my small circle of friends, well actually I had a lot of friends when I was in, in, in elementary school [Indiana Street School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] and in high school [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  But I had a small subset of that group that I related to in an academic and in an aspirational sense.  And you know it was Sterling Rolf [ph.], Gladys Cherry, Elton Caudel [ph.] to an extent, Jay Owens [ph.] to an extent.  These were the kids that I related to academically.  And I ended up salutatorian of, of my high school class, Sterling Rolf was, was valedictorian.  But you know fast forwarding to my experience at Howard, everybody that was there in, in that summer program, was like that.  But on top of that, almost all of them came from a different educational context than I had experienced.  And I could tell that you know the, the quality of, of the classrooms, the, the comprehensive nature of the classes that they had had relative to what I had experienced in Arkansas was, it was a class apart.  You know these were kids from New York, from New Jersey, from Chicago [Illinois], from Los Angeles [California].  And you know I, gosh I mean you know as late as my, my, my freshman year in college at Howard, I, I was still wearing white socks. (Laughter) And, and it was there that I learned that dress shoes and white socks, you know, we don't do that up here. (Laughter) It was just, it was different.
Story_ID: 508887
Speaker 1: So you met your wife that first year also (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. Two days into my freshman year.  We will, we will have our fortieth wedding anniversary next month.
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Did you know right away?  I mean what was it about her that said this is it?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I totally said that this it.  I--we had our ups and downs throughout the, the four years.  And she will attest, I, I, I strayed periodically.  But I'd always, you know, gravitate, gravitate back.  Our experiences were very similar.  Her father was in many respects like my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.].  He was a college professor.  He traveled the black circuit.
Speaker 1: But the East Coast (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Albeit from--yeah from the East Coast.  But he was also in New Orleans [Louisiana] for a while.  And, but you know primarily North Carolina, but he was also down in Georgia for a, a stint.  Very much, very similar to my father's.  Her mother similarly was an elementary school teacher.  And Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] was interested in the, in, in, in the sciences.  She was very attractive.  And you know we met early on and you know as I said, we had our ups and downs and so forth.  But after I went off to business school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] post-Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], it took me about three months to figure out that you know, I, I wanted to take it a step further and I proposed and we married that Christmas.  Took her back to Ann Arbor [Michigan] (laughter).
Story_ID: 508888
Speaker 1: So when did you decide to not become an aeronautical engineer and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My freshman year.  I, I had always thought that I was good at math.  I had always thought that I was good at science.  But it was in the relative context of education in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And when I got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I found that I didn't have the foundation or perhaps the aptitude.  But I'll say that I didn't have the foundation which equipped me to immediately you know be at the advanced level that so many science oriented and math oriented kids that you know, that came from Chicago [Illinois].  They came from the New Jersey, the New York school systems.
Speaker 1: Well, being the son of a college professor, how much did your father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] chime in to what you were doing?  I mean was he concerned that you were moving from aeronautical engineering and what you would move into?
Speaker 2: My, my father always encouraged me to be my own person.  And he never sought to steer me in any particular direction, nor did my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe].  But they absolutely encouraged was a love of reading, the importance of education, and part of the message that if you get these tools and if you're prepared to work hard, you'll chart your own path, whatever that is.  Just try to be good at something.
Speaker 1: So how did you discover your love for economics?  I mean was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't, it didn't take that direct path.  Once I decided, and it was very early on in my freshman year.  When I was tossed into the remedial mathematics class and kind of struggled with some of that, I said okay, Plan B, it's time for Plan B.  And at that stage, I thought that the law was the direction that I was gonna move to.  The end of my freshman year I had to elect a major field of study.  And I looked around.  I was a bit at a loss as to what it was going to be.  So I was studying the Howard catalogs.  And lo and behold, I discovered that there was some law courses that I could take as a sophomore.  And again, I've always tried to be practical and I said okay, if I'm gonna go to law school, and if I have the opportunity to take some law classes, even before I go to law school, that'll give me a bit of a foundation.  There was a slight problem.  Those law classes were, they were business law.  And it was in the department of business administration.  And you couldn't take those classes unless you were in fact a business major.  So it was for a very practical reason that I decided that well, why not major in business administration?  Well if I was gonna major in business administration, I couldn't just take those law classes, I had to take accounting, I had to take marketing, I had to take economics.  And so that's how that all started.  And I found that I enjoyed it.  Again, a whole new world was, was opening to me.  And I over the course of probably two years, my first two years, my sophomore and, and my junior year, moved from an interest in law as a legal practitioner, to thinking that there were opportunities for me to pursue in the, in the world of business.
Story_ID: 508889
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were speaking about Howard University [Washington, D.C.], some of the historical things that were happening in the country at the time and how they may have affected or not affected you at Howard.  And the one--and we'll jump back and forth--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because of the timeline, but do you know the date, the March on Washington--was it '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: It was '63 [1963].  It was the summer of 1963.  I was a marshal in the March on Washington.  The, the four years that I was at Howard just was a, a momentous series of events.  The fall of my freshman year was the Cuban Missile Crisis.  And I can recall the, the concern, kids crying, parents sending for a number of the girls in particular to come home.  This was serious stuff.  And of course the assumption was that if indeed we were heading to war, Washington [D.C.] would have been the prime target.  So it was not taken, it was not taken lightly.  Fast forwarding, that summer I stayed in Washington and worked.  And that was the summer of the March on Washington.  And as I said, I was a, I was a marshal in the march.  So I was there on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: How did that come about, that you being a marshal?
Speaker 1: Well Howard University was very--well the students of Howard University were just very engaged in this whole movement towards civil rights.  You might recall that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was a student there at that time.  I think Stokely was either a junior or a senior when, when I was a freshman.  So there was that sense of engagement.  And once the march was planned, there was an outreach to I guess students and student leaders as to, you know, who might be interested in, in being a participant.  And my hand immediately went up.  I mean I didn't, I don't recall knowing on the front end or feeling on the front end that this would be such a powerful moment in history.  But I knew that there was something going on that I wanted to be a part of and, and I did.  And as a result of being a marshal, I had, you know, the proverbial front row seat.  I mean I could actually see Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] as he delivered that very, very, very powerful message.  And just the thousands of people strung across the entirety of the Mall.  I mean it was, it was, it was something I would never, never forget.  And then my--I wanna say my second term of my freshman year, would that have been right, 1963, was the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination.  And so all of those things you know, were swirling about.  And I, I so distinctly re--remember that, including being in a line with my, with Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] at two o'clock in the morning, waiting to, to go to the Capitol rotunda [U.S. Capitol, Washington, D.C.] and actually view the, the, the casket.  And then throughout the years, the advancing agenda with respect to civil rights.
Story_ID: 508890
Speaker 1: Were you ever involved in any of the summer activity in Mississippi or the South?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, Freedom Summer.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did you ever have contact with people who were?  What were you--did you, did you think about what was going on and how you could contribute, or that was something you shied away from?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't consciously shy away, but--and I was a participant in my own way, but my, my focus was on my education, on having a good time, and on working.  I worked during the--almost the entire time that I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I had--I mean that was just part of the way in which my father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] and my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] had raised me.  And it was important to me to, to always have a little bit of pocket change.  And I mean my, my father would always send me an allowance, even when I was in college.  But that didn't provide me with the wherewithal to do the things that I wanted to do.  So whether it was the first summer that, that I was in Washington [D.C.] I worked at a shipping company.  That's when I learned how to drive stick shift because the, the manager of this little shipping company on Georgia Avenue in, in Washington, said, "Okay, you can have this, you can have this job.  I assume that you can drive a stick shift."  Well I didn't know anything about driving a stick shift, but I said, "Yeah, I can."  (Laughter) I got out there and I learned how to drive that little truck and was always very happy about that.  But then the, the fall, or rather the spring of my, my sophomore year, I was successful in landing a job at the, at the post office, which was just, you know that was just prime because I could make good money down there.  So I'd arrange my class schedule so three, four o'clock in the afternoon, I could go to the post office and, and work.  And then I stayed and worked full time at the, at the post office my--the summer between my sophomore year and my junior year, by which point I was getting very deeply involved in, in you know business administration given that I was studying that.  And I, I guess I had an aptitude for it and so did my professors could see that.  So they spirited my efforts along towards landing summer positions that would more in keeping with my business studies.  And I did that my--the summer of--between my junior and senior year, I worked at the, the Lazarus department stores [F and R Lazarus and Company] in Columbus, Ohio, in a summer management training program.  And again, that just opened my eyes a lot more to the possibilities.  And then finally the summer after I graduated from Howard, I was on a, a management training program at the New York Bell Telephone Company [American Bell Telephone Company; AT&T Corporation].  And that was just prior to, to going to, to business school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  So I mean I--there were things that I was involved with, things that I was concerned about, but just to restate it, my agenda was pretty straightforward.  It was, it was my studies, it was working, and it was having a good time and I had a great time.  (Laughter) And I was involved in student government--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --throughout the period.  Well certainly my last three years.
Story_ID: 508891
Speaker 1: Speaking of having a good time, you pledged in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: I--'62 [1962], sixty- '63 [1963].  The, the, the second semester of my freshman year, so which would have been '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: And what was it you pledged?
Speaker 2: It was a, a service fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega [Alpha Phi Omega Fraternity].  It was a service fraternity with a, with a significant social overlay.  And my thought had been to pledge A Phi Q, which you could do as a freshman.  You couldn't pledge the social fraternities as a freshman, it would have to wait 'til your sophomore year.  And my thought was to--I saw some of the guys there having a good time and someone reached to me and a group of us as freshman who had become fast friends, decided we would do that together.  And then we each had thought that we would either pledge Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] or Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and none of us did, none of us did.  Once, once we got into A Phi Q, the combination of having gone through that hell one time, coupled with the fact that we had a group of fast friends who were all in A Phi Q with us and we set our own social agenda, just didn't feel we needed to do that again.
Story_ID: 508892
Speaker 1: So during that time, you had--during the time you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington D.C.], the influences.  Who became your, your role models?  Who were you looking up to at the time?
Speaker 2: The person that most singularly impacted me was Naylor Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh].  Naylor was a professor of marketing, and again unlike anyone that I had ever been exposed to.  Fitz as we called him, and after I had graduated and he was no longer Professor Fitzhugh, Fitz impacted a lot of lives over the years.  It's a name that you'll hear time and time again.  Fitz was a Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] grad and he graduated from Harvard when, you know, blacks didn't go there.  I wanna say it may have been in the '40s [1940s], but Fitz was just, he was a student of business, he was an outstanding professor.  He cared deeply about his students.  And he inspired a number of us to pursue careers in, in, in, in business.  And Fitz just had a way of--he carried himself that he was the first African American that I had ever been exposed to who you had a sense that, that he was--could be a part of and was comfortable in interacting with the broader business community.  And, and, and not simply the, the segregated African American business community.  So Fitz more than anybody else, just had a very profound impact on me.
Story_ID: 508893
Speaker 1: I was thinking about that.  Is it--at that time did the university prepare you only to function in a segregated world?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or they prepared you to function in a broader society?
Speaker 2: In a broader society.  I never--it's an interesting question.  I, I didn't go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] thinking about business, as I indicated earlier.  But once I started studying business, I don't think--I, I can't recall ever having thought about becoming a business professional in a segregated context.  It did--that thought never crossed my mind, never crossed my mind.  I was from the time that I started thinking of moving into the world of business, I was always thinking about where can I have the impact and where can I have economic success?  And I remember, I remember when I was in the summer management training program at the, at the Bell Telephone Company [American Bell Telephone Company; AT&T Corporation], I was the only African American in that group.  And we would periodically, they would convene us as a group, there probably were twenty or thirty of us scattered throughout the New York area.  And they would periodically bring us together and have senior people there talk to us.  Their objective being obviously to the extent that they, they saw any potential in us, to, to get us to join the Bell system.  But I remember a session with a district manager.  And I asked the question, "Please, please provide us with some sense of the economic potential of being with the, with the Bell system."  And he said, "If you work hard and you are successful, you could aspire to be a, say a district manager within five to, to seven years, and orders of magnitude what, what you would be looking at would be on the order of twenty-five thousand dollars a year.  And that just sounded like all the money in the world to me.  And this was in 1966.  So you know again, whether it was the Lazarus department store [F and R Lazarus and Company], which was a leading retail establishment.  It was the flagship of what became the Federated [Federated Department Stores, Inc.; Macy's, Inc.] chain, very sophisticated marketing organization.  Each of the experiences I had in my, I'll call my, my formative period, were all in, in, in mainstream institutions that were by no means black institutions.
Story_ID: 508894
Speaker 1: Is that why when after graduation, you decided to go to a more mainstream university?  Or, you know, the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] couldn't be any more mainstream.
Speaker 2: Well I had again, as, as late as my junior year in, in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], just thought about this.  I had decided I was interested in business, but I was once again thinking about going to law school.  But at that point going to law school in furtherance of my interest in business, as contrasted with going to law school in order to become a legal practitioner.  My, my, again my family had--my mother [Lucy Hagins Christophe] had a master's degree.  My father [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] had a master's degree and a Ph.D. and education had just been always emphasized as something that was important.  And the thought of, the thought of stopping with a bachelor's degree, even though I was interested in the field of business, just didn't--it didn't occur to me not to pursue further education first.  And if I was going to be a business person, I saw the law as a way of, of doing that.  So the, the fall of my senior year, Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh] asked me had I thought about getting an M.B.A.  I didn't know what an M.B.A. was, hadn't heard of it.  And he said, "Well Cleveland [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], you have the, you have the capacity to do that.  And if indeed you're interested in a career in business, I would encourage to at least look at that possibility."  And he said, "And in furtherance of that, Dean Fowler [ph.], an associate dean from the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], is going to be on campus talking to some students and I would like for you to, you know, sit down and, and talk with him."  I'll never forget this man's name, Dean Fowler.  And so I did.  And at the conclusion of a half hour interview with Fowler, I, I came to two conclusions.  First was that I was interested in pursuing an M.B.A.  The second was I was not interested in pursuing it at, at Harvard.  It was just something about the way this man presented himself that it didn't appeal to me.
Speaker 1: Even the fact that Fitz had gone to Harvard?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, there was just--there was, there was an air about the way Fowler talked with me about Harvard that just didn't sound appealing.  Didn't sound like a place I wanted to be.  And maybe there was even the notion that if I applied, it would be a waste of time because I wouldn't get in.  Probably a mixture of those two.  But it whetted my appetite so that I started doing research as to okay, what about the other places that have these, these business administration programs?  And again, harkens back to my, my practical side just I had elected earlier on to go into the business department because I had another motive.  Similarly when I started looking at business schools, what appealed to me about Michigan was, A, it had the reputation for being a decent business school.  B, it was in the Midwest.  And C, and probably more important than any of the other things, they were on the trimester system.  And they were prepared to give you advanced standing if you had had prior business courses and could survive some of the competency tests with respect to those.  So that's--I applied, I was accepted.  And I breezed, I worked hard, but I breezed through Michigan in, in a whirlwind.  I was only there a calendar year because I mean I wanted to go to school, it was gonna be costly.  I would get some student loans.  I didn't have a scholarship or anything.  But I knew that I wanted to, to, to go get this M.B.A. and to get out and start working.  So I mean that's how I got to Michigan.
Story_ID: 508895
Speaker 1: So how had, you know, before going from Southeast [Southeast Junior-Senior High School, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you say you maybe not was as prepared as other kids from New Jersey.  How prepared were you with Howard's education once you got to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] against other students?
Speaker 2: I ran scared in a positive way.  Probably, probably until about 1986 because everything that I did, I was out on the frontier.  When I went to Howard, I wondered whether my academic grounding in Pine Bluff, Arkansas had prepared me to compete with the kids that came from the places that they came from.  When I went to Michigan, I wondered whether my Howard University education had prepared me to compete with all whites.  I was the only African American in my class of eight hundred.  That is between the first and second years.  And whether I had, you know, Howard had prepared me to compete with the kids that came from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], from the engineering schools in Illinois or wherever.  When I graduated from Michigan and I joined this highly elite group at what today is known as Citigroup [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.], and I was in investment research.  Again, I was the only thing that looked like me and on top of that, I was the--there was one other person that had gone to the University of Michigan.  There were about forty-five people in the investment research department there.  And they almost all were either from the Stanford Business School [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], from the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], or the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And so I wondered whether or not the University of Michigan had prepared me for that.  And then even over my years at Citibank as I took one position after another, it was always with the sense of excitement, but the question as to whether the foundation theretofore had prepared me for these new territories into which I was moving.  So it was only about 1986 before I began to calm down a little bit and say you know, kind of got a track record here of, of success that suggest that each step along the way, the combination of the preparation that you had received, coupled with the capacity to learn and to work hard, you'll be okay.
Story_ID: 508896
Speaker 1: So you talked about three things--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that got you to Michigan.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said the reputation of the school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which was a good business school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did they also have a reputation for being somewhat of a racist institution?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't think about it that way.  I certainly was, was aware that if I was gonna go to any business school, and I guess Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] probably had a business school then, but that wasn't on my radar screen.  I mean just given the experiences that I had had working the working the summers and you know and talking with Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh] and with other people, given my aspirations, I was going to seek out a--I was gonna seek out a mainstream business school.  And I think University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] was probably--I think that was the only school I applied to.  I refused to apply to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: What did you think about being in the Midwest at the time?  You said that was one of the reasons, that it was in the Midwest.  What did--
Speaker 2: Well I thought the Midwest would be more open and if I think about it now, that was probably influenced by two things.  One, I had enjoyed my, my two summers in South Dakota when I was much younger.  And I had enjoyed the acceptance that I felt in what was all white.  And first time I got a chance to play on Little League baseball teams and stuff like that was, was, was back during those two summers.  And then secondly, the summer that I had worked in Columbus, Ohio and Fred [ph.], what was his last name?  Can't recall.  The person in charge of college hiring for Lazarus [F and R Lazarus and Company], I did very well there that summer.  And he wanted me, they wanted me to come back and join their management training program upon graduation.  And at first I was thinking of doing that.  But my, my senior year when I started looking seriously at the prospect of an M.B.A, I called Fred and I said, "Look, I have pretty much decided I'm going to pursue an M.B.A."  And I could tell he was a little disappointed.  And he said, "You really don't need an M.B.A. in order to start with us."  And I said, "I understand that."  I said, "But I'm really seriously going to consider this.  And I'd really appreciate your thoughts about schools that I might wanna look at."  And his comment was, "Well Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe] if you get an M.B.A., candidly, I'm gonna pretty much assume that we're not gonna be able to get you."  And he said, "I accept that.  I, I wish you would, you know, reconsider.  But if, if you're committed to this path even though I'm here in Columbus, Ohio where Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] is located," he said, "a school that I think you might wanna consider that has an absolute first rate reputation was the University of Michigan."  And so that's where that initial thought came from because I respected him and his interest in me.  So you know it was kind of an amalgam of, of those factors.  The Midwestern experience, the, the level of kind of comfort I had felt there both earlier on and, and then during the summer, coupled with Fred's recommendation that I look at the, at the University of Michigan.
Story_ID: 508897
Speaker 1: So during that year at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], who did you socialize with?  I mean were you able to easily move from one world to the other as far as your socializing, I mean outside activities (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but I didn't, I didn't do heavy socializing.  Again, I went through there in one, in, in one calendar year.  And I started in August and I finished in August, the following August of '67 [1967].  I got married the Christmas in between and took Cheryl [Cheryl Cleveland] back out from North Carolina where we were married.  She arrived back there with me in January.  But I had a handful of friends.  One in particular, Walter Hirschberg, whom I've--I need to, I need to find Walter.  I kind of lost track of him now, but Walter was from the Midwest.  He was from, actually from the, the Detroit [Michigan] area.  And Walter had a perspective on things that was different from, you know, anything I had, I had experienced.  So I spent a lot of time with him.  And then there was several other people, but I was, I was, I was very comfortable there.
Speaker 1: Because I can't remember who I interviewed, but their--for example they said there was no place to get your hair cut in Ann Arbor [Michigan] if you were black.  You, you had to go to this one guy who was located in this part of town, and it was very difficult.  I can't remember the--
Speaker 2: There were--while there were no black students in the business school, there clearly were blacks on campus.  And I had a small group of them that I periodically spent some time with.  But not a lot, not a lot.  And I have a vague recollection of a place where I could go get a haircut.  Yeah, it was on the other side of town.  But Ann Arbor wasn't but so large and I had a car.
Story_ID: 508898
Speaker 1: You were just mentioning that you drove back from Michigan State [sic. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] to New York [New York].  How did they--how did Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] get you after?
Speaker 2: I was on a mad tear in going through the Michigan business school [Stephen M. Ross School of Business].  I knew in going to the school that I was interested in investments.  I knew that I wanted to be in investment research.  And I knew that I wanted to do it on what we called a buy side institution as opposed to the sell side.  I was very clear about that, even though people tried to get me to change my mind.  And the reason was quite straightforward.  As a, as a senior at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I had the opportunity again spirited on by Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh], to interview for a position at Bear Stearns [Bear Stearns Companies, Inc.].  Bear Stearns was interested in getting a black trainee who would start to build a client base.  And so I actually flew to New York and interviewed with E. John Rosenwald [E. John Rosenwald, Jr.] and Ace Greenberg [Alan C. Greenburg] who, you know, became the real heads of, of that firm.  And they talked about the, you know with success, the phenomenal amounts of money and so forth we could make.  And I remember being absolutely taken with all of this.  But upon returning to Washington [Washington, D.C.], I, I sought out Wiley Branton, the same whom I had known as a youngster in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  By then Wiley was a--I think he was deputy over in the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice], and head of the civil rights division.  And he was living in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and I, I actually had, had taken a liking to, to one of Wiley's daughters.  As I said Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe]--I was in and, in and out.  And I remember I was taking, I was taking Wylene [Wylene Branton Wood] out, this was during the summer.  And, and before we left for the movies, I was sitting and talking to Attorney Branton.  And he was asking the question what was I gonna do after, after school.  And I told him about the, about the opportunity that I had at Bear Stearns, and you know, said, "What, what do you, what do you think about that?"  And he kind of paused and he said, "You know, I would encourage you to continue to pursue your education.  And I would discourage you from at your youthful age, taking a position like this."  He said, "Because candidly if you came to me and indicated that you wanted to manage my money such as I have," he said, "I'd probably be polite to you, but you wouldn't get any of it."  And I thought about that.  And I thought about that.
Story_ID: 508899
Speaker 1: But as I--and I had, I had had a couple of courses in investments by that point at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  And I, I, I've always been inspired by my own dreams, my ability to visualize what can be and even though the paths were you know, not clearly laid out and there were no maps.  To reduce those dreams to almost visual images and simple, but to me actionable themes that would inspire me.  And that's the way I thought about the, the world of investments.  And that's why my, my, my interest when I was pursuing my M.B.A., was so clear to me.  Because I said I'm black, I want to do well, I wanna make a lot of money, I wanna be valued for what I can do as opposed to who I am, or the color of my skin.  So I saw the market as an independent arbiter.  And so I said okay if I can pursue something, the market will decide whether I'm good or not.  And, and then I took that a step further by saying I wanna do it on the buy side, meaning I would be a recipient of the research of others, as well as the independent research that I would do.  And that I wouldn't have to spend my time trying to sell something to other people where again, this clear perspective I had, perhaps naively, but nonetheless it was mine, that if I got to sell something to other people, then there's noise that gets in there that can cut either way against the grain of the truthfulness of the validity of my ideas.  So tha- from that came research and buy side.
Story_ID: 508900
Speaker 1: So when I started interviewing on campus, I had fourteen interviews, fourteen different institutions.  They were all investment oriented institutions, save for Jersey Treasurers, Jersey Standard, Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation] today, which was itself a very high powered--had the reputation for a really high powered treasury shop.  And they had, they had responsibility for their investments.  So I did interview with them.  I was invited to have onsite interviews and visits to all but one of the fourteen firms that I interviewed with, and that one was Prudential [Prudential Financial, Inc.].  And I knew before leaving the interview at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] that I was not gonna be invited to the Prudential 'cause I was so turned off by what they were offering that I think I pretty much conveyed the message, you know, don't--that we don't even need to go down this road, and they didn't disappoint by inviting me to Newark [New Jersey].  One interesting thing came about as a result of these interviews.  I knew I wanted to go to investment research as I said, and I was very clear about that.  So when people wanted to talk to me about doing other things, I was equally clear in saying that's not where my head is.  And that all came to, to a, to a pinnacle with JPMorgan [J.P. Morgan and Co.; JPMorgan Chase and Co.].  Morgan invited me to New York [New York] and I wrote them back and said thanks, but no thanks.  So the following week I get a telephone call from the, the recruiter.  Said, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], we really enjoyed seeing you on campus.  We're very impressed.  We'd like for you to come to New York for, you know, for further discussions."  And I said, "Well thank you very much.  I enjoyed our discussion, but did you not receive my letter?"  And he said, "Well yes, I did get the letter but you know candidly I'm calling because I thought there was a misunderstanding."  I said, "A misunderstanding?"  He said, "Yes, we invited you back and I wanted to let you know that we're gonna pay for your trip."  And I laughed.  And I said, "I was fully aware of the fact that you were gonna pay for my trip."  He said, "But then you turned us down."  I said, "I did. Because as I explained to you when we were talking on the campus, I'm interested in investment research.  And I immediately want to move to do that."  He said, "But we at Morgan have determined that the best path is for our M.B.A.s recruited into our executive program to spend the first two years rotating amongst the various departments to get a full exposure to the, to, to the breadth of Morgan for the institution to have the opportunity of looking at you and then making a decision."  I said, "I respect that, it's just not what I'm interested in doing."  He said, "But, but, but."  And I said, "Look, I just don't wanna waste your time."  I said, "Because I'm not gonna do that" (laughter).
Story_ID: 508901
Speaker 1: So I had offers from a number of institutions, but it came down to the Chase Bank, Chase Manhattan [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], and, and Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.].  And after onsite visits with those two organizations, there was no question in my mind which one fit me and it was Citibank.
Speaker 2: And they fit because they offered you investment research?
Speaker 1: Both Chase, both Chase and Citibank offered me exactly what I was interested in.  But the--my sense of Citibank and then it was called the First National Citibank of New York, my sense of the, the ethic, my sense of the kind of style of Citibank as contrasted with that of, of the Chase, in fact was accurate.  Citibank was more of a forward leaning organization.  Citibank was, was in a banking sense more edgy.  It was a pioneer.  Chase was a little bit older school and in my interviews at Citibank, there was a crispness, there was a professionalism, there was a youthful vim, vigor, can do in the people that I interviewed with, as contrasted with the people I interviewed with at Chase who were very nice and everything, but they were more out of the, the classical image of what you would expect of a banker as contrasted with the people that I interviewed with at, at Citibank.  So I just--the fit just felt right.
Speaker 2: So let me--help me to understand this.  At Bear Stearn [Bear Stearns Companies, Inc.] they were offering you also the opportunity to go out and develop the area (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was gonna be a broker.
Speaker 2: You were gonna be a broker.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so at Citibank you were never going to be involved with--
Speaker 1: No, no.  I was gonna be on the buy side (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You would be on the buy side.
Speaker 1: And that institution, the twenty-two billion dollar trust division which I was part of, was very research driven, as contrasted with portfolio management driven.  And I was given the opportunity to go to this highly elite group of almost all M.B.A.s, they were all hard charges and so forth.  And I was gonna be given, you know, the opportunity to gain key responsibilities there.
Story_ID: 508902
Speaker 1: Were you the only African American?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yep.  The only one and the only one that had ever been there.  I mean that's not true today (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of course, but during that time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Well then how did they treat you?
Speaker 2: I was treated very well.  I was treated very well and that--my attitude, it was just different from that of a lot of the African Americans that were at Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] at that point.  There were a handful, and then there were others that started to come in in the early 1970s as more went to, to the business schools.  I--and there were times when you know the, the young black officers would come together and they wanted to go and petition senior management and wanted to see more people doing this, that and the other and my attitude was just different.  I worked like a demon.  I would still leave work on Friday evenings at 8:00, 9:00 and 10:00 and find the bars where the guys were hanging out and I'd hang out into the wee hours with them and survive on too little sleep.  But then would be back hard at, at work again.  And my attitude was, I describe it this way.  In about 1971 I was engaged in college recruiting for the bank.  They always--we always at Citibank in those days work on the basis of having young officers making campus visitations and actually doing interviews and so forth, and the feeling was that students could more easily relate to those that they didn't see as, you know, too far outside of their own envelope of experiences.  So on this one occasion, I was actually--it was a small cocktail party up at Columbia University [New York, New York].  And, and it was specifically for black students.  And so there were two or three of us up there and it was, you know we were having cocktails and just a, a free-for-all discussion.  So the question was asked of me to what did I attribute whatever success I had enjoyed to that point?  And I said something like this:  "I, I believe in working hard.  I believe in creating my own opportunities."  And I said, "And, and one of the things that I always seek to do is to identify who is a winner within the context of the organization I'm gonna be working for.  And to go to work for a person like that.  And then very quickly to become that person's go-to person so that he or she very quickly starts to see me as a platform for their advancement as contrasted with someone that they have got to, you know, mollycoddle and look out for in all of those things."  And so one of the guys there said, "That sounds awfully presumptuous that you can identify who you know, even sometimes before you join an organization, is a winner and, and who's not.  You know, what makes you think that you can do that?"  And my retort was, you know there was a certain cockiness and arrogance to me.  But it was also being truthful.  My retort was, "I can't tell you how I do, I just will simply tell you that I've been successful at doing that."  And so in going to work, my initial job in investment research at Citibank for Carney Lawson [ph.] and Chris Maxwell [ph.].  Carney a graduate of, of the Stanford business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] and a product of the eastern establishment.  He was--Carney was probably about thirty at that stage, I was twenty-two.  But you know Carney had done Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you know he came from a wealthy family and he was a playboy.  And Chris Maxwell had gone to Northwestern business school [Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and Chris worked for Carney and Carney was very clear when I was interviewed that Carney was a rising star within the investment research department.  And so I, I knew in accepting the position that I was accepting a position to work for these two guys.  And I could just tell that these guys were on a winning tract.  And I was the first trainee that Chris had ever had.  Chris, Chris was tough, but Chris said even twenty years later when I had occasion to have lunch with him, he said, "You know, you were always the best that I ever had."  I worked hard at it and, and I made Chris look good.  And I made Carney look good.  And so that's the way in which I always approached it.
Story_ID: 508903
Speaker 1: Then what sparked you to leave Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] if you were working with these two guys [Chris Maxwell (ph.) and Carney Lawson (ph.)] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I suppose there, there--maybe I had a little bit of, of my father's [Cleveland Christophe, Sr.] wanderlust.  I--each place I had been, I have, I have wanted to do well and in fact I, I, I did well.  But my eye was always open to what other opportunities may there be out there and how does that compare with the path that I'm on?  And how does that, how does that compute relative to this longer term aspiration that I have towards--this was a, a--comes back to these simple notions that guide me--I talked about I can, I will, I must.  There was another just a little theme called FIRMT, F-I-R-M-T.  That I probably came up with in, in the early 1970s during a period of self-reflection when I said, you know, I would periodically ask myself what's your life all about?  What's important to you?  And so I came up with this FIRMT.  F meant family, I meant independence, R meant respect, M meant money, and T meant time.  And that if I was going to be successful in the way in which I would define success at that point, the, the holistic image would need to embody those elements.  And so coming back to your question, I would you know, periodically as something was presented to me, say okay how does this compare?  How does this model compare with the model that I'm currently pursuing, always within the circumference of FIRMT.
Story_ID: 508904
Speaker 1: I was approached to consider a position at ITT [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation], Hal Geneen's [Harold Geneen] ITT.  And that was an industrial--they were moving out of the financial area.  And I actually interviewed with him, but I didn't like the way that one mapped relative to what I felt I was doing at Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.].  But then shortly after I turned that down, the same executive recruiter came back and said, "Heard you the first time around about not wanting to just join another large institution.  I have something that, given your background, I think might be uniquely suited to you."  Gardiner Dutton and Bob Kenmore [Robert H. Kenmore] had been Harold Geneen's lieutenants during ITT's most (unclear) period.  They were both very young and they had taken the success that they had had at M and A [mergers and acquisitions] with Hal Geneen, and they had partnered with Manny Gerard [ph.] from, I can't remember the name of the investment banking firm on the street.  And they had acquired a small discount store chain called Family Bargain Centers [sic. Family Bargain Center] in Upstate New York, that happened to be public, and used that as a platform to start acquiring other things.  In business we call them in 19- 1972, the, the classiest conglomerate around.  And I, I went to work--was invited to go and joined Bob and Gardiner as assistant to the top two people in, in the company.  And I did everything.  At first we had a suite of offices in the Drake Hotel [New York, New York] on Park Avenue.  And then I was kind of the jack of all trades.  There were only eight of us.  And I found the premises on 3rd Avenue that we eventually moved to and I, you know, worked to flesh all of those out.  And as deals for acquisitions would come in, I was the, the go-to analyst in terms of looking at them.  And then I became responsible for our banking relationships.  And you know, it was just a whole series of things.  And it was, it was exciting.  But at the end of the year, I decided to leave.  And Gardiner couldn't believe it.  He and I were at the, at the Stanford business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] recruiting for some people to join Kenton [Kenton Corporation], and Gardiner, let's see at that point I would have been, I would have been about twenty-four.  And Gardiner was early thirties.  And I said, "You know Gardiner, I'm leaving."  He said, "But you're doing well and we were just about to make you an officer."  And I said, "Well, I'm leaving for the same reason that--," and again it comes to brashness.  I said, "For the same reason I believe you should leave."  And he was the number two guy and his name was on the door.  Ken, Kenmore, Ton, Gardiner Dutton.  And he looked at me and he said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Well your partner," because they weren't equal partners.  Bob was a little bit older and Bob was chairman and Gardiner was president and chief operating officer.  I said, "Your partner Bob Kenmore is gonna drive this company over a cliff and I don't wanna be here when he does it."  And he said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Gardiner, look at the companies that we've acquired.  Look at where we make our money, and look at where Bob spends his time.  Bob spends his time--he's starting to believe his press clippings."  He had, as I said, we owned Cartier jewelers [Societe Cartier], and he had the good fortune or misfortune of selling the Cartier Diamond to Liz Taylor Burton [Elizabeth Taylor].  And that got him into the society pages and we got the limousine for him and he was always at the social events in, in, in New York City [New York, New York].  And he reached the point where when we had our management meetings with the operators of our various divisions, he would come to the Cartier, he would come to the house of Valentino reviews, we were making money there.  He wouldn't come to Family Bargain Centers and RepublicCelini [RepublicCelini Corporation], the importers of slot merchandise from the Far East, which was where we made all of our money.  And I just said--my antennae was always twirling.  I just said, "Gar, he's gonna drive this company over a cliff.  I see a recession coming.  I just don't wanna be around."  So I left.  A year later they were in bankruptcy.
Story_ID: 508905
Speaker 1: Had the, the trio introduced themselves to you at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was during that year that I was with Kenton [Kenton Corporation].  It was I would say three months before I left.  I was already having these thoughts about, about Bob [Robert H. Kenmore] and what was gonna ultimately be a fiasco for the company.  And I was thinking about the, the what next.  And I got this telephone call from, I guess it was probably Ben Shiriak and he introduced himself and he said, "Look, I've heard about you from several people and my partners and I would like to, would like to sit down and talk to you.  Would you have drinks with us?"  And I said, "Okay."  So I did.  I didn't know what they wanted to talk about.  But then they started explaining Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc., New York, New York], this restaurant concept that they had developed.  And for of which they had gone out and raised a small pool of money.
Speaker 1: How much?
Speaker 2: Probably about seventy-five thousand dollars.  They had already built the first prototype unit on 126th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. Boulevard] in Harlem [New York, New York].  And, and they said you know, "We've got, we've got a great architect.  We've got great banking relationships, we've got great legal service."  And they had a little office on Madison Avenue, spending oodles of money for that.  And they said, "We're ready to take this to the next level.  And so we need to raise more money.  And ergo our conversation with you because we think that you could be helpful to us in a consulting capacity, you know obviously we're prepared to pay you."  And I listened to all of that.  And at the conclusion of it I said, "You know as I listen to you, I'm going to do you a favor and be very honest.  I believe you guys are on the wrong track.  I don't believe that you need a consultant and I wouldn't take your money doing that, I think you need something else.  You need somebody to run this company, okay.  And the only basis upon which I would be prepared to do anything with you, would be to run the company because you guys are gonna drive it straight over a cliff.  And I know that's not your agenda.  I know that that's not something that you would be remotely interested in, and even if you came back to me and said that you were interested in having me do that, I'm not sure I would do it because I'm not sure philosophically I agree with what you're doing." I said, "But were you to do that, I'd think about and I'd give you a pretty quick answer."  Two days later Ben Shiriak called and said, "Okay Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], we buy your act.  We'd be very interested in having you consider coming in to run the company.  Now your turn to follow up on what you said you would do."  I said, "Fine, I'll come back to you in a couple of weeks and give you an answer."  And so there I was once again focusing on FIRMT [family, independence, respect, money and time], thinking about where I was with Kenton, thinking about the, the potential of what these guys were doing with Soul Stop, and I, I, I was always a risk taker.  And I figured that if this was an opportunity to really take a crack at entrepreneurship, it wasn't starting from ground level zero because at least they had something of a platform.  That I would have partners in the process, and what the heck?  If it didn't work out, I'd always figure out a way to, you know, earn a living.
Speaker 1: So this tape is about to end, but I have a--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) quick question that you can answer in twenty seconds.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What part of the, their philosophy did you have to overcome to go and work with them?  You said prior to this you didn't know if you agreed with their philosophy or not and what they were doing with Soul Stop.
Speaker 2: This was, this was the first real opportunity that I looked at that would purely have been serving the African American community.  And there was nothing in my background that had moved me along that path.
Story_ID: 508906
Speaker 1: You'd said why you had not agreed with, or may not have agreed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) May not have agreed with, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --a lot with their [Soul Stop, Inc.] philosophy.  What changed your mind about, about it to make you say okay, I'll take the--I'll do the job, I'm interested?
Speaker 2: I could see the possibility.  I mean their essential premise was that fast food prepared tastefully in a place that was attractive, that reflected the ethnicity of the community, and they had--their wallpaper was special designed that had African American heroes on it and so forth, Frederick Douglass, et cetera. that provided opportunities for employment that would be good opportunities growing into, you know, becoming store managers and so forth.  And that the communities like Harlem [New York, New York] didn't have places like this, and that the business model was scaled such that a unit could, a store unit could, could, could operate quite efficiently and generate cash flow.  And that you could replicate this a number of times over, including ultimately franchising.  This was during the, the, the period when franchising was all the wave.  I could see that there was potential there.  So it was, it was that appeal on the one hand, it was the opportunity to be in the driver's seat in attempting to make that happen, coupled with the fact on the other side that the business model I was then pursuing at Kenton Corporation had fallen out of favor with me.  Meaning that as I indicated, I was ripe for some other opportunity because I was convinced Bob Kenmore [Robert H. Kenmore] was gonna drive Kenton over a cliff.
Story_ID: 508907
Speaker 1: So I was going to--I was committed to moving to something and this [Soul Stop, Inc.] was the first--it wasn't the first time I had considered something entrepreneurial, but it was the first time I had actually been close enough to something that seemed to make sense and that was doable.  Turning back the clock to 19- 1968, '69 [1969] when I was still at Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.], I had developed a good relationship with John Wendelbo [ph.], also a University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] graduate.  And John was one year ahead of me.  He was on the corporate banking side at Citibank, not an African American.  He and I had many times come together and, and, and talked about creating some form of an entrepreneurial opportunity.  And we had come dangerously close a couple of times.  As a matter of fact, I can remember a conversation, there were three of us.  There was John, corporate banking side, there was me on the research side and there was a, a, a young scientist in Wilmington [Delaware] at DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company].  And we were each going to quit our jobs and we were gonna combine what little resources we had and we were gonna start something.  And I was ready to go.  And I just--I've always had this, I've always had this instinct for what needs to be done if in fact you're gonna do something.  That's another expression that my kids [Jean-Paul Christophe and Kimberly Christophe] if they were here would say, "Yeah Dad I know, I know, I know."  I said the only way to do it is to do it.  And a lot of people get together and they just talk about doing something.  And ultimately if I'm part of that, I tend to be the person that'll force the action by saying okay, if we're going to do, we gotta get past the, the talking stage and I'll know that we in earnest to the extent that we're prepared to commit ourselves to course of action.  And so going back to the discussions I had with John and, and, and this other fellow, everything was great as long as we were talking conceptually.  But the day I said okay, we've mapped out these ideas on paper.  Let's set a timeline.  By the end of next month, we each will have quit our jobs.  Well you know, it was yeah, yeah, yeah until two weeks passed and we were getting two weeks closer, and then reality set in.  And then you started to see who was prepared and who was not prepared.
Story_ID: 508908
Speaker 1: Coming back to the Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc.] experience, this one was real.  Soul Stop had already been created.  They already had an office, they already had raised some money.  They already had their first unit in, in Harlem [New York, New York].  And they were prepared to embrace me coming in to, to run the organization.  So that--it was not academic.  So why not?  I did.
Speaker 2: So you did that job.
Speaker 1: Yes I did.
Speaker 2: And I read that by day you raised money.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: By night you fried chicken.
Speaker 1: That's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 2: At the end of the year you sent out 109 I-9 forms.
Speaker 1: W-2s.
Speaker 2: W-2s.
Speaker 1: That is correct.  That is correct.  And by the end of the year, I had learned so much.  I'd learned so much about business, I'd learned so much about myself, learned a ton about accounting because I had to do my own books and everything.  And I learned that whereas my economic aspirations had not changed, that there were parameters within which those had to exist.  I learned that--and I thought about this before, signing on.  Had identified it as a potential issue, however I had not appreciated how really important intellectual stimulation was to me, and there was none in that business, none.  And even though I, I still will say that there was the potential to take that opportunity and to, and to do very, very, very well with it, by the end of that year, I just wanted out.  I was sick of the business, I was sick of every aspect of it.  I was sick of the employees, I was sick of the purveyors, I was sick of the customers.  And I knew it was time for me to go when I realized that the combination of physical fatigue, battle fatigue, had put me at the point where I probably could have killed.  I knew it was time to go because I had been robbed several times, my own brother [Quinton Christophe] had worked for me as a college student during the summer, and he'd had a gun put to his head twice.  And the second time he'd called me.  I'd never personally experienced it, and I had just left the store when he called and he said, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], I think you better get back down here."  I said, "Why, what's going on?"  He said, "We've been robbed again."  And, and then he kind of gave me that nervous little laugh as he described what had happened.  And he said, "When you asked me to come here and work with you for the summer and you told me that I would have an exciting experience," he said, "I didn't know that this is what you meant."  He said, "This type of excitement I can watch on 'Gunsmoke.'" (Laughter)  "I don't need to do it."  So it was time for, it was time for me to go.
Story_ID: 508909
Speaker 1: Well you went into it apprehensive because of, of the philosophy of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay maybe you don't wanna serve the African American community.  Did the experience color that any?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't, it wasn't so much a question of--let me state it differently.  It was a question of whether there were things that you could do essentially only serving the African American community that could make for the type of business success I aspired to.  That was an open question.
Speaker 1: And what did that--what did Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc.] add to that?
Speaker 2: Experience?
Speaker 1: Experience.
Speaker 2: It, it showed me a--remember now I came along during the Black Power era back in the 1960s and we're gonna, you know, do everything for ourselves and dot, dot, dot.  Soul Stop set aside the rhetoric and got down to the practicalities.  And I saw, I, I disabused myself of any fuzzy notions about the enormity of the challenge.  And it served me very well.  And in subsequent years when people would come to me, even looking for financing, with what I call fuzzy thinking about okay here's an African American opportunity and nobody else is doing it and it's just there for the picking.  Well okay, let me tell you about the way the world really works.  And I'm not saying that the opportunity may not exist, but I would challenge your thinking along a number of axes just on the basis of my own experience and share with me then how it is you're gonna deal with these issues.  I mean again, the reality, the reality is that I fired very few people during that year I was at Soul Stop.  I fired very few and it only took six at a time to run the operation.  But when I had to prepare 106 109 W2's, and most of the people that didn't come back to work didn't give me advance notice they weren't coming back to work, hey, you know.  You get colored by your own, you know, your own experiences.  The, the robberies, the fact that I couldn't get protection from the police department and had to resort to putting up bulletproof glass.  And it just--just a whole litany of, of things.  So I just said okay, been there done that.
Story_ID: 508910
Speaker 1: So how did it end?  You met your lawyer or you--Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I met, I met Reg.
Speaker 1: Did you know him prior to the Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc.], or that was--
Speaker 2: No, no I did not.  Mariel Landa [ph.], Ben Shiriak and Mike Schwitzer [ph.] were the three young M.B.A.s who had started Soul Stop.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just gonna be picky.  Tell me which of those two were black?  There was one black and one white.
Speaker 2: One black, Mariel, Mariel.  And Ben and, and Mike.  Ben and Mariel.  Ben had a law degree, I think Ben went to New York University law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York].  Mariel went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and had both an M.B.A. and a law degree.  And Mike, I believe Mike went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And Mike worked for Restaurant Associates.  So he kind of brought the restaurant experience.  They had sought to do in their own terms everything on a first class basis.  I mean that was part of the imagery they were selling.  They had through Restaurant Associates that owned Four Seasons [Four Seasons Hotels, Ltd.] and other places, they had, they had gotten a very prominent restaurant architect to design the prototype unit.  They had found someone to design the wallpaper and to manufacture it.  Similarly, they wanted a, a first class law firm.  And I guess one of them had relationships at Paul Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP].  And Reg Lewis was a young associate, graduate of the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And Reg was assigned to the account.  And so I remember when--so Reg was already in place when I joined.  And I remember when Reg and I had our introductory lunch together, we just immediately hit it off.  And I saw a, I saw a kindred spirit.  I saw a, a, a young man who had grown up in Baltimore [Maryland], Reg is probably about four years older than, than, than am I, was I, and I saw how he had gone from the--he went to--what was it Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?  Yeah, I think Reg went to Virginia State, and he had gone from there to the Harvard Law School.  I, you know, we already talked about my background and we were both highly ambitious.  And we were moving in similar worlds, albeit he on the law side and me within a, a--had been within the mainstream banking community.  So we spent a lot of time together.
Story_ID: 508911
Speaker 1: And when I made the decision that I didn't go forward with Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc.], Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] and I did what we did so many times over the, the next fifteen years.  Which is we got together frequently at the Harvard Club [Harvard Club of New York City, New York, New York], that was his, one of his favorite spots, and we'd sit down over many a glass of wine and talk about, okay where do we go from here?  And he and I put together the sexiest little stock swap for a penny-ante restaurant that you ever wanna see.  And we packaged it in a way that served all of our communities of interest, whether it was the shareholders who had put up the initial capital for which I didn't have any--I hadn't done anything to bring that money aboard, but I felt a responsibility as the CEO then of the outfit to try to do the best I could for their going forward investment.  And I had borrowed a minor amount of money from a bank and I wanted to have that taken care of and I wanted to provide the employees such as I had, an opportunity to go forward.  And so he and I, you know, put that all together and when the dust settled, we had managed to, to sell Soul Stop to All Pro Fried Chicken [All Pro Fried Chicken, Inc.], owned by Brady Keys [Brady Keys, Jr.], former Pittsburgh Steeler, and that was the beginning of the, the, the relationship of Cleve Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe] and Reg Lewis.
Speaker 2: So but there is a gentleman you'd gone to before, perhaps to raise money when you were thinking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Phil Smith [Philip Smith].
Speaker 2: Phil Smith.  And then you decided you didn't wanna take his money.  What incident led to okay, I'm not gonna take your money because I don't wanna move forward with this?
Speaker 1: Because over that year I had, as I said, been in a suit seeking to raise venture capital to expand the enterprise by day, and then ultimately having to go into the restaurant and to run it by night.  And there was just this sense of isolation.  I mean my, my partners had all left me by then with their shares intact, mind you.  But you know they--once I came aboard--I mean Mike Schwitzer [ph.] had never left Restaurant Associates, although there had been talk about him doing that.  Ben Shiriak was freelance lawyering, but he was kind of never around.  And Mariel [Mariel Landa (ph.)] was the one original partner who was in the restaurant.  And then once I came aboard, Mariel was the kindest guy you'd ever wanted to see, but Mariel just basically said, you know, "I don't like this anymore.  And if it's all the same to you, I'm not sure that I'm adding all that much value here.  Why don't I just go read 'Siddhartha' [Hermann Hesse]," you know he was into that, read poetry and stuff like that.  And, "And you run this restaurant."  And so I mean it was me.  It was, it was, it was me.
Story_ID: 508912
Speaker 1: So in any event, Phil Smith [Philip Smith] was president of FNCB Capital Corporation, today known as Citicorp Ventures [sic. Citigroup Venture Capital].  And it was one of the leading early on pioneers in small business investing.  And Phil was, and to this day he lives over in Darien [Connecticut], Phil has always been an out-of-the-box thinker.  As some people would say sometimes he didn't think before he acted.  But Phil, Phil provided--Phil and a couple of other guys provided the Hollingsworth Group with its C financing.  The Hollingsworth Group later became known as Essence Communications [Essence Communications, Inc.].  Phil provided Brady Keys [Brady Keys, Jr.] with some of his seed financing for All Pro Fried Chicken [All Pro Fried Chicken, Inc.].  So Phil had kind of come around after months of courting, to the view that he was prepared to back me with Soul Stop [Soul Stop, Inc.].  And it was towards the end of that first year that he had made the decision and I was sitting with him and I said, "Phil, I, I really appreciate it, let me come back to you."  And I went back to him several days later and said, "Thanks, but no thanks.  I'm, I'm not gonna bring your money into this organization because I have decided that this isn't the ship that I wanna continue to sail."  And so he said, "Well thanks for, you know, telling me that before I put my money in, and by the way, what's your plan?"  I said, "I'm gonna sell it."  And he said, "And what then?"  I said, "I don't know.  I probably will have to, you know, put my feet up for a few days of, of sober reflection."  And he said, "Well why don't you come back to the bank?"  I said, "Why does that make any sense?"  And he said, "I'm not talking about the mainstream bank.  I'm talking about why don't you come down here and work in the Capital Corporation [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.], do venture capital?"  And I said, "Really?"  He said, "Yeah, you've over a short period of time, had experience at research at Kenton [Kenton Corporation], you had, you've had core finance and you've done some M&A [mergers and acquisitions].  And certainly at Soul Stop you got more than a belly full of an understanding as to what entrepreneurship is all about."  And he said, "You already have so much more substantive experience than many of the people I have down here working with me, that I think that you would be a natural for it and I'd like for you to consider it."  He said, "But there is a caveat."  I said, "Well what's that?"  He said, "The caveat is if you decide you want to do this, I'll bring you back in, not as an officer, which you were when you left.  You'll come back in as a non-officer.  And secondly, I will only pay you what you were making when you left here two years ago."  And I said, "What's that all about?" And he said, "Well Citibank does not have the reputation of bringing people back after they have had the audacity of leaving.  And so in bringing you back, there will be some of the, the gray beards around here who wouldn't understand why we were creating this opportunity for you."  He said, "But, you know, if you came back and in effect was starting all over, then you know, no one would think twice about it."  And he said, "And if you're half as good as I think you are, within a short period of time you'll cover the distance that you would have covered and moved if I had brought you back in as an officer."  I thought about it and looked at the fact I had no money in the bank and decided I would do it.  Five years later I was a vice president, so.
Story_ID: 508913
Speaker 1: And given--within that experience, you headed several banks in different countries. Explain that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not within that, not within that experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh no, that wasn't the time that you--okay.
Speaker 2: That was--I was in coming back to, to Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] in 1971, January of 1971, I was there for another sixteen years before it was all over, and I covered a lot of territory within that period.  I started out in, in venture capital.  I was there with Phil [Philip Smith] and the other guys for two years.  And then I got my arm twisted to go back to my, my first area of endeavor, which was investment research with a focus on you know, now starting to take over more managerial responsibility for a whole area.  I pioneered our investment thesis and put together the strategy for investing in financial institutions.  I had responsibility for building products and a whole range of areas with, with about ten people working for me, which was my first real managerial experience within the Citibank context.  Then in 1975 I, I had decided that if I was going to remain an investment professional, that it made sense for me to leave Citibank and to go to Wall Street [New York, New York] where investing was the primary driver of enterprise, as contrasted with being what I call the twenty-two billion dollar somewhat sideline activity within the context of everything that Citi- Citicorp [Citigroup Inc.] was.  In the alternative, if I was going to stay with Citibank, my view was to seek a path over to the lion side and lion's share side of what drove that institution.  And I elected the latter.  I had developed a pretty doggone good reputation within the bank.
Story_ID: 508914
Speaker 1: In 1970, late 1973, I had just returned to research and had just organized the team to invest a lot of money in the financial services arena, and the bank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] had not theretofore done that.  And Tom Theobald [Thomas Theobald] who then was the, the head of the investment division, investment group as it was called, came to me and said, "Walt Wriston [Walter B. Wriston] our chairman, is very concerned."  And Walt was such a visionary as well as a historian.  He said Walt was very concerned that there were trends afoot in the financial services community that were going to in the fullness of time, change financial services as we then knew it.  And he felt that not many people, academicians or regulators, or even practitioners, understood these trends.  And he wanted them studied and if there was a message to be delivered, as he put it, I want it written about in a quasi-scholarly fashion and I wanna put the world on notice.  And so Tom Theobald said to me, "We want you to do it.  And by the way, we're not asking."  So working kind of directly with the chairman, I held down two jobs for about six months.  I, although Tom told me to dispense with what I was doing in the investment research department and put that on hold, move to the fourteenth floor, which is where corporate planning was located, and get this job done and then you can come back to investment research.  Well I mean I knew that, that I had laid the foundation for some substantive investments in the financial services area, and I knew that the portfolio managers who were reliant upon what I was doing, they were gonna be oblivious to the fact that the chairman had me off doing something else.  As far as they were concerned, I simply had started something I hadn't, you know, followed through on.  So during that period, I held down two jobs.  I was working twenty hours a day.
Story_ID: 508915
Speaker 1: And I, I took the office on the fourteenth floor and I kept my office on the nineteenth floor.  And I just kind of split between the two.  And there were times when in working to get this done, I slept in the bank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] overnight and just, you know, awakened and, and went back to work.  But as I told Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe], this is one of those watershed opportunities.  I said either competition in financial services, which was the project I was working on, either this is going to work and it's gonna to be known to have worked in a major positive way, or I'm leaving the bank because as far as I'm concerned, you don't as a young officer, get a chance to get this level of exposure directly to the chairman and, and have that kind of come up a no, and have it make sense for you to continue down this path.  So I was absolutely committed to it.  And it worked, it worked and it worked very, very, very well.  And I learned a lot about, about organizational politics, you know because there were some very heavy hitters in the, in the bank who, who sought to sabotage what, what I was doing.  Not in any way having to do with me, but rather because they thought that what, what Walt [Walter B. Wriston] was espousing was gonna make their lives more difficult.  Basically Wriston's concern was that in the competitive arena there was unrecognized, unfettered competition coming from the General Electrics, the Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and so forth, of the world.  General Electric was already laying the, the, the tracks with respect to what today is, is GECC, General Electric Credit Corporation [GE Capital].  ITT [International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation; ITT Corporation] was doing a number of things.  Sears through Allstate [Allstate Corporation], the insurance, and they were starting to do lending.  And Walt's point was that these institutions did not have the same regulatory yoke around their necks that the deposit based financial institutions had, and that in the fullness of time, markets were going to be served and these unfettered competitors were gonna have the upper hand.  And he wanted to--if there was a case there, if in fact his thesis was correct, he wanted somebody to write about it.  And I did.  It was called 'Competition in Financial Services' [Cleveland Christophe].  Wriston wrote the introduction, and it was very broadly disseminated.  This is in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] now.  And I, I put the spotlight on--I, I talked about all of this in a broad sense, but then I took three cases, ITT, General Electric and Sears, and I did case studies on them, quoting from their own annual reports and so forth.  Well Billy Spencer [William I. Spencer], who was the president and Walt's partner, Billy sat on, on Sears's board.  Walt sat on General Electric's board, and ITT was a major client of, of the banks.  And the head of the corporate banking division and the head of corporate planning then, both before we published, went to Walt and said they thought this was some of the worst corporate PR [public relations] that we could possibly do, and we were going to incur the undying wrath of some of our major customers.  And I had to navigate around that.  And I'll never forget the day I went back into Walt's office when he said, "Okay, let's go, it's a print."  And then Walt looked at me, and you talk about a person that had an impact on me, Walt looked at me.  He put his hand on my shoulder and he said "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], I appreciate what you've done, I appreciate how you got it done.  I appreciate what you had to go through in order to get it done.  But I want you to know that at the end of the day, I work for the Citibank shareholders.  And if that means I have to go off the GE board, if that means that Billy Spencer can no longer get his, his Whirlpools from, from Sears, then so be it."  He said, "But I have to at least pretend sometimes I'm listening to what people around me say."
Story_ID: 508916
Speaker 1: You were just about to tell us how it ended up.
Speaker 2: Quite favorably.  It was, it ['Competition in Financial Services,' Cleveland Christophe] was published.  It was-Walt [Walter B. Wriston] presented it before the, the ABA [American Bankers Association] banking conference.  In the aftermath of that, I was asked to speak to it before state banking associations and commissions kind of around the nation.  I was invited down to Washington [Washington, D.C.] where I had a private luncheon with the U.S. comptroller of currency and his key reports.
Speaker 1: And who was that at the time?
Speaker 2: Gosh, it was 1974.  I believe the name Smith [James E. Smith] comes to mind.  I just can't recall.  Easily enough pull that, pull that up.  And then I taught at the BAI, the Banking Administration Institute [sic. Bank Administration Institute] kind of on some of these surrounding topics.  So for about two years I spent a lot of time, even as I was otherwise working, speaking about and delivering the, the messages of, of the research that I had done.
Story_ID: 508917
Speaker 1: What did you get in turn for having done that?
Speaker 2: George Vojta, who was by then an executive, young executive vice president of the bank, had been the, the head of corporate planning. Dr. Voida as Wriston [Walter B. Wriston] would say, because George in fact had a Ph.D., George was my mentor as I was working on this project.  By the time I finished, George had been promoted and was the, the head of the international banking area for Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.], a very broad spread set of responsibilities.  So after I finished the competition at financial services, I returned to investment research and finished what I had initiated.  And a year later we're now February 1975.  I called George and I said I wanna have lunch.  And so George and I got together.  And he said, "What do you wanna do?"  And I said, "George, I can't tell you what I wanna do, but I can give you some characteristics.  I've decided that as I mentioned earlier, if I'm gonna stay in the investment arena, it makes sense for me to go to the street.  If on the other hand, I'm gonna stay in this organization, then I want to engage in what this organization is really about," what I call the lion side of the lion's share side.  I said, "So over the fullness of time," because I never aspired to be a ninety day wonder.  "Over the fullness of time, I would like to have the opportunities of getting substantive grounding in people management, in process management operations.  I would love to learn something about treasury.  I need some experience in credit and in marketing.  And if I can achieve all of those and do it in a way that gives me cross-cultural exposure, then so much the better.  And if in fact I do that, and I do well, I'd like to think that I have a shot at eventually running something of substance within this organization."  And George looked at me, he smiled and said, "Okay I hear you, where do you wanna go?"  I said, "George similarly, I'm much more interested in being able to accomplish what I just outlined than I the particular piece of geography; caveat was--," always, always had a caveat.
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: This is me, I said--I always have a caveat.  "The caveat is I reserve the right to refuse to go to the local hell hole of the earth, wherever that momentarily might be located."  And George laughed and he said, "How about France?"  And three months later, I packed up my family and, and we moved to Paris [France].  So did that have anything to do directly with 'Competition in Financial Services' [Cleveland Christophe]?  Certainly it, it, it, it drove from the backdrop of something that really characterized the roughly twenty years that I spent with Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank].  And it perhaps goes a ways towards asking, or answering a question I'm frequently asked:  How did I stay with Citibank for so long?  Well the simple fact is, facts are, I had a lot of fun.  I had a lot of responsibility, and I did a lot of different things.  And Citibank challenged me along the way.  I didn't have a single job.  I never had an opportunity to become bored because each time I, I was reaching a point of the end of fulfillment with respect to doing something, I put my hand up and I said I wanna go do something else.  And the reality Shawn [Shawn Wilson], is that almost without exception, every job I had over the twenty years, I kind of created.  And because I had a history of succeeding by and large in what I did, the organization was ready to continue to, to take bets on me at--in doing things that I had not theretofore, I hadn't done.
Story_ID: 508918
Speaker 1: Were there at this time other people in the institution whom looked like yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so there were.  They were--were you responsible for bringing them on board?  I mean at this point, some--
Speaker 2: Some, some because of the--
Speaker 1: Did you feel a responsibility to do so?
Speaker 2: Well I--yes I felt a responsibility, particularly in the early years.  I was I would say probably the first ten years I was with Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.] prior to going overseas in 1975, I was always kind of on the front line with respect to college recruiting.  I remember going back to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and attempting to interest people in, in Howard.  I remember trying to interest Howard students in the University of, of Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  From Citibank I would go back to Michigan, but I also would go to the other business schools, such as I could work into my schedule in recruiting.  And it wasn't just looking for minority students, it was across the board.  But then of course I always had a slant.  And in the interest in, in, in trying to get other African Americans in.  And then there were a number of junior officers that I knew early on and you know, we would--was very good friends.  And we'd get together and share experiences and, and so forth.  But I particularly during the, I would say the first ten years, by and large I was, I was looked up to as, as probably the person that was on the fastest track.  And certainly to the extent that I'd done the work for the chairman, that I had done and, you know, some of the paths that I had moved along.
Story_ID: 508919
Speaker 1: People felt that the path I was on was different and I, I, I found it difficult to--I didn't see the world through the same lens that they frequently spoke of.
Speaker 2: And explain that to me.  What does that mean?
Speaker 1: I never felt held back.  I never felt that, that I was being blocked.  I never felt that I was working with or for people that didn't appreciate what I could do.  And those were the types of complaints I would frequently hear.
Speaker 2: Did you feel that you were the exception, or that people--what did you feel?
Speaker 1: I felt that by and large, I was prepared to work harder than most people.  I mean I always worked long hours, always.  And while I wanted to make the party, I ended up compromising things like sleep and so forth in order to do that.  But I always knew--I just--I was driven.  I was absolutely driven.  The other thing that I learned about myself is that, and I'm speaking candidly.  I always had a superior set of navigational tools.  And I don't know where it came from, but I always had it.  My brother [Quinton Christophe] said to me, and it was many years later that he remarked this to me, probably about ten years ago.  He said this, he said, "You were different from that summer that you went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and when you came back."  He said, "You were even talking differently.  You no longer had what I knew as that Arkansas twang and so forth."  Whether it was--I always was aware of my ethnicity.  But I had a profound appreciation for the broader world. And whether it was adjusting because the kids at Howard told me, "Hey, kid, white socks are not the way to go."  Or whether it was when I was privileged to join forces with Carney Lawson [ph.] and Chris Maxwell [ph.] and I described to you, you know, Carney's upbringing.  Carney was indeed a wine connoisseur.  And whenever I traveled with Carney, Carney believed in everything being first class.  We did not, we did not stay in anything other than the finest hotels.  And Carney was always doing his research to figure out the outstanding restaurants.  When we'd go to San Francisco [California], we'd be at the Fairmont [Fairmont San Francisco] on Nob Hill [San Francisco, California].  We would invariably end up going to Ondine's [Events Ondine, Sausalito, California] for dinner, or even in places like Indianapolis [Indiana], he knew about King Cole there, and all of these places extraordinary wine lists.  So I learned about wines, and then I became a student of wines.  I learned about food, I learned about escargot, I learned about raw oysters.  And I always took advantage of the, the, what I'll call the, the opportunities that I could access as a result of the main opportunities that I was being given.  And I could still enjoy the fried chicken and the barbeque ribs, but there are few things that I love more than a fine glass of Chablis to complement belon oysters.  And, and a lot of my colleagues just--they, they didn't, they didn't adapt in the same ways that, that perhaps I did.  And--
Story_ID: 508920
Speaker 1: Well would you say--yeah, adapt, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Adapt, yeah adapt.  And they--with, with many of them, not all, but with many of them there was an attitude of wanting the environment to adjust more to them, and I never quite saw it that way.  I said I can be who I am, but I also recognize where I am and I recognize what I'm seeking to do.  And by the way, there are a lot of things about all of this that have enormous appeal to me.  I'm not gonna forget who I am.  But I'm not gonna waste a lot of time doing things that I found certainly in those days, I found patently silly.  Like going to senior management and partitioning them, petitioning them saying that you know we, we, we need more blacks, you know, up here and up here and up here because I would look around and say who's ready?  Okay.  And you know the thing that we need to be about doing now is making sure that we're developing that readiness path on the basis of demonstrated competency.  And that's just kind of the way I always approached it.
Story_ID: 508921
Speaker 1: How did you--okay I'm just gonna ask this.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: It can be off the record.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How did you stay grounded enough not to then go out and pursue a wife of a different ethnicity?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It never occurred to me.
Speaker 1: Never, never occurred to you.
Speaker 2: Never occurred to me.
Speaker 1: Had you ever dated outside of your race?
Speaker 2: Not broadly.  You know, a couple of, of flings when I was in college.  Certainly not in Arkansas. (Laughter) I still remembered Emmett Till, yeah.  But, no I mean I always, I always, I always knew who I, you know who I, who I was.  But--and you know it's something, it's something that my son and my daughter and I have, have, have talked about and you know in their cases, you know, their world is a different world than the one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Explain that to me.
Speaker 2: Well I mean that you know, they went to independent schools here.  They both went to Phillips Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire].  And Kimberly's [Kimberly Christophe] at Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri], Jean-Paul [Jean-Paul Christophe] went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And they--what's, what's interesting is they learned more about associating with the types of kids I grew up with in Arkansas at Phillips Exeter than they did here.  Because there at Exeter, there is more of an amalgam of kids of color drawn from Memphis, Tennessee and other places than, you know, they found in the schools that they attended here.  And you know the racial divide does not exist for them in the same way that it clearly was you know, a factor of my upbringing.  That said, you know they each know, and I guess you know their mother [Cheryl Christophe]--
Speaker 1: Each know?
Speaker 2: They each know that my attitude if they ask the question is, and I don't get into their affairs this way, but if the question I think they probably have at some point along the way, I'd say, look relationships are challenging.  So you know you put the racial component to it, you just add a different level of complexity.  It doesn't mean that it's a no-no.  It's just--just understand it for what it is.  That's life. Which challenges are you prepared to take on?
Story_ID: 508922
Speaker 1: You decide to, I mean you, then you--you can briefly talk about the twenty-one years at Citibank [First National City Corporation; Citibank, N.A.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the various countries you were able to work in.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you worked in France.
Speaker 2: The, the travel log, just to describe it in a nutshell and then we can delve into any that you, that you choose to.  I was eight years in New York [New York], fresh out of business school.  Then in 1975 I described the opportunity to go to France.  The thought is, was that I would be there for a year, turned out to be four and a half years.  And I split that time between Paris [France] and Monte Carlo [Monaco].  I started out--I was already a vice president, and I made myself a trainee again over there, even though I remained a vice president.  But I was determined to pursue the agenda that I had laid out to George [George Vojta].  And so I wanted to start in operations, which I did, I had to beg my way into it.  Ended up working for the head of operations, became his chief of staff.  Then six months later ran one of his operating divisions.  And that all worked sufficiently well and I guess I was gaining somewhat of a reputation that the division head for all of Europe requested that I be assigned to Monte Carlo to build what we call an asset domiciliation center down there.  It took me a year to do that.  And I split my time between Paris and Monte Carlo, and that's when I had the (unclear).  Used to go to the, to the, to the Monte Carlo Grand Prix [sic. Monaco Grand Prix] and down in the pits and all of that--it was a lot of fun.  So that's now two years into the, what I call the French experience.  And then I was asked or given the opportunity to go back to Paris to head up all of operations, the infrastructural side of the organization.  And I, I agreed that I would do that, again with the caveat.  The proviso was I will do it for a minimum of two years, and a maximum of two years.  The minimum because I felt it was gonna take at least that long to have any impact because I had an agenda, and it was to help move the operational infrastructure from being a backwater to being a mainstream strategic element within the French corridor, that is of Citibank in France.  And I wanted it to be a maximum because as I had indicated, my thought in going to France was that I was only gonna be there for a year and if indeed I stayed for another two years, I was gonna turn out to have been four years and it was time for me to further the agenda as I had outlined it.  So I did that for two years.
Story_ID: 508923
Speaker 1: And then I went to my bosses [at Citibank, N.A.] and said you know, as I said two years.  I'm now interested in the credit marketing side.  And then I worked to create the opportunity which resulted in me moving to San Francisco [California] in the corporate banking area there.  And again, drawing on my previous both experience as well as relationships developed.  John Moss [ph.] who was prepared to take me on, not having any substantive experience, neither credit or in marketing.  John had been in corporate planning when four years, five years earlier I had written 'Competition in Financial Services' [Cleveland Christophe].  So John knew me peripherally, but knew of my background and my work ethic.  And when John learned that I was available and what I was looking to do, he was the head of the San Francisco office.  And so he said (unclear) here.  And so 1980 we picked up stakes and relocated to, to San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Were both children born in San Francisco?
Speaker 1: No, Jean-Paul [Jean-Paul Christophe] was, was born--we, we moved to San Francisco December 31, 1979.  And Jean Paul was born February 1st 1982.  And then Kimberly [Kimberly Christophe] is three years younger, she was born actually in Kingston, Jamaica in 1985.  Jean Paul was born in--outside of San Francisco in Marin General [Marin General Hospital, Greenbrae, California].
Speaker 2: So you go, you moved back to San Francisco, you do the job here and then they approach you again to move to Jamaica to--
Speaker 1: Not quite.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Again, Paris [France] to San Francisco, and I took on increasing levels of responsibility there.  And the last two years I was in San Francisco, I ran the corporate banking area for the high technology industries in the west, which really was Silicon Valley [California] in its infancy.  I had that set of responsibilities.
Story_ID: 508924
Speaker 1: By the end of that second year, now three and a half years in, I, I wanted a different type of a challenge.  I didn't like the way the North American banking group was being run.  It was a very centrist organization with all roads eventually leading back to Larry Small's [Lawrence M. Small] office.  Larry was the North American banking head.  And I, I came close to leaving Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  As a matter of fact, I had accepted a position with a fledgling bank called Redwood, Redwood bank [Redwood Credit Union] in San Francisco [California].  I was all but out the door.  I was gonna be the number two person in this struggling little bank.  And I thought that given the western division had Bill Farnsworth [Wilford Farnsworth, Jr.], who had a reputation.  He was a true died-in-the-wool Citibank, old style loyalist.  And the word had always been there that if Bill liked a person and felt that they had promise, and that person indicated the supreme folly of indicating he or she was prepared to leave the bank, he would waste no more than about ten minutes attempting to, to get that person to see the foolishness, and to the extent that they were not otherwise swayed, he would say okay, fine.  Be out of Dodge by sunset.  That was Bill.  So I had expected that treatment.  I flew down to Los Angeles [California] to meet with Bill, and Bill tried that on me.  Except he didn't say be out of Dodge by sunset.  He said, "I hope I've convinced you to change your mind," and I said, "Bill you have not."  He said, "Well then there's just one further thing I request that you do.  I want you to fly back to New York [New York], there's some people there that wanna see you."  I was shocked.  I said, "Well Bill I don't need to do that."  And he said, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], you owe that to us.  There are some people that wanna see you."  So the following week I flew back to New York.  And that was quite a dramatic day.  The person I started out with was Larry Small, the head of the North American banking group.  And Larry said, "Cleve, I suspect there's some things that you don't particularly like about the way in which I'm running the group.  I'm doing what I think is the appropriate thing.  We want you to be in this organization.  And you're going to see a group of people today, each of whom has volunteered to spend time with you because they either know you or know of you and because they care.  And the only promise I want you to make to me is keep an open mind and if by the end of the day, if you find yourself questioning the decision that you've already made, just promise me that you won't stick to that decision simply because you feel that you would be vacillating and that others would look at you and wonder what you were made of, having been otherwise swayed."  He said, "You need to know that everybody that you are going to meet with has been in your boat." I never forgot that.
Story_ID: 508925
Speaker 1: And then during the course of the day, I met with George Vojta, I met with Tom Theobald [Thomas Theobald], who was then head of the world corporate group.  I met with Paul Collins [Paul J. Collins] who by then was on the executive committee and had oversight for both the venture capital area as well as the entire investment area and the investment policy of the institution.  I met with Bill Spencer [William I. Spencer], who was president of the bank, and I met with Walt Wriston [Walter B. Wriston].  And when I walked into Walt's office last, I went in and he said, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], come on over here and sit down.  What the hell is going on?"  And I knew him then as Walt.  Our relationship had moved beyond Mr. Wriston.  And I said, "Walt it's been a, a great run at this organization and I enjoyed every moment of it.  But I have now reached the point where I would rather be a big fish in a smaller pond where what I do has more of an impact on that organization, than in this bigger pond."  Walt looked at me and he said, "Well, I understand this little bank you're talking about going to.  They got a lot of trouble."  I said, "Yeah, that's part of the challenge."  He said, "Well, you know I remember when you came to this organization.  You wanted to do investment research and we let you do that.  Then you decided after you got your sanity and came back, you wanted to do venture capital, we let you do that.  And then you decided you wanted to become a real banker and we sent you over to Paris [France] and we let you do that.  And now you're out in San Francisco [California], plying a different craft, and we let you do that.  And it sounds to me like what you're saying now is you wanna go play in a pile of shit."  He said, "Well we got some of those around the farm too." (Laughter) That's exactly his words.  "So if that's the type of challenge you're looking for, hey, give us a chance."  And what I recognized by the end of the day was that I had unfinished business.  I recognized that given the many years that I had worked in Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], given the, the premise that I had discussed with George Vojda back in 1975 that led to this what I'd call extended educational developmental program that I really wasn't complete with that.  And that I still yearned for that opportunity to run a slice of the organization in a full profit center sense.  And I yearned basically to have that stamp that said to me and that said to anyone else, here is the validation that says for those years that Christophe worked in this organization, he really did achieve.  And I decided that I would have to go back on the commitment I had made to leave.  I just decided that I could not do that in peace.  But I also decided something else.  First of all, Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] my dear friend who was practicing on his own nickel again and I had worked with him over the years in helping to build his law firm.  And whenever I got into a bit of a challenge with something legal, Reg was there to, you know, assist me.  And Reg had to, had to negotiate me out of the agreement that I had signed to join the Redwood bank [Redwood Credit Union, San Francisco, California] and so forth.
Speaker 2: So you had actually signed an agreement.
Speaker 1: I had actually signed an agreement, and Reg, you know, negotiated that, got me out of that.  And but the--that experience influenced greatly how I approached my ultimate departure from Citibank five years later.
Story_ID: 508926
Speaker 1: So ultimately you said that decision or what had happened would help you five years down the road when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, in formulating my--what ultimately became my exit from, from Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  Because I didn't wanna repeat of that experience.  In any event--
Speaker 1: Before you left.
Speaker 2: Before I left.  The bank did not immediately commit to me if I reversed course.  They did not immediately commit as to what the next step would be.  But they said something would be in the offing, and fairly soon.  Took about two months.  And then I was offered the opportunity to move to Kingston, Jamaica as country head.  And that was another very formative experience.  First of all, I was very excited about going because country management were some of the best jobs in the bank.  Because as I was fond of saying and was actually very factual, the only person in the United States in Citibank that had the same composite level of responsibility that I had in my small empire in Jamaica was Walt Wriston [Walter B. Wriston].  Because everything was functionalized within the United States, which was one of the reasons I had grown tired of, of working there.  The way Larry Small [Lawrence M. Small] ran North America is, was that everything was matrixed.  So that the office head in San Francisco [California] ultimately didn't even have responsibility for the staff out there, nor for even his own secretary.  There rather was an operating division and Larry had an operating chart that ultimately only came together in his office.  And I just, I--I was chafing under that.  I was in Jamaica as country head during the height of the Third World debt crisis.  And I had responsibility for all of our lending, of our treasury, all of our employment policies, all of our government relations, I was it.  All roads led to my office.  And when Eddie Seaga [Edward Seaga] who was prime minister, made certain assaults on the bank, particularly in order to try to garner foreign currency from my reserve position, I was the person that had to deal with the prime minister on that.  I was the person that was a consultant to Horace Barber who was the governor of the central bank of Jamaica [Bank of Jamaica] and talking him about actions that we needed to be taking as a nation with respect to developing a working foreign exchange system.  Or steps that we needed to take in order to put the banking industry on sound footing.  It was very exciting. And I restructured Citibank's presence there.  And it worked, it worked very well.  Again, I had to navigate some pretty tricky straits in order to do it, both within Citibank, as well as vis-a-vis the Jamaican government because I reduced our staff size by a third.  And got out of certain lines of business of the government had theretofore ordained that all banks had to participate in.  But I outlined a thesis for not doing that and ultimately had to explain to the foreign, to the prime minister about what we were seeking to do and to get his nod in, in order to do it.
Story_ID: 508927
Speaker 1: And that worked sufficiently well that two years later, now 1985, I was asked to take on a, a larger Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] country organization in a more complex piece of geography, and that was in Bogota [Colombia], out of Colombia where we had a fairly broad spread banking network.  And there I was, I had the dual role of--I was Citibank's head person in country, but we had a majority, we had a minority ownership, 49 percent position in Banco International Colombia [Banco Internacional De Colombia].  And I was president of that.  So I had, you know, seven hundred people on the ground.  I knew I was a kidnapping target.  The guerillas were very active.  You know, the Christophe family adjusted, just as we adjusted when we, when we lived in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Where did the children go to school during that time?
Speaker 1: Kimberly [Kimberly Christophe] was born in Jamaica.  She was two year--two months old when we moved to Colombia.  Her second year there she went to a little nursery school.  Jean-Paul [Jean-Paul Christophe] on the other hand, was--let's see when we moved there, '85 [1985], Jean-Paul was three.  We, we threw him into an all-Spanish speaking school, little nursery school.  And within six months, there were Colombians that felt he was Colombian.  He was that fluent in, in Spanish that quickly.  But, yeah we had a nice, we had a nice life there.  It was different.
Story_ID: 508928
Speaker 1: And then how did you actually leave Citibank [Citibank, N.A.]?  The five years passed and it's now time to leave and you don't want to repeat what you did before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am--we moved to Colombia in April of '85 [1985].  In, in 19--Christmas of '85 [1985], I told Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] that this was my last job with the bank.  And she said, "Well it's about time, but why?"  I said, "I'm fulfilled."  I said, "I now have done everything within this bank that I wanted to do.  No one's ever told me that I couldn't go higher, but as I look at my boss's job and my boss's boss's job, I think I have a better job than each of those."  And by then I had had substantive country management experience.  I had become what was called the senior credit officer, which was kind of one of those stamps that says you've reached a level with respect to the credit discipline that says you're one of our top guys.  And I said, "When you start thinking that way, it's time to go."  She said, "When?"  Well I was working then on restructuring the largest private sector bank in Colombia.  Not our bank, but Colombia Bank [Banco Internacional De Columbia Colombia], that we were the principal global creditor to.  And Banco De Bogota had fallen on the wrong side of the dollar, and was in duress.  And there was a syndicate of--an unstructured syndicate of some forty international banks that had all different types of credit facilities to Banco De Bogota and we were trying to figure out a way to save it.  And I was the--as, as Citibank's primary guy in Colombia and the largest creditor, I was the point person on developing the, the restructure plan.  In 1986, notwithstanding the fact that I had a wife and two little kids [Kimberly Christophe and Jean-Paul Christophe] and a broad set of responsibilities for Citibank in Colombia, when we prepared my tax return, I had spent 105 days outside of Colombia traipsing around the globe meeting with French banks, with German banks, UK [United Kingdom] based banks, Canadian banks, all in trying to come up with a rescue plan for Bon Canta Bogota.  So relating that back to my decision, I told Cheryl that I wanted as my wrap up with Citibank, to successfully complete the restructure of the Bon Canta Bogota.  And I didn't feel I could do that as a lame duck because it was just too, it was too much effort, too much finesse, too much organizational politic and so forth, involved in trying to get all of these international banks into common harness.  And if, if, if those guys had known that I was on my way out of Citibank, I don't think they would have listened to me.  So I said you know when I complete this, and I don't know how long it's gonna take to complete this.  I said when I complete this, that's when I'm leaving.  And it must have been about March 20th or something of that nature, 1987, I signed the restructure agreement in the offices of Shearman and Sterling [Shearman and Sterling LLP], the brank- the bank's principal attorneys there on, on Lexington Avenue, right across the street from head office.
Story_ID: 508929
Speaker 1: And then I walked across the street and sent a pre-prepared email.  Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] had email in those days, even before, you know, the Net [Internet] existed as it does now.  We had an internal email.  And I had already prepared an email and left it in its draft form, to my boss, Antonia Shusta.  I knew that Antonia was in the Dominican Republic, that she the next was going to be--because I talked to her secretary, she was gonna be transiting back through Miami International [Miami International Airport, Miami, Florida] en route, up to Fort Lauderdale [Florida] for a three day conference.  And so I signed that restructure agreement and I walked across the street, entered my code, pulled that email out of draft and I sent to Antonia for her to get in, in the Dominican Republic.  And the email said I know that you will be arriving flight whatever, Eastern Air Lines at Miami International tomorrow at three P.M.  I will be there to meet you.  I must see you.  And then I get these urgent telephone calls later in the day with Antonia's assistant chasing me down.  Antonia had gotten in contact with her.  And she said, "Antonia said she can't meet with you, you'll have to meet another time."  And I said, "Tell Antonia I will be there, and I must meet with her."  So I flew down the next day, pre-positioned myself at Miami International waiting for Antonia to clear customs.  And she looked at me and she said, "Okay, Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe] you insisted we meet.  What's up?"  I said, "I'm leaving."  She said, "Let's go have a drink."  And we sat down and we talked for two, two hours.  And her first question was, "Who attracted you away?"  And I said, "No one.  I'm not leaving for any negative reasons.  I'm actually leaving for a happy set of reasons."  I said, "I've had a wonderful twenty years around this institution and no one's ever told me I couldn't go further."  I said, "But I'm complete."  And I said, and these were my very words, "As I move into the second semester of my professional career, I wanna take all of these experiences and I wanna apply them to something entrepreneurial.  And if I'm half as good as I think I am, if I'm half as good as I believe I have been prepared to be, I want the psychic fruits of doing that and the accompanying economic reward."  So she said, "Let me make sure that I understand this.  You're telling me that you don't have a job, and you're just leaving cold turkey?"  I said, "That's exactly what I'm saying.  I intend to go back to the United States, take what little capital I have," and it was very little because you didn't make money in banking in those days.  And I said, "I'm gonna look to acquire a small platform."  And I was looking at, you know, kind of as a model, what Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] had already done and I had helped him do that.  He by then had acquired the McCall Pattern Company [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.], owned it at that point.  And I had these aspirations of, you know, I can do something somewhat similar.  And so Antonia's remark was, "Well if you don't know what you're going to do, I know you and I know your work ethic.  Why don't you stay here and keep doing what you're doing in Colombia until you figure out what that next step is?  And I know your work ethic, and you'll continue to do that, and I'm okay with that."  And I said, "I appreciate that vote of confidence.  I said can't.  As long as I'm around the farm, I'm gonna give it 150 percent of my effort."  I said I just--I couldn't stomach being in a position where anybody would look at me and say what's happening to Christophe?  He used to hit on all eight cylinders.  Some reason he's only hitting on six or seven now.  I said it just won't work for me.  And what she later said to me as I was leaving, she said, "You may wonder why no one called you.  You may wonder why John Reed [John S. Reed] who was then the chairman, or some of the other seniors didn't call.  I'll tell you why.  It's because I told them it'd be an absolute waste of time."  She said, "When you told me that you weren't leaving to join anyone else and you shared with me the reasons that you were leaving, I told them it was pointless."  And she said, "And they respected that."
Story_ID: 508930
Speaker 1: So now the, the, the experience of 1982 and my aborted attempt to leave Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] then, influenced mightily how I proceeded in 1987.  When I told Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] of my decision, he was shocked, absolutely shocked.  Shocked less by the decision, but by the fact I hadn't told him because we had shared everything over the period 1971 'til then, 1987.  We shared tears, we shared joys of accomplishment.  I worked with--in helping him build his, his legal practice.  I assisted him when he was trying to buy his first company.  I assisted him when he was buying or seeking to acquire the McCall Pattern Company [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.].  I was his consultant when he was having problems with banks, whether I was in Jamaica or whether I was in France, I was always on the phone with him, telling him what I thought and I was helping him understanding financials.  I was helping him deal with personalities.  Because Reg, Reg was always at the cutting edge and pushing so hard that he invariably ran into challenges with respect to personality clashes with people and so I was, I was always there to either run interference for him, to talk, make that telephone call, try to explain his thinking, try to explain the stress and strain he was under.  I mean we were there for each other.  But I did not call him before actually resigning from Citibank.
Story_ID: 508931
Speaker 1: Going back to December of 1985 when I told Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] that this was gonna be my last position in the bank, her first question was, "Have you talked to Reg [Reginald F. Lewis]?"  And I said, "No."  She was surprised.  And she said, "Why not?"  I said, "Because I learned from 1982 that I wanna keep my own counsel.  The only person that I'm indicating of my plan to leave, is you.  And I intend to keep it that way to protect me from me." I.e., if for whatever reason I reverse course, I don't want the psychological baggage of having to explain it to anyone, including Reg Lewis.  The most painful part of stepping away from that 1982 decision was kind of the people peripherally, including Reg who had gotten involved, and in some way you know, feeling psychologically I had to explain both my decision and my decision to reverse paths.  And, you know, try to learn.  So that, I mean I stuck to those disciplines.  So Reg and I over the years, I mean we were best, truly best of friends.  We had always talked about the possibility some day of, of doing something together.  And so Reg's shock was first of all that I was leaving, secondly and even more so that I hadn't shared it with him.  And then thirdly, that I was thinking in terms of doing something in an area that he already had a platform and, and we weren't talking about doing it together.
Speaker 2: And how did you, how do you explain that?  How did you explain that?
Speaker 1: Well I had lived with Reg Lewis for a long time by then.  And as I said, Reg was a driven man.  And he invariably could find himself at counterpoint with people around him, or people even that worked for him.  And I knew that there was the possibility in the aftermath of my decision, that, that Reg and I would come together.  I knew that.  But I didn't want--again, you know, to thine own self be true.  I didn't want my decision to leave Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] to in any way be colored by perhaps joining forces with Reg Lewis.  And my reasoning was very simple, and I told Cheryl this.  If Reg and I ever do something together and it doesn't work out, I don't wanna look over my shoulder and in any way feel that my decision to leave Citibank was associated with the prospect of doing something with Reg.  I wanted de-linkage.
Story_ID: 508932
Speaker 1: As I said, I, I, I have always felt blessed by having a, I think a pretty good set of navigational tools.  And that was again another one of those situations.  Because that's exactly what happened.  Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] had me fly up from Bogota [Colombia] a couple of times.  He wanted to sit and talk to me about joining him.  We spent inordinate number of hours at the Harvard Club [Harvard Club of New York City, New York, New York] consuming entirely too much wine to the wee hours of the morning talking about these things.  And, and so finally he said, "Look, I know you, I trust you.  You have a superior set of financial skills.  You have done all of these things."  He said, "I've got the legal side.  I don't have anybody in this business really with me.  I have the platform now of the McCall Pattern Company [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.].  I see tremendous opportunity to do more.  When I think about what the two of us could do together, I think it's a (unclear)."  And he said, "I want you in as my partner."
Story_ID: 508933
Speaker 1: By then I had moved my family.  We moved cold turkey, no job, to Stamford, Connecticut.  I had not joined Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] and my thought was when I, when, when the moment of truth came of actually moving to leave Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], I turned to Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] and I said, "Where do you wanna live?"  I said, "We don't have any ties to any particular geography."  We had sold the first home that we'd ever owned and that had been, you know, out in the San Francisco [California] area.  We'd sold that.  And I said I just--my requirements are that we either be near a major business center, or I could consider a university setting provided that that university has a reasonable business school that I could figure out a way to get access to for purposes of doing research.  Because everything that I'd ever done was research based in seeking opportunity.  And I figured I needed access to, to the, the tools that would allow me to do that.  And Cheryl said, "Well how about Connecticut?"  And I said, "Well, why Connecticut?"  We never lived here.  And she said, 'Well you know when we lived in Riverdale [Bronx, New York], we had some friends that were in Connecticut, and it always seemed like a nice place."  And I said, "Well, okay."  Two weeks later we hopped on an airplane, dropped the kids off in North Carolina with our parents, we flew to Connecticut, to LaGuardia [LaGuardia Airport, New York, New York].  Stayed with some friends over in Darien [Connecticut].  The guy I used to--Tom Newnan [sic. Thomas Newman] who had been my country head when I was in France by then was working back in New York [New York] for Citibank, so he was living in Darien.  And over the course of a week, we looked at about thirty houses.  Came dangerously close to buying one in, in Greenwich [Connecticut], decided not to.  Decided Greenwich wasn't the community in which we wanted to raise our kids.  A friend of mine, [HistoryMaker] Frank Savage, who then was--see where was Frank then?  Frank was a senior executive at the Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company].  He and I had worked together at Citibank in the early days.  And Frank was living in Stamford and learned that I was back and he said, "No, you guys belong in Stamford."  And so we started looking at houses in Stamford.  Found one about two miles from here.  Bid on it, negotiated it, got back on the plane, picked up the kids, and had attorney close with power of attorney.  And a month and a half later, we moved lock, stock and barrel to Stamford, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 508934
Speaker 1: The following day I went back into the city to meet with Reg [Reginald F. Lewis], and we're now into the very early part of June of 1987, and on June 15, 1987 I joined Reg at 99 Wall Street [New York, New York].  Three days later, he walked into--I could, I could dignify what was my office by calling it an office, but really it was the mail room where I had a card table as a desk.  And Reg walked in and tossed over a sheaf of papers that was a Xerox copy of the divestiture memorandum for Beatrice International [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods].  And he said, "I'm not supposed to have this, but I do.  You know, why don't you take a look at it," and he said, "it's probably not gonna make any sense.  But I'd like your thoughts on it."  Took it home, caught the train, subway first to Grand Central [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York], then all the way up here and then drove to my home.  And I stayed up all night.  I looked at it and read it and then I pulled out my computer, I was one of the few guys that had computers then.  And I modeled the whole thing out.  And the following day I went in and I said, "This makes a lot of sense."  And the price is $950 million.  And three days later we bid $950 million for Beatrice International Foods.
Speaker 2: How does it work?  Where do you get $950 million?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We were asked that question.  We were asked that question.  Reg and I ran--we ran a process that I even marvel at to this day.  And I can't do justice to it, not in a single seating.  But if you look at Reg's biography--'Why Should White Guys Have All The Fun?' ['Why Should White Guys Have All The Fun?' How Reginald Lewis Created a Billion-Dollar Business Empire' Reginald F. Lewis and Blair S. Walker] It is very well chronicled in there, very well chronicled.  There were some pivotal moments.  Three days after we bid $950 million, Reg was on an airplane heading out to Beverly Hills [California] to meet with Mike Milken [Michael Milken] and I get the call from--what was Gordon's [Gordon W. Lawson] last name?  Can't remember right now, a young guy over at Salomon Brothers.  And he said, "Is this Cleve Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe]?"  I said, "Yes."  He introduced himself and he said, "I'm, I'm with Solomon Brothers and I'm working on the divestiture, the sale of Beatrice International."  I said, "Okay."  He said, "We have a, a letter proposing to compete in the auction for this property, a letter from you for $950 million."  I said, "Yes."  He said, "We have a slight problem."  I said, "What's that?"  He said, "Nobody knows who the hell you guys are."  And I said, "Well I guess we have to do something about that."  And we sat down and started talking about it.  The following day called back and he said, "Apologize, I thought we had a good and constructive meeting yesterday, but there are two investment banks that are involved in this sale process.  The other one is Morgan Stanley, and you're gonna have to sit and have a similar conversation with them."  And that was kind of the beginning of it all.  There was credibility at least at the surface level because of Reg's success in acquiring McCall [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.].  And fortunately The New York Times had just the prior week written a major article about Reg and what appeared to be the success of, of the McCall acquisition.  And as far as we were concerned, that was just currency because we played it up big time.  And, and you know and then, and then Reg had worked over the years to kind of cultivate this relationship with people out in Beverly Hills at, at Drexel [Drexel Burnham Lambert], and ultimately a relationship with Michael.  And we traded on that.
Story_ID: 508935
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm now old enough that I pretty much say what's on my mind (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we're talking about, we were talking about I knew someone who worked with him, all the other stuff he'd done.  You were telling me what he was trying to do.  He was setting out to start--
Speaker 1: Reg [Reginald F. Lewis], Reg is--when Reg left Paul Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP], he combined forces with I believe there were three other African Americans in--put their offices on Wall Street [New York, New York] and the idea was to build a black major corporate law firm.  The initial name of the organization was Wallace, Murphy, Thorpe and Lewis.  And Reg was the last person to come into that, that group.  And I would say within two years, the group had pretty much come apart at least as it was originally configured.  And it became Reg's law firm.  And the basic reason was as Reg would explain it to me, and I knew for a fact he was an absolutely driven animal, just as I was doing what I was doing.  And Reg figured that everybody else should work as hard and everyone else should ring the cash register as he would put it, the same way he was ringing it.  And if you wanna see or want to experience what can break up more partnerships, whether it's investment banking or whether it's law or for that matter either, even medicine, is you get desperate levels of contribution, particularly in an economic sense.  But in a partnering sense, some holding the view that the spoils should be divided equally.  Eventually that doesn't work.  And I think that, that was, that was the undoing of, of Reg's initial partnership and you know for--I have experience over the course of my career as, as well.  But Reg tried and tried.  And he was, he was always having difficulty in his mind finding the right people and then retaining those individuals.
Story_ID: 508936
Speaker 1: In 1980, when I moved to San Francisco [California], I'd only been there a short period of time when Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] called and said, "I'm going to be out in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] for a conference tomorrow, let's have dinner," you know, just as we always did.  And over dinner Reg shared with me that he had decided he was gonna look to buy a business.  Now that was a shock.  I said, "What?  Why?"  He said, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], in part with your help over the last number of years, I have been working with venture capitalist, primarily the MESBICs [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company]."  I had introduced him to the people over at Equico Capital [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.], which was the Equitables [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company].  He had built a relationship with the general foods MESBICs and a number of the others in the New York City [New York, New York] area.  And had moved on to become the general counsel to what was then called AAMESBIC, the American Association of Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Companies out of Washington, DC.
Speaker 2: Say that again.
Speaker 1: AAMESBIC was the abbreviation, A-A-M-E-S-B-I-C, the American Association of MESBICs.  And then it eventually became the, the name was changed back in the 90--in the late '80s [1980s].  So the name that it has today--
Speaker 2: Which is the Minority--
Speaker 1: Which is NAIC, National Association of Investment Companies.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So Reg had said, "I have been over the last decade or so, either at the side of the venture capitalists, financing all of these little businesses, or I have worked for some of the entrepreneurs assisting them in either acquiring the businesses or financing the businesses."  And he said, "Candidly, I'm at a stage now where I think I can do it better than either the entrepreneurs if I were to be an entrepreneur, or then the venture capitalists in financing them."  And he said, "Plus, you know how hard I work."  And he said, "One thing I know about what I'm doing now is my opportunity is only as good as my health.  Because if for whatever reason I can no longer work, I no longer have an income."  And he said, "So I've come to the strategic view I wanna do something that makes money for me while I sleep."  And I said, "Okay."  The following months he called and he said, "I have my eye on a property which is in the lawn products, lawn furniture arena.  And I'm working towards acquiring it.  Would you help me?"  And so I did.  And that went around and around and around for I would say six to eight months he worked on that.  And then the seller got seller's remorse and at the last minute decided not to, not to sell.  And as Reg later said, he almost had a nervous breakdown.  I mean he invested so much into that, and he was so close.  But he regrouped.  I believe it was in the aftermath of that that he was just determined he was gonna buy something and I think that's when he bought the Virgin Island radio station and that was a disaster.  He didn't talk about that too much.
Story_ID: 508937
Speaker 1: Then it was in 1983 shortly after I moved to Jamaica that I got the telephone call.  And he said, "I've identified this little property in Norton Simon [Norton Simon, Inc.]."  He was always impressed with Dave Mahoney [David Mahoney], who was the, the chairman of the Norton Simon.  See at Paul Weiss [Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton and Garrison LLP] Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] had had an opportunity to work on corporate deals.  And he became absolutely enamored of people like Steve Ross [Steven J. Ross] and Dave Mahoney.  Dave Mahoney was Norton Simon, and Steve Ross was, was Warner, what became Warner Communications [Warner Communications, Inc.].  And, and Reg was a student of this stuff and he was always going through prospectuses and reading the fine print to kind of figure out how these guys, you know, were wheeling and dealing and doing the things that they were doing.  And so now it is 1983 and he identifies that Norton Simon is being acquired by Esmark [Esmark, Inc.] and as he put it to me, "There's a little jewel of a company that I don't think makes any strategic sense for them, but I think I could do something with it if I could convince them to sell it."  And that was the McCall Pattern Company [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.].  And you know it was a long shot and it took better part of a year to do it, but he succeeded in convincing them A, to sell.  And B, in keeping the deal together against all of the trials that it went through, including when he, when he got at loggerheads with the Chemical Bank [New York, New York] that was providing the financing.  And Chemical was about to back out of the deal, you know Reg once again called and said, "You understand these bankers and so forth.  Would you talk to them and find out what their, you know, are they just giving me the runaround because I'm black or, or you know is there something else I need to know?  You talk their language," and you know, I mean that--I did a lot of that for Reg (laughter) over the, over the years.
Story_ID: 508938
Speaker 1: Why is it that you knew even before the deal had closed with Beatrice Foods [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] that you would not continue your relationship with him?  Business relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Actually it was both.  I loved the man Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis].  I cherished the friendship that we had.  I think our friendship was as strong as it was because we were equals with profound mutual respect for one another.  Didn't always agree, but we had that.  Once I joined Reg as his partner, that changed.  And I can only say that--this is my own view based upon my experiences with Reg even over the fifteen years before I joined him, what I saw of Reg during the period we were together, which was less than a year, and what I saw of Reg even afterwards.  Reg was one of those individuals who just genetically does not work well in a partnership.  Somebody's got to be dominant, okay.  It just--and that's not a criticism, it just is what it is.  And I was not going to be dominated.  And therein again, going back to my survival skills or my navigational tools, I again reference the point as to why I didn't tell Reg about my decision to leave Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] is because I knew that if Reg and I joined forces, that there was the possibility that it wouldn't work.  And I wanted the psychological freedom to tell him to take a flying leap.  And that's exactly what I did.
Story_ID: 508939
Speaker 1: In any event coming back to the story, the Beatrice International [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] deal was all consuming, all consuming.  There were really two of us, yes there were other people in the office, but it was Reg Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] and it was Cleve Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe].  And I put together the financing over at Manufacturers Hanover [Manufacturers Hanover Corporation], $450 million.  I had done all of the modeling.  Drexel [Drexel Burnham Lambert] relied upon the models that I was running.  I did a lot of the interviewing.  I mean Reg and I were just all over the place.  But Reg needed his presence to be there even when he wasn't physically there.  And it was conversations like, "All right, when you go into this meeting, make sure you say that Reg said X, Y and Z."  "Did you use my name?"  "Do they understand who's in charge?"  And that started to wear a little thin, particularly when you're sleep deprived, as I was frequently sleep deprived during that, during that whole period.  And we reached a point in October, we had already been the anointed.  We were desperately trying to pull together what was going to be a billion dollars to finance this record shattering deal.  And the markets were crashing around us, this was the crash of 1987.  Ours was one of the few deals that survived out of that crash.  And time was not our ally in making this happen because we had already picked up on the view that KKR [Kohlberg Kravis Roberts and Co.] who really was the seller, had perhaps gotten what they perceived to be a better deal from someone else and was just waiting for us to hit a trip wire in terms of having run out of time so that they could move onto the other party.  So we were pressing real hard against a, a timeline for getting what we called our book out in order to have Drexel hit the street in selling the bonds that we were using as part of the financing.  And you know Reg--don't know what happened, but I didn't see him for several days.  And I was moving to get that book out and I went for probably forty-eight hours without sleep.  And Drexel called, it was about one in the morning, and said, "Here are the last two questions we have to have answers to, to go to print."  And I gave them the answers.  And they marched off to the legal printer to get the, the book ready.  And I went to sleep.
Story_ID: 508940
Speaker 1: I'd been asleep for about two hours when the phone rang. It was Reg [Reginald F. Lewis], three o'clock you know in the morning.  And he was ranting and raving.  "Who the hell do you think you are?" (Laughter) I told him in no uncertain terms.  I was the same crazy son of a bitch yelling at him that was yelling at me.  And he didn't take too kindly to that.  And I didn't care.  I knew he was under tremendous stress, so was I.  I slept for several hours, never forget this, I awakened and I went into my downstairs bathroom and there was a mirror when I walked through the door and I looked at that mirror and I said, "This will never work."  I can't look at myself in the mirror and I certainly can't look at my wife [Cheryl Christophe] and two little kids [Jean-Paul Christophe and Kimberly Christophe] if economic gain is going to push me to compromising my principles and my self-respect.  There is not enough money in the world to do that, that was the first decision I made.  Second decision was I knew that we were making history and I was I think both brash enough on the one hand, and realistic enough on the other to believe that if I pulled out, that deal was not going to happen.  It's not that I was everything to the deal, but I was too fully integrated into too many pieces, and it really was about the two of us trying to make all of this happen.  And I knew that in, in at least certain corridors I had developed better relationships and was respected for certain of the things that I did in the areas that Reg was not perceived to have strength in.  Which again, is not taking anything away from him.  So the commitment I made to myself was I'm gonna see this through, but on the other side of it, I'm outta here.  And, and that's what I did.  We closed the deal on November the 30th, 1987.  I signed my name about two thousand times.  Got a volume of books around here, some nine deep, representing all of the legal documents associated with this world breaking deal.  And again, there was a whole lot of drama each step along the way, in keeping the deal together, in getting Michael Milken to the finish line, in keeping the banks in place, in breaking through the log jammed that had developed over in France that was just about to blow the deal up.  It was just so many episodes and two black guys got it done.  And it was, it was--I mean I still have such vivid memories of, of what that was all about.  I, I was kind of reminded of that in the conversation I had--what's her name again?
Speaker 2: Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson].
Speaker 1: Julieanna, with Julieanna earlier today.  We were chatting and I said, "So how many of these are you going to do?"  And she said, "My aspiration is to do five thousand and we're at fourteen hundred now." And she was telling me all that was going into that.  And, and as we were talking about the Beatrice International [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] deal, I was reminded of, of that.  You're in it now, you just keep running, put your head down and keep moving. (Laughter) You can't look back.
Story_ID: 508941
Speaker 1: So how do you pick up the pieces and move on?  How do you decide okay now I want to do for myself what we have done jointly as a team?
Speaker 2: In January the deal is now closed.  We are in process of putting in place the systems by which we're gonna manage this behemoth that has been acquired.  I go into Reg's [Reginald F. Lewis] office and I say, said to him, "It's time for me to move on."  He did not of course believe that.  And we chatted about it.  And I said, "Look, you and I have had our ups and downs.  This is at the end of it all, your organization.  You know this isn't a partnership.  And it's not what I signed on for.  And I'm not suited to working in this context."  Well Reg's rejoinder was, "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], we have just set history.  You have known me for fifteen years.  I have assisted you, you have assisted me.  We've always had these dreams of what we would do together.  How many a bottle of champagne, how many a bottle of fine wine have you introduced me to over all of these years?"  And he said, "You know what my strengths and my weaknesses are."  He said, "I recognize them and I want to be different, and I need your help in doing that.  And I trust you.  You know how difficult relationships are for me, but together we can achieve great things and give me a chance."  And I said, "Reg, old buddy, with all due respect, I think we each are who we are.  And I think the better part of valor is for us to recognize that and for me to move on."  So he continued on for about fifteen minutes with the, the rational thought process.  He then kind of moved more middle road and became a bit more fatherly.  And said, "You know, I knew in bringing you into the organization that notwithstanding your enormous promise, I knew that there was probably going to be some, some strain for you in the adjustment toward becoming an entrepreneur.  You've always been nurtured and so forth, in the womb of nature corporations.  This is different.  And what you've seen is me on the jagged edge at times, and that's part of it.  And I apologize for that, but you know there's growth for you in this process too.  And by the way, I think that if you follow through on this decision, it is the most juvenile piece of economic analysis in terms of your own economic wellbeing that I've ever seen."  So I said, "I hear that, but I'm still leaving."  Now at that point he then says, "Okay, so when?"  And the tone level changes ever so slightly.  And I said, "Well look, we've just acquired this two and a half billion dollar company.  There is a lot of serious work to be done here.  And while I'm committed to moving on, I don't wanna do it in a disruptive way.  So perhaps you and I can discuss what makes sense in that context."  Well the expletives started then.  And in no uncertain terms he was telling me not to do him any god damn favors.  And that if I was committed to leaving, you know, leave when you wanna leave.  To which I said, "Okay, I'll be out of here in two weeks."  The following day Deidra Wilson, Reg's secretary comes over and says, "Mr. Lewis," she always called him Mr. Lewis. "Mr. Lewis would like to see you in his office."  So I went in Reg's office and he said, "You know, Tom Lamia [Thomas Lamia] is over in Alsace, in France working on this problem that we have with SES [Societe Europeene de Supermarches]," which was one of the--a shopping--supermarket chain that we owned as part of Beatrice [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] over there.  And the guy that was running that group had--we had found out had gone and made some commitments to do things that were counter to the terms of the credit agreements for the acquisition.  So Tom Lamia, a friend and an attorney, had, had gone over there to try to get to the bottom of it.  So Reg called me in and he said, "Look, Tom's over there working on this problem, but I think Tom needs help."  Now Tom is--his business was lawyer, but he's not a businessman.  "Would you mind going over to Alsace and seeing if you can get to the bottom of this working with Tom?"  And I said, "Well Reg remember I said yesterday that I'm leaving."  He said, "Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Okay, fine.  But right now would you, would you, would you mind going over?"  And I said, "Well when do you want me to go?"  He said, "Deidra's got your plane ticket.  I'd like for you to leave this evening."  So I flew to Paris [France] and ultimately over to Alsace, and I was over there two weeks.
Story_ID: 508942
Speaker 1: I came back and was in the office for several days.  Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] was all peaches and cream.  And finally at the end of that week I went back in and I said, "Reg, remember that conversation we had?"  "Yeah, yeah."  I said, "Well we need to talk about that, I'm still leaving."  He said, "Are you serious?  I thought you had forgotten about all that."  I said, "No, very serious."  And again we started. "When?"  And I said, "Well I offered the last time around to, you know, try to, you know, move in a responsible fashion and I, you know, I made that offer again."  He said, "Okay.  If you're committed to this," this is the end of January.  He said, "I'd like to set a date of April 30."  He said, "The, the--what I would ask of you is two things:  one, don't be fearful of changing your mind, as I hope you will.  And two, don't tell anybody, and most of all don't tell anybody here on the staff."  So the weeks went by and without fail, about typically once every four days or so, Reg would come by my office and say, "You free for lunch?"  And we'd go over to either Fraunces Tavern [New York, New York] or to the India House [New York, New York].  He liked to go to those places--Reg always liked going places where he was known, and he worked assiduously to build relationships, or at the Harvard Club [Harvard Club of New York City, New York, New York].  So he would either ask me to have lunch and they were invariably very long lunches, or he would ask, "So you're taking the train home this evening?"  I said, "Yeah, I'm taking the train home."  And he said, "Well why don't--," he had a chauffeur and car at that point and he said, "Why don't we ride uptown together, let's stop by the Harvard Club, let's have dinner, let's have drinks," and, you know again we'd be together.  These sessions would go on five, six, seven hours.  Even our lunches would typically be three or four hours.  And, and we would reminisce about, you know, things that we had done together over the years, how much money there was to be made in Beatrice International [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods], and what the future could look like.  And invariably Reg would then turn to you know, "Aren't you thinking about changing your mind?"  And he would test that about every, every four days or so.  And then finally was the last week of April, '87 [1987], it was a Thursday and Reg came into the office and he said he had, he had purchased, I think it was called Broadmoor [ph.] at that point.  This was the estate out on, on, on--in the Hamptons [New York].  And he was having it redone before moving into it.  He said, "You know you've not seen Broadmoor.  Why don't you fly out there with me tomorrow," and he said, "I'm taking a helicopter from right here."  You could still take helicopters off the foot of the island.  And he said, "I'm gonna go out because I'm meeting the, the tennis court contractor, and it would give you an opportunity to, to see the, to see the property," he said, "I think you'd like it."  And I said, "Reg tomorrow?" I said, "I can't."  He said, "Well why?"  I said, "Tomorrow's my last day, I have to finish packing."  And he looked at me and said, "You, you, you got to be kidding me.  You can't be real."  I said, "Yeah, it's the end of April."  Well in the, in the three months up to that point while Reg had asked me not to tell anyone, he had started dropping clues to other people there in the office who then came back to me and would say Reg would make statements like, "Well you know Christophe's [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe] ambitious" and, "You know, I just can't help but think that he might be thinking about doing his own thing." (Laughter) And it was as if he was laying, laying the foundation for--
Speaker 2: His leaving.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 508943
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're in the office, he says, "You can't be leaving."  You says, "I'm leaving."
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And he then said, "Well, okay.  Why don't I give you a ride up to Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York] whenever you're ready to leave this evening and I won't see you tomorrow." I said, "Fine."  So he and I were in the back of his car and we are proceeding along the East River Drive [FDR Drive].  And Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] starts again.  "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], I just can't believe you're doing this.  You know we have such potential, and I'm," he said, "I'm," he said, "haven't you noticed I'm changing?"  And I said, "Reg, you know, it's a little late now."  And he then, true to form, start switching.  And he said, "Dammit," he said, "I'm embarrassed for you.  This is the worst piece of economic analysis and it is economic suicide as far as I'm concerned."  And then this--his demeanor totally hardened and he looked across the backseat of the car at me and he said, "Do you know what I really think?  Do you really know what I really think, son?"  And I looked back across at him and I said, "Reg, I don't give a fuck what you think."  And he looked and he turned, (laughter) faced out of the window and I saw his face kind of melt.  And he turned back and looked at me and this big smile came across his face.  And he stuck his hand across like this (gesture) and he said, "You don't give a fuck what I think."  He said, "Boy, you got the makings of an entrepreneur yet."  And, and we shook hands and I got to Grand Central and, and got out of the, of the car.  It would have been the end of April 1987.  And the next time I laid eyes on Reg Lewis, I was looking at him in his casket at the funeral down in Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 508944
Speaker 1: You never spoke again after that?
Speaker 2: We did.  When I left Reg [Reginald F. Lewis], I moved my office into my home and went back to the original strategy that I had had of seeking to find some platform, business platform to, to build.  And again, I had a little bit more money than when I left the bank [Citibank, N.A.] but, but not a lot more because I left you know, candidly I left millions of dollars on the table when I left Reg.  But I was not going to be beholden to him or to the climate of the enterprise for economic gain.  And so I started looking at various possibilities, working from home.  And I had been at it for about nine or ten months when out of the clear blue the phone rang and it was Deidra Wilson again, his secretary.  "Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], this is Deidra."  "Hi, how are you?"  "I'm fine.  Mr. Lewis would like to speak with you."  And Reg came on the phone and it was amazing.  He, he said, "I just wanna give you an update on how things are going."  And he started talking about the business and you know, what's happening here and what's happening there.  And it was as if from his perspective, the last time I had had a talk with him had been the prior day.  As if I was still there.  And we talked for probably about fifteen minutes.  And I suspected it was probably a challenge for him because I was pretty, pretty short in terms of my comments.  They were: "Hm." "Okay." "Yes." "No."  I was not inquiring.  And as you know, typically is the case when two people are having a conversation and only one of them is communicating, the, the initiator finally gets the message that A, this is a conversation that the other party would just as soon not have.  And B, it's gone be very difficult to keep this one going because only one person's talking.  So finally he said, "Well I guess I gotta go now."  And you know, "I'll talk to you."  So I still had, you know, some friends that were still working there with Reg and a couple days later I got a call from one of them.  And I got the word that Reg said, "I talked to Christophe the other day.  He was pretty cool. (Laughter) Didn't have much to say."  And then I got a call that said, "You know when Reg called you the other day, I think what he was doing was trying to feel you out to see whether or not he could get you to come back because there'd been a couple of things that have happened recently and Reg had made the observation we ought to have Christophe here to work on this stuff."  You know, another couple months go by, Deidra calls again, and again it's Reg.  Conversation was a little longer.  I had probably said a little bit more.
Story_ID: 508945
Speaker 1: In the meantime I had shifted gears and had made the decision, or created the opportunity to go inside Equico Capital [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.] owned by The Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company].  And there was real irony there because harkening back to my Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] days, Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] had tried to buy Equico from The Equitable and Reg had called me.  This is when I was in, in, yeah this was when I was in Bogota [Colombia].  Reg had said, "You know we've always talked about working together.  I think I've figured out a way where we can work together where you kind of have your own space."  And he said, "I think I have this opportunity to acquire Equico, these guys never knew how to run it," and so forth and he said, "you know, I'm in negotiations and, and this would be ideal for you to run and you've got the type of background and so forth for that."  So fast forwarding again to my decision in--this is now 1990, to join Equico.  I know that in Reg's mind, he never mentioned to me, never even really acknowledged that I had joined Equico.  But I know in his mind was, "Boy, what a step down.  Here you were with me and we were gonna buy this company together.  And then here you are with me and we buy a billion dollar enterprise.  And now you're going to work as a vice president for this company and you're not even running it.  And at least with me you would have been running it.  You know, boy you must have fallen on hard times."  I could hear that tape playing in his, in his head.  But coming back to the, the relationship that never really rekindled.  We reached the point where--and this was after I joined Equico, Reg would call me probably about every other week, and because I was now back down in Manhattan [New York, New York] and Reg had moved his offices to Midtown Manhattan [New York, New York], we were only about three blocks apart.  But in the conversations, A I became more responsive.  B, as he talked about the business, I'd give him some of my thoughts.  I would ask questions.  And, and even called me once and said, "You know your name came up in conversation.  I was having lunch with I think it was Jimmy Robinson [James D. Robinson III]," who was then the chairman of American Express [American Express Company].  "And Robinson had asked did I know anybody that we might wanna consider for the treasurer's position."  And he said, "I just wanna let you know that I told him there was only one person that I could think of and that was Cleve Christophe [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe]."  He said, "I don't know whether you remotely have any interest or not, but I just wanna let you know that I said this and that B, you may be getting a telephone call."  And indeed I did get a telephone call, and I ended up talking to them.  This was while I was with Equico.  But we never talked about getting together, notwithstanding the fact we were just a few blocks apart.  And, and then I remember an event where Reg was speaking that I chose not to go to.  But I remember some friends of mine who were there who said you know he didn't look well.  And it was shortly after that that, that he died.
Story_ID: 508946
Speaker 1: So what had been your main objective for going to work for Equico [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: It was real simple.  I had come dangerously close to buying a controlling position in a failing bank here in Connecticut.  And Duane Hill [Duane E. Hill] was working with me as my principal financier.  And when I decided not to do that, this was the end of, toward the end of 1989, I was really running on fumes.  I'd exhausted what little capital I had.  I had already talked to Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] about the need to pull the kids out of the independent school that they were attending and to put them in public school.  We were just about out of money.  And Duane and I were on my back deck.  He lived in Stamford [Connecticut], I lived in Stamford.  And he asked me the question, "What are you gonna do next?"  And I said, "I don't know; I'm still committed to this entrepreneurial path, but I need to do it in a way that's different from what I was trying to do with these highly regulated industries."  And I then turned the table on him and said, "Well, you know, what, what are you gonna do?"  And he talked about the, the venture subsidiary that he was running.  Financing minority controlled businesses.  The evolution of opportunity that he had seen with businesses becoming more sophisticated, more upscale opportunities.  More of an opportunity to really create investment returns and wealth he felt he was starting to see.  And he said, "I've really fallen in love with this business.  And I think that I'm gonna continue doing it."  And I said, "Well if you feel that way, why don't you buy it?"  And he didn't say anything.  And two weeks later we had that same conversation again and I said, "Well Duane if you feel that way, why don't you buy it?"  And see I was thinking back to the point where Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] and I had been talking about buying it some five years, four or five years earlier.  And Duane said to me this time, he said, "Do you really think that could make any sense?"  And my comment was, was, "Duane right here the answer to that is yes, I think so."  I said, "But give me some information and I'll give you an answer that comes out of here" (gesture).  And sure enough the following week, he gave me a sack full of financial statements and reports and better part of the month and I analyzed them.  And I went back to him at the end of the month and I said, "Okay, I now have a view.  I think it makes all the sense in the world.  And here is a roadmap for going about doing it if you're serious."  And I said, "And by the way, if you're serious and you wanna a partner, I know where you can get one."  I think he was stunned that I said that.  But I felt there was opportunity there, but I also recognized my own realities, which was that I was just about out of money.  And as I said to Duane, "If you want a partner and you want me to be that partner, I'll only do it from inside of the organization because I think that it's gonna take more than the measured moment to get a transaction done with a large bureaucratic insurance company that doesn't know that it wants to be a seller.  And to get the change of control approved down in Washington [D.C.] by the Small Business Administrator [sic. Small Business Administration] who is the regulator."  Boy was that prophetic.  So I joined Duane at, at Equico around the 1st of February 1990.
Story_ID: 508947
Speaker 1: In June of 1990, Coy Eklund was moved out of the chairmanship of the Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company], and Dick Jenrette [Richard H. Jenrette] became chair.  And these were troubled times for The Equitable.  And Dick let it be known very fast that there were no sacred cows, and that it was clear that The Equitable was going to have get out of certain businesses that perhaps some of the things that had previously been considered to be crown jewels and so forth, that there was fundamental change that would have to be made in order to right the ship, which was floundering.  And the moment that announcement came out, I convened a meeting of my, my, my partners, all the employees of Equico [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.], Duane [Duane E. Hill], Larry Morse [Lawrence C. Morse] and Divakar Kamath [Divakar R. Kamath].  And I said, "Are we serious about this?"  Because my role, the understanding that we had amongst the four of us was that I, I was going to be the--I had joined them to actually put together the, the, the roadmap for acquiring control of Equico.  So I went home that evening and again it was another one of those all-nighters on my computer, created a letterhead, came up with a name and typed in a letter of offering to buy control of Equico.  And we signed it and delivered it to the Equitable the following day, literally the day after Dick Jenrette moved into the chairman's office.  Within two days we got a, a response back that said, "We're gonna take this seriously.  We're gonna give you a, a hearing to consider the merits and we'll see where it goes."  But where it went was a two year ordeal in order to get this small transaction done.  And it was truly an ordeal and there were many a time when you know, I and my colleagues became very frustrated.  There was many a time when I became very annoyed.  And I'll never forget in the early part of 1992 I said to my colleagues, "Hey guys, I think I know a little bit about the deal business, and let me tell you the conclusion I've come to.  If we're committed to gaining our independence, if we're committed to getting this deal done, all of my experience tells me that it will never happen as long as we're behaving like employees.  We have in my judgment reached the point where if we're going to succeed, we gotta burn the bridges behind us.  There is no road back.  And if we gotta play hardball within this institution in order to get this done, we gotta jump over levels of management, then so be it."  And that was I think a trying moment for some of my colleagues.
Story_ID: 508948
Speaker 1: But see again, this is the product of my experiences.  I had always been prepared to take risk, and I had certainly done that in leaving Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  And even within Citibank, there are various, there were various pivotal points in my career within Citibank where I took very, very, very risky positions, jumping over levels of management doing certain things that I thought were right.  And I had face offs with some of my bosses on some of these things.  When I was in France, I thought that something that was going on was wrong and I just--I--and Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] faulted me on some of these things.  He said, "You, you, you are, you are too principled with respect to some of the things that you do and it is not in your best interest, as your counselor," as he would say it.  But, yeah I, I--when I thought that one of my bosses in France was doing some things that were inappropriate, that were not ultimately in the best interest of the bank, I jumped over his head and his boss's head and went to the highest, one of the higher levels of management and let it be known.  And then ultimately when my boss found out about it, he couldn't believe it and after he finished screaming, he called the division head that ran all of Europe and Bob [ph.] was old school.  And when Bob called and got me on the speaker phone, you know, he had been one of my--he had been one of the real supporters of my rise, so to speak, and, and, and Bob said, "And you will never, ever do something like this again."  And I said, "Bob, I might not have the greatest respect for the guy I'm working for," who's standing right here in the room with me, my boss.  I said, "But I've always had a great deal of respect for you.  And it is in that vein that I'm gonna make the following observation:  I did what I thought was right.  I did what I felt was in the best interest of this organization.  And you need to know that under similar circumstances, I'll do the same thing again and if you have a problem with that, then why don't you just go ahead and fire me now?"  And Bob's response was, "I see you and Chuck [ph.]," that was my boss's name, "have some things that you need to talk about," and he got off the telephone.
Story_ID: 508949
Speaker 1: But I mean you know so, you know fast forwarding to what was going on with the Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company], you know in the aftermath of everything that had happened with, with Reg [Reginald F. Lewis] and with Beatrice [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] and Mike Milken [Michael Milken] and Henry Kravis, with all that I had gone through in exhausting resources attempting to buy this bank, you know, being prepared to play hardball with the Equitable in order to get the deal across the finish line was, I mean that was, that was an afterthought for me.  But for my colleagues, this was--let's just simply say their experie--
Speaker 2: New territory (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Their life had not been lived the way mine had been lived.
Speaker 2: But you acquired the company.
Speaker 1: But we did.
Speaker 2: May 19--
Speaker 1: May 19th, 1992, emancipation day as we called it.  We got it done.  We had to hock everything we had, put second mortgages on our homes.
Story_ID: 508950
Speaker 1: I found a bank, a black bank out of Boston [Massachusetts], Boston Bank of Commerce [OneUnited Bank], Ron Homer [Ronald A. Homer] who was prepared to, to, to make us the loan where, you know, organizations I had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How much was that loan for?
Speaker 1: It was, it was, you know we had worked it so there was $640,000.  But I couldn't get to Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.], I couldn't get Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], I couldn't get any of those guys to, to lend us the money.  And finally when I had this brainstorm after we had been, you know, trying for what seemed like months to get what we needed, finally I had this, this, this brainstorm and I thought of Ron Homer.  Because Ron, when I had been interested in buying the National Industrial Bank [National Industrial Bank of Connecticut] here in Connecticut and decided not to do it, Ron Homer had heard about me down here and my interest in buying the bank.  And Ron got in contact with me to ask if I would consult to his bank.  And I did that, and that then resulted in you know, Ron and I developing a, a relationship, and Ron attempting to convince me to come in as his number two.  And when we finally agreed not to do that, nonetheless we stayed friends and, you know going back to 1992, I thought about Ron.  I picked up the phone and I called him and I said, "I want to come to Boston to see you."  So Duane [Duane E. Hill] and I flew up to Boston, walked Ron through the business proposition.  And at the conclusion of the meeting, Ron looked at me and he said, "I'll do it."  And he said, "If given your backgrounds, if given your education, I can't do a deal like this, I don't deserve to be in business."  Never forgot that.  So that's where we got the money.
Speaker 2: One thing I wanna say before we move forward.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: How did it feel, or what were your thoughts that here it is now you, you know these--the broader institutions, Citibank, the guys that you'd worked for, wouldn't give you six hundred thousand dollars and you had to turn to a minority owned bank to get the money.  Did that--did you have any feelings about, about that in any way, shape or form?
Speaker 1: The, the, the, the only thought I had was that the credibility that potentially you get from working for large organizations can be very fleeting, and that I had seen enough over the years to realize that the experiences that any of us have in large corporate settings does not necessarily easily translate into something that people will feel comfortable in believing you can do it, with respect to particularly things that are entrepreneurial.  And so what I mean what I really thought was again, going back to those navigational tools.  You know the antennae is always twirling, trying to figure out how you make something happen.  And I typically, like the proverbial cat, figured out a way to land on my feet.
Story_ID: 508951
Speaker 1: So did that push you more towards wanting to fund, fund these minority businesses?
Speaker 2: Yes, to an extent.  Again, I, I, I am a realist.  And in the aftermath of the aborted attempt to buy the bank, I then looked at the opportunity set that looked near at hand if I could create it.  And it was out of that that, you know the idea with respect to Equico [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.], was created.  And always in my mind there was how can I take what little I have now and translate that into something that is leverageable and not for peanuts?  And I, I just--I mean I just saw this real clearly.  And I knew that the first step towards making that happen was to convince Duane [Duane E. Hill] to do it, and then to convince Duane to convince his bosses to allow me to come into Equico.  And then it became convincing Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] to go through with the deal.  And then in the aftermath of that because the Equitable was still involved, to in 1993, raise a separate pool of money with which to get the Equitable out of our knickers and to leverage our economic interest in the organization, and then it became using the platform that we had created by now having a controlling position with respect to Equico, to raising a larger pool of money that would not be, would not be hampered with the regulatory restrictions that came from being a MESBIC [Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Company].  So that's a long winded way towards saying this.  On the one hand as a result of the experience that I had at Equico financing minority businesses, and seeing particularly that wealth could be created such as we had done with Chester Davenport in acquiring Envirotest [Envirotest Systems Corporation] and I was the lead on that deal and helped Chester pull that whole thing together.  And by the time it was all said and done, this is now, you know, going some years later.  We did that deal in 1990, and then we ultimately exited in 1998.  You know Chester walked out of there with about $50 million.  And we did okay at Equico, but we were starting to see these types of--or the possibility of these types of opportunities.  And also bear in mind that I had already had the Beatrice [Beatrice Foods TLC; Beatrice International Foods] experience and the, the, the--even the notoriety that, that, that came from that and my engagement with respect to that.  So it was a question of trying to set the table in a way that leveraged what I had done, leveraged the vehicle that we had, and Equico was one of the largest and was considered the most successful MESBIC around.  By then they were called specialized Small Business Investment Companies [SBICs].  And the broader opportunities set, but trying to figure out how we could translate that amalgam into something that was broader, that would be credible.  And so the strategy that we came up with in seeking to raise the larger pool of funds, was to draw on our ethnic backgrounds and our understandings of ethnic markets, and our understanding of minority business people, while not being constrained to operate within that arena to call attention to the fact that the world was changing, both in terms of markets as well as in terms of talent.  And we had access to that, and we had an understanding of that.  And that's kind of the way in which we put together our thesis, and then went forward and raised you know, our first fund in 1994 for $225 million, and then again in 1998 for 515 million.
Story_ID: 508952
Speaker 1: My recollection is that the U.S. Congress passed the, the Small Business Investment Act [Small Business Investment Act of 1958].  Pretty sure it was, it was 1956 [sic. 1958].  And this was a program intended to create financing vehicles to encourage the funding of the United States small business space.  And in order to get banks and other entities to create these small business investment companies, you know, the government provided a combination of, of tax and funding incentives to do that.  So let's put a pin there.  In 19--believe it was about 1971 or '72 [1972], in the aftermath of the problems of the US cities and the burnings and you know, all that had come along with the advancing of civil rights in this country.  The Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration felt that more needed to be done, or at least there should be an appearance that more was being done by the federal government in order to create the building of minority owned businesses.  So the Nixon administration, Maurice Stans who was then secretary of commerce, created the amendments to the Small Business Company Act [sic.] that provided for the creation and special financing for the so-called MESBICs, Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Companies, as contrasted with small business investment companies.  And the advantaged financing that the government would provide the MESBICs had some advantages over the, the financing that was typically provided to just pure SBICs [Small Business Investment Companies].  And then Maurice Stans, the secretary of, of commerce, went around to organizations like the Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company], etc., and encouraged them to form these MESBICs.  Now in exchange for this special financing in the form of 3 percent perpetual preferred stock, the structures of these so-called--I think it was 301Cds--301Cds, which was the provision within the act, the requirement was that these companies only fund minority controlled, meaning 51 percent at a minimum, enterprises.  And that's what Equico [Equico Capital Corporation; TSG Ventures, Inc.] was.  And so we were by regulation, restricted to only putting so much capital in each of our investments, which itself was a function of the size of the capital base.  We could not take control positions in companies.  And there were, there were well intentioned, but in an economic sense, somewhat artificial constraints that we felt as now the partners in pulling this enterprise together, that we would be well served if we could design a format that would allow us to take advantage of market opportunity based upon who we are, what markets we understood, but without the artificial constraints imposed by regulation.
Story_ID: 508953
Speaker 1: And how did you get them to loosen those regulations?
Speaker 2: We didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why we--we did two things.  One, we were privileged to create the base of Equico Capital Corporation, and that gave us sustenance.  That gave us an intact portfolio, which we continued to work to build value for ourselves and for our, our partners.  But very importantly, it provided the infrastructure and it provided a certain level of credibility.  And then what we then did just in rapid succession, '92 [1992] May 19 was the, the restructure transaction that resulted in the creation of TSG Ventures [TSG Ventures, Inc.].  TSG Ventures was Equico Capital Corporation.  The Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] did not want us to continue to use the Equico name.  We didn't want to use the Equico name because we felt that given what we were seeking to do, that from a, from a marketing vantage point, we wanted to create a new image that we were no longer this enterprise that was the captive of this large insurance company.  And that there were these guys that were very experienced but had a different cut at both the opportunity and how they were prepared to, to operate.  So we renamed it TSG Ventures.  Then in 1993, we raised the $5.7 million and used that to buy the Equitable out in the entirety to enhance our economic interest in the enterprise, and to gain somewhat broader latitude (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So once you bought them out, you were able to--go ahead.
Speaker 2: We were still licensed, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the SBIC [Small Business Investment Company], by the SBA [Small Business Administration].  And we couldn't get out of that until and unless we repaid the--what was about $10 million in this 3 percent perpetual preferred stock.  So one of the things that we had to work on was coming up with a creative strategy for dealing with that, and we did.  And then in 1995 I negotiated yet again another restructure transaction with the SBA that gave us the ability of paying off on a discounted basis, that perpetual preferred stock over a period of, of five years.  In the meantime, we were continuing to build value in Equico, TSG Ventures now, and we'd gone out and raised the separate funds, which itself was not regulated.  So we were now managing the two vehicles.
Speaker 1: So the separate fund would have been the 225 million?
Speaker 2: That's the 225 million, right.  And so we now are managing both.  And then we had sufficient success with some of our investments in TSG Ventures that by 1998, we had built not an inconsiderable amount of capital into TSG Ventures.  But again because we were still regulatorily constrained, we couldn't tap into that ourselves.  And the SBA was still holding our feet to the fire with respect to the salaries that we could take and everything, and by then I'd had enough.  And we made a cold, calculating decision in 1998 and I flew to Washington [D.C.] and met with the administrator of the Small Business Investment- of the SBA, and said while we have another two years to run under the five year constraint that we entered into in 1995, two years to run before we will be free and clear of the remaining portions of this obligation, we're prepared to write you a check for about, I think it was about $1.5 million, and call it quits.  Two years later we wouldn't have to have paid them a dime.  But I just wanted out, just wanted out.  And we negotiated to do that and in October of 1998, we indeed cut them that check for about a million and a half dollars and, and, and we, we turned in our license.  And at that point, Equico/TSG Ventures was then wholly owned by Duane Hill [Duane E. Hill] and myself because the first thing that we did was, was we negotiated to buy out the limited partners that had put up the $5.7 million in 1993.  And once we had taken care of them, then the remaining interest in TSG Ventures was 50/50 owned by, by Duane and, and myself.  And in the meantime we had, you know, moved forward with the, the other larger funds.
Story_ID: 508954
Speaker 1: And then by 1999 you have how, you have how much?
Speaker 2: We had about three quarters of a billion dollars that we were managing at that point.
Speaker 1: And how do you, at this point how were you deciding which companies you were going to--
Speaker 2: We, we were under agreement with our limited partners that put up the capital, a, what they called a mid-sized buyout fund.  We talked about the opportunities in ethnic markets, but we were not constrained.  And certainly there was nothing in our charter that talked in terms of being limited to financing minority entrepreneurs.  And as a matter of fact, it was expected that in the vast majority of our transactions, we in fact would take control positions in those companies.  So most of the financings we did were in buying controlling positions, working in partnership with, with management in order to build greater values.
Speaker 1: I read that you were able to at this point in single deals, put up $100 million.
Speaker 2: We could put up as much as $100 million in single deals, that is correct, and did a few.
Speaker 1: Some of the companies that you were--Urban.
Speaker 2: Urban Brands [Urban Brands, Inc.], right.
Speaker 1: Urban Brands and Ashley Stewart?
Speaker 2: Ashley Stewart is Urban Brands.  Urban Brands became the umbrella name because at one point there were other, there were other concepts, retail concepts that were under the Urban Brands' umbrella.
Speaker 1: What about the Spanish language radio (simultanoeus)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spanish language radio stations.  That started out as PAR, Preferred Achievement Radio [PAR Communications, Inc.].  It was the first deal that we did out of our larger fund.  And you know when, when Plan A doesn't work, you shift to Plan B.  And Plan A, the concept that the entrepreneur had, sounded good in concept.  And it was taking motivational speakers, and taking them to the airwaves and having a full format that was centered around the Tony Robbins, the Deepak Chopra's and so forth.  And we had, we had a number of stations that were applying this concept.  And then when the, when the cash register didn't ring, we, we migrated to a different strategy, which at first was, was what they call time brokered radio.  Where we would sell timeslots to people that wanted to, to broadcast in the Lithuanian language, or the, you know, whatever.  And then when we saw an opportunity to acquire control of a company that we had invested in through TSG Ventures [TSG Ventures, Inc.] earlier on, and that was called Z-Spanish Radio [Z-Spanish Media Corporation], we acquired control of it and then migrated the radio stations that we had already assembled to the Z-Spanish format.  And then ultimately sold Z-Spanish to Entravision [Entravision Communications Corporation], which itself became a public company.  So, you know, gotta be flexible (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 508955
Speaker 1: So being in this position and--today you said you are starting to scale back, or to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, and we're well along.  We decided several years ago that we would not seek to raise the fund, another fund.  Bearing in mind that the nature of the business we were in, leave aside TSG Ventures [TSG Ventures, Inc.] again, Duane [Duane E. Hill] and I own that.  TSG Ventures was a perpetual life vehicle.  And you know we could keep that alive for however long we wished, and you know we still have, we still have I think one remaining investment in, in, in that company.  But the funds, the two larger funds, had defined lives.  They were defined life limited partnerships.  And typically the way those are organized, are for ten years.  During the early years you draw down the capital as you need it in order to invest.  Typically, you would have somewhere between four and five years in which to put the capital out, and then you'd have the harvesting period where over the following five years, actually starting even earlier than that for some of your earlier deals.  You would be looking to round trip that capital and, and take it back to your, your limited partners.  Their expectation is that the vehicle will wrap up around year ten with the possibility in our case of say two one year restrictions.  And so if you don't decide to continue to re-up and raise additional funds over the course of time, the business you know, winds itself down naturally.  And I'm now sixty years old and I have a lot of interests, and I reached a point, gosh time passes.  I probably reached a point about four, five years ago, where I said there's some things I wanna do differently.
Story_ID: 508956
Speaker 1: What are those things?
Speaker 2: If you were to ask my wife Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] a question that frequently comes up, which is what does Cleve [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe] do with all of his free time now?  She will typically say he's working as hard as he ever did, except he's not getting paid for it.  I do a lot on the not-for-profit side.  I am now vice chairman of the Stamford Hospital [Stamford Health, Stamford, Connecticut] board.  That's a $400 million healthcare institution that is an amazing place and is becoming more amazing with each passing month.  But it comes with all of the complexity of healthcare in this nation.  I spend a lot of time at the hospital.  When we were in Mexico last week, the first three days I was there, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, I was, I was up at 6:00 each morning in order to be on a conference call for two hours.  I chair the finance committee, I'm on the governance committee, and I had a strategy and market development committee.  And most of those committees meet--we're trying to push it to meeting bi-monthly, but most--we tend to meet monthly.  And then Peter Sachs, the chairman of the board and I will typically meet with the president and CEO every Tuesday morning at 7:30 A.M.  I was just looking at my calendar last evening as I was placing the 19- I'm sorry, the 2007 schedule.  And you know, there is a curse associated with technology.  Because sometimes you find out too much too fast.  And I said let me just do a, a search here and I'll look on my calendar.  And I punched in SHS, Stamford Health System.  And did a search and within about five seconds I had my calendar, every one of the appointments that I've had associated with the hospital for the last two years, and then looking out 2007, and it's staggering.  It is staggering.
Story_ID: 508957
Speaker 1: On top of that, if that were not enough, I have become chairman of a fledgling independent school that serves bright, little kids K [kindergarten] through five that come from low income families over on the south side of Stamford [Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Is that Waterside [Waterside School, Stamford, Connecticut](simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Waterside, I'm chairman of the Waterside board.  And that is pure entrepreneurship because we're working with a business model that to my knowledge has not been tried before.  Because in an independent school, and I know this with my kids [Jean-Paul Christophe and Kimberly Christophe] having grown up at KLHT, King Low Heywood Thomas [King and Low Heywood Thomas School; King School, Stamford, Connecticut], and I sat on that board for, for eight years.  Your natural constituency base--bases I will say--are two:  they are the parents of your kids, and your alums.  We have neither, we have neither.  We have--we collect from our ninety-nine kids and their families, probably an aggregate of about sixty thousand dollars in tuition.  And we don't have any alums, and we don't have any endowment.  So that means the entirety of our operating budget has to be raised each year, that's a difficult model.
Speaker 2: And how much is it?  How much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My challenge--we're a little over $2 million.  And my challenge is to organize the board to take ownership of the school because the, the, the founder has put a lot of his own capital in, and he came to recognize that if the school was going to survive and prosper, it had to move to a different model because eventually it was going to outstrip even his capacity to continue to write the checks.  And we have a, we have a board of very accomplished businessmen primarily, and some women.  But the board has never developed as a board.  And my challenge, and we had an offsite meeting for a half day a week and a half ago.  My challenge is to migrate us from the model that we were working with to one where the board takes ownership and the board understands its responsibilities, and the governance truly starts to go through the board, as contrasted with through the founder and the initial executive director.  So it's pure entrepreneurship.  And I spend a fair amount of my time at that.
Story_ID: 508958
Speaker 1: And then separately I'm on the, the board of the Business Council, which is one of the premier institutions of its type in the country.  This is the Business Council of, of Fairfield County [Business Council of Fairfield County].  And it is a, it is a network of, of leaders working to build a better economic and more viable economic foundation here in our communities, and recognizing all of the elements that go into that, including education, including things like being concerned about the achievement gap, including being concerned about the things that you know, business associations always talk about like taxes and that type of thing, but we take a broader approach.  Which is what's in the long term interest of the community?  And recognizing that government is necessary.  Recognizing that the knee jerk reaction of businesses should not simply be less taxes, but perhaps more effective expenditures, and recognizing that the infrastructure needs to be invested in, whether it's our ridiculous transportation system, which in and of itself is an impediment to job creation here, or whether it's the housing stock and the expense of living in this area.  These are all vital economic issues that have to be addressed, and the education of the kids that are growing up in the community.  If you're going to have a sustainable presence as, as a, a region capable of competing within what is increasingly a global village.  So I'm very much involved in, in, in that.  And I have agreed to go on the, the Norwalk Community College Foundation board.  And I'm, I'm, I'm boarded up.  And then I'm on one public company board and chair the compensation committee.  It's a building products company out of Dallas, Texas, so I have a few things to keep me busy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what do you do--
Story_ID: 508959
Speaker 1: --keep me busy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what do you do for fun?
Speaker 1: I, I try to find time to play golf, I try to find time to read and--
Speaker 2: What do you like to read?
Speaker 1: Well right now I'm--if you ask my wife that question she would say, "Come in and take a look at his library and you can see all of the things that he likes to read.  Now ask him," she would say, "how many of these books has he finished" (laughter).  Right now, right now I am off and on reading about three different books.  I have a, I have a, if I say so myself, a pretty complete golf library.  What I have not succeeded in, in terms of buying a golf game, I try to make up for it with a lot of reading and I'm not sure that's gonna help or not.  But I do have quite a library.  But on a more serious note, the things that I'm reading now are the, the Tom Freidman [Thomas L. Friedman] book and the, the one that I'm deep into is, is-wow, name just escaped me-'State of Denial' ['State of Denial,' Bob Woodward].  And every now and then I will read a novel, although I don't think I've read a novel in probably several years.  Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] said to me just yesterday, she said, "You know you ought to take occasion and get away from your serious stuff and just go back and read a good Jack Higgins novel or something" (laughter).
Story_ID: 508960
Speaker 1: So what are you--what do you think ab- I mean, and we haven't talked much about your children, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so tell me about, things about them that you're proud of.  Actually we're wrapping it up, so these are sort of the lighter things we talk about.  And your children, you have a daughter [Kimberly Christophe] and a son [Jean-Paul Christophe].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your--whomever first.
Speaker 2: Well my first son died when we were living in France, and this was in 1979, brilliant kid, very athletic, but he suffered from asthma.  And you know at the early age of eleven and twelve when we were living in Paris [France], he was kind of a free citizen, and it was an era where I guess Cheryl [Cheryl Christophe] and I both thought that we were all invulnerable.  And so Scotty [Jon Scott Christophe] as we called him, went to an all-French speaking school halfway across Paris.  And he would, you know, leave home in the morning alone and hop on the Metro [Paris Metro] in Paris in order to go across town to, to school.  And, and one day I was on a business trip in Belgium when I got the emergency telephone call and it was a hot, August afternoon and he was on the soccer field and he collapsed and had a wheezing attack and one thing led to a series of heart attacks, and by the time I got back from Belgium, it was all over.  So we started a family all over again.  He would--he was just shy of thirteen when he died.
Story_ID: 508961
Speaker 1: So Jean-Paul [Jean-Paul Christophe] was born in--outside of San Francisco [California].  Kimberly [Kimberly Christophe] in, in Jamaica.  They're both energetic, bright, very different kids.  They grew up here.  Jean-Paul went to King Low Heywood Thomas [King and Low Heywood Thomas School; King School, Stamford, Connecticut] from first grade through tenth grade, and then went off to Phillips Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire].  Kimmy as I call her, Keeks sometimes, went to KLHT from kindergarten through the ninth grade and then went off to Philips Exeter.  Kim is an aspiring doctor.  She'll be going into--she is a senior at Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], albeit she's, she's here for this term interning at Stamford Hospital [Stamford Health, Stamford, Connecticut], as well as taking a microbiology course at UConn [University of Connecticut, Mansfield, Connecticut].  And, and Jean-Paul is an ensign, in the, in the U.S. Navy.  I call him my Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] philosophy grad turned warrior.  He called me his, his junior year, beginning of his junior year at Yale and said, "Dad [HistoryMaker Cleveland Christophe], I wanna talk to you."  This was out of the clear blue.  "I wanna talk to you about what I intend to do after I leave Yale."  I said, "Fine."  He said, "You know I'm still thinking that I wanna go into business."  He said, "But I think I'm gonna start someplace else.  I believe that I'm gonna look to go into the Navy."  And I didn't say anything.  He said, "Let me explain to you my, my thoughts before you say anything, not that I was going to say anything."  He said, "I know that you know that I've always been interested in the military since I was a tyke."  His favorite two movies, and not just the military, but the Navy in particular.  His favorite two movies were 'Top Gun' and 'The Hunt for Red October.'  Each of which he's seen at least 150 times.  He can--and, and, and Jean-Paul was always in plays and so forth when he was in school here.  I would bet you he could still recite many of the lines.  And so he got to--when he went off to Exeter and then when he went to Yale, he always had his DVD of these two movies.  And I, I remember saying to him once, "How can you possibly watch this again?"  And he says, "Dad I never watch the whole movie."  He said, "When the mood hits me, I will go to a certain track within the movie and, and just spend fifteen minutes looking at that again, or--," but in any event, he said, "So A, you know I've always been interested in this."  He said, "B," he said, "You know I think I'm reasonably intelligent."  He said, "But you know what?  That's not special.  We got a lot of intelligent people out here in the world."  And he said, "I especially have seen that at Exeter and at Yale."  He said, "So I don't, I don't look at myself as something special in that sense."  He said, "Thirdly, you and Mom [Cheryl Christophe] have always provided Kimberly and me with a, a, a rich experiential existence.  Even to the extent that if I look at myself objectively, I might say I'm a little bit spoiled.  And," he said, "If I go into the Navy, I'm not gonna be spoiled."  He said, "I will do something that I have always been interested in.  I will get a chance to deal with stuff that is going to challenge me, including the bureaucracy, and I'm not gonna always like that.  I'm gonna get a broader cut of society and perhaps live in different cultures.  And maybe along the way I might even gain some leadership skills.  And then when I come out on the other side because my aspiration," at least as he was looking at it then, as he put it, "was not to be a career Naval officer."  He said, "But then when I come out on the other side, maybe I'll have an amalgam of skills and experiences that'll be worth something to somebody."  So.
