Story_ID: 5174
Speaker 1: We're gonna get started.  And I'd like to -- you know, this is just a conversation between us.  I'd like to start out by slating it.  My name is Julieanna Richardson.  And I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns, the videographer, and Amy Billingsley is the observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.  And give us your date of birth.
Speaker 2: William L. Clay, Sr., C-L-A-Y, date of birth, April 30th, 1931.
Speaker 1: And "L" stands for?
Speaker 2: Lacy, L-A-C-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, can we have today's date and the location.
Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 22nd, 2003, and we're at 14917 Claude Lane, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Story_ID: 5175
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, it would have to be something like barbeque or hamburgers.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Every day that I wake up is my favorite time of year.  We don't have any seasons around here.  We -
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about it.  Blue, maybe.
Speaker 1: A vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation, been vacationing for years all over the world.  Jamaica, Spain.  We go every year.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Haven't thought about that either.  Probably, the title of my book, "Just Permanent Interest."
Story_ID: 5176
Speaker 1: I want to have you first talk about your father.  And if you could give his name and if you could, talk about him and what you know about your family background on his side.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Irving Charles Clay, Senior.  He finished high school, which was something of an accomplishment back at the turn of the century.  He had steady employment even during the Depression.  He had one job that lasted over forty years.  He was a acetylene torch man and made pretty good money.  But he had seven children, husband, wife -- he and his wife.  And our grandfather lived with us, so he had quite a contingent of, of people that he had to take care of.  But he did make good money.  And he was a very religious person in his later days; good father, good provider, taught us to respect others.  And they -- my mother and father, they had two things that they instilled in us.  One was to finish high school and two was, if you got married, you stayed married.  And those were the two outstanding things that I think they provided for-- for our family.
Speaker 1: Now, where was your father from?
Speaker 2: He was from Missouri, and we trace our-- the Clay side of the family back to slave owners.  He was from out-state Missouri, a place called Union, Missouri.  And many of our relatives are still there because when the owner freed the slaves, he left them certain property.  But not a clear deed.  So as long as they or their relatives are in -- their inheritors stay on the land, it belongs to them.  If they leave, it reverts back to his side, the slave owners side.  I doubt if it -- anybody knows who the slave owners relatives are.  But a lot of our family is still out there in the Union, Missouri area.
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather talk much at all or was he -
Speaker 2: No, not-- not really much.  He had a great relationship with my sister, with one of-- one of my sisters.  But I don't know who my grandmother was.  In fact, before you came today, I was talking to my brother and he doesn't know the name of- of our grandmother on my father's side.  So I don't know much of their history.
Story_ID: 5177
Speaker 1: And your mother, can you give her name and -
Speaker 2: Luella Hyatt Rhodes.  She, she was born in St. Louis County.  At age five, she had to move to the city because St. Louis County did not provide education for black children.  So if she wanted to go to school, she had to move in with some relatives, which she did, moved in the area called the (Bayton?) area and went to Lowell Elementary School.  She did finish elementary school, but dropped out of school at the tenth grade.  She's -- she had seven children, including me- four girls and three boys.  She worked as a domestic for a number of years.  And then she came home and spent a lot of time with us.  And I guess after, after I was about six or seven, I don't remember her working anymore.
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?  Did they ever tell you?
Speaker 2: No.  A lot of things they didn't tell us!  They- it was grown-up talk.  And whenever-- one of the things really kind of bad though is like when doctors are trying to get the history, and they will say, "Well, what did your mother or your father or your grandfather die of," I just say what they told me,  "The heart stopped beating."  They wouldn't tell you in those days.  So, no, I don't know much about how they met.
Speaker 1: Did you know your mother's side of the family much at all?
Speaker 2: Quite a few, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they live long lives like she did?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandmother, her mother, was probably sixty years old when she got hit by, by a truck.  And so she was a spry and healthy person.  And the rest of the family, she had seven brothers and sisters.  They all lived to the '60's [1960s], which according to the time they were born around the turn of the century. That was a long life.
Story_ID: 5178
Speaker 1: Now, what is your-- you're the third, the fourth --
Speaker 2: Fourth.
Speaker 1: Fourth child.  What is your earliest memory of, you know, of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I can go back to age three, somewhere around there and remember.  One incident in -- and one incident in particular, my grandfather taking my two older sisters and my brother and myself to go down on the river-- we lived about ten blocks form the river, early one morning.  And we went down to watch him fish and all of that.  And it was-- by the time we decided to come back, it was extremely hot, like a hundred degrees.  And I didn't have shoes and (laughter) there was only one pair of shoes in the bunch.  And my sisters and brothers had to wear the shoes and take turns carrying me back home.  I can go back that far.
Story_ID: 5179
Speaker 1: Can you talk about family life, you know, what it was like and, you know, growing up?  What your memories are?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I grew up in downtown St. Louis, maybe six, seven blocks from the major department stores.  We lived in an integrated neighborhood, but it was segregated.  There were a lot of Italians and a lot Irish.  And we all lived in different tenement houses, Italians lived in theirs, the Irish lived in theirs and the blacks lived in theirs.  We had outdoor toilets, no- no hot water inside, which was pretty general for St. Louis at that time.  They had something like 40,000 people without indoor plumbing.  And it lasted until the early '50's [1950s].  In 1951, the City Council there passed an ordinance that you had to put plumbing inside and you had to tear down your ash pits, where you put your- your cinder, cinders from the furnaces because they were havens for rats.  So we lived in an area that- where you had mixture of the races, but blacks couldn't attend anything.  We couldn't go to the theaters.  We couldn't go to their restaurants, the amusement parks.  We were prohibited.  In fact, we lived across the street from a playground that was, was one side for white and the other side for, other side for--for blacks.  And it was just - everything was just racially segregated.
Speaker 1: Did you-- well, no, let me ask you?  Can you describe what the St. Louis of that day was like?  It's a river city, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was, you know, what was it like, just period, I mean to the extent that you know as a child?
Speaker 2: Well, opportunities for blacks were very limited.  You didn't have the signs.  You know, there was no-- the only law in Missouri that enforced the segregation of the races was the one with education.  Everything else was by custom and tradition.  There was no law that said you could not serve a black in, in the restaurant or you could not admit a black into your hotel, but it was custom and tradition.  But it was very rigidly adhered to.  Employment was miserable.  In fact, until 1963, when we engaged in what was the Jefferson Bank demonstrations [ see Clay_William_06] that resulted in hundreds, at least 500 blacks going to jail, and some of us for, for many, many months, there was total segregation and relegation of blacks to the most menial time -- types of jobs.  This is in '63 [1963].  We had no sales people in the department stores.  We had no blacks driving the trucks for the beer companies, the soda companies, the bread companies.  We had no blacks working on the bottling lines inside the soda companies and the beer companies.  We had no black salesmen in any of the insurance companies and in the banking industry.  And that's why we took on the banking industry.  There were something like 4,600 white collar jobs in the town and only sixteen of them were held by blacks.  And we were better than 45 percent of the population.  So this was-- and the utilities were worse.  The newspapers were just as bad.  We had one newspaper, daily newspaper there that hired 250 people and not a single black.  The St. Louis Post Dispatch hired over 4,000 people and they only had two blacks in white-collar positions and no reporters, no- nobody working in the press rooms. No-- just no, nothing, period!  They had one black receptionist and one other black white-collar worker.  That was the extent.  So it was pervasive.  Employment discrimination was, was pervasive throughout the system.
Story_ID: 5180
Speaker 1: Now, I want to take you back to your childhood, and even, you know, to the place you lived and your neighborhood, and -- cause you were right, you said, right downtown, essentially -
Speaker 2: Six blocks from downtown.
Speaker 1: Six blocks  And I'd like you to just describe, if you could remember, you know, any sights, sounds or smells that, you know, when you experience them-- you know, when you think back to your childhood, they remind you of growing up.  Any sounds?
Speaker 2: You mean actual sounds like airplane sounds -
Speaker 1: Any sound, you know, sounds, smell -
Speaker 2: And certainly it wasn't many automobiles in that neighborhood because we played in the streets, but that was because there weren't many automobiles period in existence.  See, we're talking about the '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s] now.  And so sound?
Speaker 1: Smells?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Sights.
Speaker 2: Well, we-- where I lived we had some sounds, I mean some smells because we lived over a-- a place that, that made the- what is it -- really the things you put the clothing on in the, in the windows- the mannequins.  And, of course, it was- it wasn't plastic and they would cast, some kind of a plas-- a cast.  But it was before plastics were invented.  And they had to spray--spray gun that-- spray painted and so we got a dose of that occasionally in the house.  But- and I don't exceptional sounds, no.
Story_ID: 5181
Speaker 1: Now, what were you like as a young person?  Did you, I mean -
Speaker 2: Bad.  (Laughter)  Stayed in trouble, not with the- not with the law, but stayed in trouble.
Speaker 1: You were mischievous.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Class clown.  Had a run-in with the law, of course, I wasn't in school.  I was in college at that point.  And I had a job which I had been working for eightyears.  I started working at age twelve in one of those downtown stores, as a custodian, and worked my way up after about three years to do the-- the sewing.  I did all of the alterations for them.  And when I was eighteen, and had started college, I was at work one day.  And the police came- a policeman came in and handcuffed me and roughed me up and took me to the station, which was a block from my house.  And my employer had called my mother and informed her that I was on my way to the station.  So by the time he got me there, she and her sister were there waiting.  And they tried to find out what-- what was the problem.  And he used some profanity and pushed my mother down the steps about four flight- four stairs.  And they roughed me up, took me inside.  Well, that's when I really understood what politics was about in this country.  He got me inside and he had me in a room, had the little light on me like this.  And he had his little rubber hose and he was gonna to beat the confession out of me because some informant, the guy that ran the pool room in our neighborhood where I used to hang out told him that I drove two people who did-- who murdered two people in a confectionary to the bus station.  Well, by the time he got around to getting ready to hit me, the door flew open and two white detectives walked in.  He was white as well.  And they said they came to get me to take me to headquarters.  And he started a rumpus with them and saying, using profanity and saying, "Nah, I caught this son-of-a -- so-and-so.  I'm gonna make him tell.  It's my- my arrest, not yours."  I'm gonna get the credit.  And they said to him.  You're not gonna do anything.  This-- we've got orders from the chief of police to take him over to headquarters and give him a lie detector test.  Well, what happened was my mother's sister worked for the chairman of the Police Commission's Board.  She went right back to the house, called him.  He immediately sent some people over there.  They gave me a lie detector test, and they released me.  But this guy could have beaten a confession out of me, I would assume, because that's the way they did it in those days.  And I think they still beat them out of people now-a-days.  But I realized then that you had to have some-- somebody with influence, preferably your own influence, if you could establish that kind of influence.  So that was a real awakening for me.
Speaker 1: What happened to your mother in that instance?  Was she hurt?
Speaker 2: No, she wasn't hurt because it was just about three or four steps.  He just shoved her.  But it was disgraceful, the language he used.
Story_ID: 5182
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back just even to like any remembrances of family.  And I like you to, if you could, just for us, give your siblings' names in order.
Speaker 2: Hazel Clay Brown, Eliza-- Mary Elizabeth Laud, Irving Charles Clay, Jr. and myself, Norma Clay Kane, Joseph Sylvester Clay and my youngest sister, Flora Clay Everett.
Speaker 1: Because you were sort of smack dab, sort of in the middle?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I just-- you know, a lot of times they talk about middle children, trying to sort of find their way, and know, you were in a relatively large family.  But if you could just give some, you know, some memories of things that come up, the incidences that are, you know, they were holiday times or just normal life or -
Speaker 2: Well, even though I was in the middle, it was gap-- age gap between my brother, older brother and myself, a seven-year age gap.  He's still alive.  In fact, he's seventy-eight, seventy-nine years old now.  And he just announced his retirement from the St. Louis Board of Aldermen. So, but it was about a seven-year age gap so I didn't have that kind of competition.  My competition would have been with my sister Norma, who really it was no competition because she was low key.  And my grandfather and her were the ones that related -- they were like, almost like Siamese twins [colloquialism for being extremely close, joined at the hip].  And so really, we didn't have any kind of competition amongst the siblings.
Speaker 1: But when you said you were mischievous one, was that shown within the family structure or was it mainly in school?
Speaker 2: Mainly in school, I guess.  I got put out of almost every class I was in (laughter), some for good reason because I couldn't-- I couldn't sing so , I couldn't join the choir or chorus.  And the school was so small and if you, you -- most of us were in one room.  See when I graduated from high school, it was only ten of us.  And so when they -- when I couldn't go to a class, they would sit me in the sewing room and in the typing room and I taught myself how to type.  I got up to about seventy-five words a minute.  So, and it was a- it was a blessing that I- some teachers put me out.  And they would put you out for-- in a small class of ten, they insisted on everybody learning.  If I learned faster than the others, I'm sitting there doing nothing.  And we wouldn't move on until everybody got it.  So that left a lot of time for trying to figure out what to do with your extra time.
Speaker 1: So you had an active mind.  The teachers-
Speaker 2: They didn't call it that -
Speaker 1: I know they didn't.  They called you a troublemaker.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They called you a playboy.  But what school-- what was the name of the school you went to?
Speaker 2: St. Nicholas [middle school].
Speaker 1: St. Nicholas.  You went there from-- what grade to what -
Speaker 2: I started in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go before?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary, public school the first five years.  Jefferson School.
Story_ID: 5183
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories from that school experience, those first five years?  Anything, any teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, one or two teachers.  I- I don't -- I just remember the principal's name.  Her name was Ms. Giles.  She never--she never bothered me, but she had a habit of disciplining other kids.  She'd take her fingers and pop the nose.  That's what I remember from, from those days.  But the physical abuse was just as bad as at the Catholic school that I went to too.  And so, I mean, in those days, they just didn't care about rights.  It's a good thing they're not teaching today because some of these kids would-- would retaliate physically and they wouldn't be around I don't think to-- to do it to any other kids.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: You wanted the truth didn't you ? (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But now, why was the decision -- the decision for you to go to St. Nicholas, was that-- whose decision was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a Catholic, and my mother was baptized a Catholic at a young age.  All of us were baptized at birth.  We went to church across the street and one of the priests there, Father John Madigan, had a relationship with the black community, even though the school -- the church had an all-white school.  He provided for us on weekends, Saturdays, religious services, catechism; provided workshops, taught us how to build airplanes, model planes, took us on picnics and those kinds of things.  And when I was in the fifth grade, he introduced us to a woman by the name of Lucille Lindsey, who was very wealthy.  And she invited a number of us to go to Catholic schools.  And she was doing it across the city, and so she paid all the tuition for us.  And that's how I got involved in the Catholic-- which was segregated too in those days.  And it wasn't until '40- '49 [1949] that the new Cardinal came to St. Louis and immediately desegregated all the Catholic schools.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, in your school environment that you were in, what was actually taught?  Was it -- did you have black teachers who were, you know, a lot of times people say that the teachers took seriously teaching, you know, about other black people.  I mean was that happening in your school or was it not?  You know, and what was sort of the religious doctrine, sort of?  I mean I'm just trying to see --
Speaker 2: Well, you had mostly nuns who-- who taught.  But we did have some, some black teachers, and I thought they were-- were very good.  We had one, Minnie Mathews, which was excellent and then Mrs. Taylor that was a good math teacher.  But we lacked the facilities and we lacked the-- the trained nuns, who were really trained to be educators.  I mean if you want, you know, somebody to take out after them, you'd call one of my classmates, Robert Guion who was in school with us too.  And I've heard people who tell me that when he'd be interviewed, he really lambasted them.  But the school was, it--it was a poor school.  And when I say poor, educationally poor.  I never had a day of chemistry or biology or, or calculus because they didn't have anybody qualified to teach it and we didn't have a lab.  And this is what they projected as education in a Catholic school in the black community in St. Louis.  So I don't want to fool anybody about somebody teaching us.  We did have a course in history, in black history, which was very, very valuable. But other than that, we were totally uneducated.
Story_ID: 5184
Speaker 1: And what motivated you, and what did you dream about or think you wanted to be or, you know, or have a view of -- I mean what thoughts were going through your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you, when I was twelve years old, it was during the second world war, and I got this job as a custodian at the Good Luck Store is what they called it.  It was on the edge of the downtown area, shopping area. My ambition at that point was when I get old, I want a job like this indoors, sweeping floors or anything because I always looked at my dad who worked outside.  In the wintertime, he came home frozen and in the summertime he came home cooked.  And I did not look forward to a job, even though he made -- when school teachers were probably making $1,400, $1,500 a year, he was making $10,000, because he did what you call, piecework, and he cut up these box cars [train cars] and all.  He was very skilled - which was a skilled position, acetylene torch person.  But I did not want any part of any job where you worked outside.  And so my ambition at age twelve was to get a job inside.  And as things progressed, I got other ambitions, you know.  And it was possible for me to go to college.  So, I wanted to be a lawyer, but by the time I finished I had deferments. And the day after I graduated, I got a letter saying, you will come to the Army (laughter) thirty days later.  So, I had been accepted for law school, but while I was in the military, I got married and we had our first child and so I never went back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, we need to change tapes--
Story_ID: 5185
Speaker 1: So you're working summers, and making a lot of money -
Speaker 2: I worked all year.
Speaker 1: All year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not sixty -- but just in the summer, you worked sixty hours a week
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then in the winter, we would work after school from 4:00 to 9:00 on Mondays and Fridays and thirteen hours on Saturday, and the 4:00 to 6:00 Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.  But what they did -- they were, they were very nice employers.  I got a raise to $7.50 and then when I went back to school, they didn't cut the-- the money.  And eventually I got one, a raise to $15.00 a week and went back to school.  And they didn't cut the money.  Now, that process went on until I got up to $30.00 a week in the summer and in the winter, they didn't cut the, didn't cut the, the pay.  And then at Christmastime, they would give, give us a bonus of a hundred dollars, a hundred dollars (emphasis).  You know, what that -- in '45 [1945] and '46 [1946], that was a lot of money.  So, you know.  Can you just cut- okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Resume.
Speaker 2: So did you, you didn't have any time to play or like get trouble or anything too much except -
Speaker 1: No, they would let me off two, two weeks in the summer to go to camp.  And whenever I wanted to go play softball, they always provided the time for that.  They were very good employers, very good.
Speaker 2: And this was, you said, where was this you were working?
Speaker 1: A place called the Good Luck Store.
Speaker 2: The Good Luck Store.
Speaker 1: It was a retail men's clothing.
Story_ID: 5186
Speaker 1: Now, what other things are forming you as a person in your teenage years?  What things are influencing you or informing you?  You know, work is definitely a part of things, but are there friends or other people in the community-
Speaker 2: Well, I had lots of friends.  I was in the Boy Scouts.  I loved pool and so I frequented the pool room every minute I, I could.  And I was even an altar boy so-
Speaker 1: And what, then what is the thing that made you want to go on to college?  Where did that come from?  Was it the family saying that?  Was -
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --because you say you're the-- that's why-- what made you want to go and what, were some of your teachers-
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  No teacher encouraged me to go to college.  It's just something I decided I was gonna do.  I started running into other people who had been off to college and met some very good people, older than me.  In fact, one guy by the name of George Larry.  He used to help me with my math and algebra and trig when I got in college.  He'd come on Sundays and spend four or five hours.  He was good at that.  He didn't finish college because he ran out of money, but people like that were the ones who inspired me.
Story_ID: 5187
Speaker 1: Now, when you went to St. Louis University, did you -- you majored in history and political science?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why were you interested-- I mean was that an interest that you had from, you know, from high school or what made you decide to -
Speaker 2: Well, history was, I guess. And then, as I said, I- that political reality of the guy trying to beat confession out of me probably inspired me to learn something about politics.
Speaker 1: And, now that explains- when you were going to St. Louis University, were you still living at home or-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were.  For the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what -
Speaker 2: We moved in-- two years after I started at St. Louis U, we moved further out to the west end part of the city.
Speaker 1: You know, I just-- what I'm trying to understand is somewhat of a disconnect because here you were-- you know, I asked you what you were like.  And you said I was mischievous and, you know, teachers -- you know, 'I was a troublemaker' or they saw me as a troublemaker that-- that time that I spent, I'm learning how to type seventy-five words a minute.  And then I see that, and then you go, you know, and you're the first in your family to, you know, go to college.  And I'm just wondering, you know, what-- what happened along the way?  Was it working that made you, you know, mature or you know, gave you some purpose or what -- I mean what was happening in your, you know, we all mature in some respects.  No, no.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if anybody has to steer you towards more education.  I think that it's something natural people.  They-- most people I know want to learn more than what they know.  And that was just a logical progression for me, was to try and further my education.
Speaker 1: Now, at St. Louis [University], were there things that you experienced or, you know, got involved with, because right now, at that point, we're in the, the early '50's  [1950s], right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  And I'm just wondering if there was any, you know, I mean did you find the coursework fine?  Was it, you know, easy, hard?  You know-
Speaker 2: Oh, I found out that I didn't have much education. You see I was a straight-A student all of my life.  And so when I went to St. Louis University and I, I scored high on the entrance exam, they put me in the accelerated course.  And I was-- it wasn't long before they called me in and said, "We don't think you belong here," which was true because I was failing in every category.  So they put me back in the regular course of, you know, (unclear) they had me in. I guess what you would now consider a masters program or something to that effect.  And it, it just wasn't-- I just didn't have it.  And so I had to drop back and do remedial work again.
Speaker 1: But you got caught up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You graduated.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, no, I didn't-- I mean they put me back with the average students, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, I just-- you weren't in the accelerated-
Speaker 2: No, right.  And, yeah, I graduated and I think it-- I got a good education at St. Louis University.
Story_ID: 5188
Speaker 1: Now, when you were drafted -- what do you call it?
Speaker 2: Drafted.
Speaker 1: Drafted into the service, right, you said that you were wanting to go to law school at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when you were drafted, you were drafted into the Army?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I was up to Ft. Leonard Wood [ Missouri], where I did basic, eight weeks of basic training.  And then they sent me to clerical school for the second eight weeks.  And I got out of the clerical school and got a job with the Post Commander in what they called a 'out-processing section'.  That's when we were preparing people to go overseas who had finished their sixteen weeks of basic.  We made sure that they had all of their records, their shots.  They had their dog tags properly identifying them and gave them their airline tickets and all of that and shipped them overseas.  And I held that for about six months, and then I was sent to Alabama [ Ft. McClellan], which was worse than probably Korea.  I preferred Korea over Alabama.  It was a hell of an ordeal, a town of about 16,000.  I -- my wife and I stayed-- lived off post, and about evenly divided, about thirty, 30,000, about 15,000 blacks, 15,000 whites.  But there was nothing for blacks to do in that town.  And we would either go into Atlanta one weekend or Birmingham the next weekend.  It was- they were that close; sixty-five miles for one, one hundred miles for the other.  And that was where we spent our weekends.  I was there, incidentally, when the Supreme Court ruled in Brown vs. The Board of Education [1954].  Our commander said to all the blacks who lived off post, you stay in the house until we call and tell you it's safe to come out.  So I was in the house for four or five days because I mean people -- the white folk in the South were really- they were up in arms.  So we stayed in the house four or five days.  In fact, that's where I was initiated into the civil rights movement, while I was on post there at Ft. McClellan.  It was, they had, they had prohibitions against blacks in barber shops, in their service clubs and a couple of the restaurants.  And so I decided that I wasn't gonna go down there, the barbershop on Saturday afternoon when they imported a black from town.  And it would be hundreds of blacks lined up to, to get their hair cut.  So I--I just started a boycott.  And I organized other blacks to join in the boycott.  And so we didn't get haircuts.  So after the third month, my commander came in one day and he told the captain, tell him to get a haircut.  The captain said, I told him.  He said, "Well, bring him in my office.  So I went into the office.  And he told me, "I'm giving you a direct order to get a haircut".  And I said, "Well, why don't you accompany me down to the barbershop.  I'll get it right now."  He said, "You know, you can't get a haircut in there."  I said, "That ain't what Mr. Eisenhower said and Mr. Truman said.  The law of the land says that I- that there wouldn't be discrimination on this post."  And so, he was furious and so then we, we were meeting with other blacks who were in this little organization that we had.  So we decided to confront them at the Thursday night dance where it was off limits for blacks because they brought white girls in from town.  And so we blocked the doors.  And he called me back in and said, "I'm gonna court martial you."  I said, "Oh, thank you."  And I went home. I left and went home and got my wife and a couple little kids from the housing project that we lived in, told them, "Put your swimming suits on." And we drove back out to the post.  And she, myself and three little kids jumped in the white-only swimming pool.  And we swam.  And so, I said, "They've got something to court martial me for now."  So, the next morning when I came back, he said, "We're transferring you."  He said-- he said he had a list of orders.  And he wanted to-- pick what you want.  Well, Honolulu [Hawaii], a couple of places in Germany.  And I saw one where I came from, Ft. Leonard Wood, Missouri.  I said, "I'll go back there," because I knew damned well that Honolulu was too close to Korea.  And I knew where-- and so I went-- we went back to, to Missouri immediately.  He gave me fourteen days to travel back to Fort-- to St. Louis, but my wife was pregnant and she had to catch a plane because I -- we drove down there.  And she couldn't-- the doctor said she couldn't make it driving back to St. Louis.  So she caught a plane and I drove back with whatever our little furnishings were.  But that's how I got started in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: So the South had- that was-- you realized that you had not really been in the segregated south up to that point?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I knew I had been in the segregated south up to that point, but it just wasn't as obvious.  They didn't have the signs for the restrooms and the drinking fountains and-- and those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 5189
Speaker 1: Now, when you got, so you got involved politically when you got back, right?
Speaker 2: I got involved in the movement, not politically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I organized the NAACP Youth Council and we got a charter.  And the parent branch was kind of staid, kind of reluctant to fight.  They just had "press release" organization.  And they raised money for the national office based on what the national office was doing in terms of its lawsuits.  And so I was able to pull together about 500 youngsters.  When I say youngsters, we were in our 20s, early 30's and we went out and we, we did a job on St. Louis.  We had picket lines every night.  We-- we forced places like White Castle to open their restaurants, the Parkmore [spelling] to open theirs.  We forced Howard Johnson's [ hotel chain]-- we spent six month period at Howard Johnson's, and we got arrested there.  And then we went after employment.  And so -- and from that, the experience that, that we gained in that sphere, we went into politics four or five years later because we-- we knew how to organize by then.  And people were showing a great deal of respect for us.
Speaker 1: Now, wasn't James Barry [spelling], was that who was -
Speaker 2: James Barry was one of the organizers of the Youth Council.  We, we both worked together at Aeronautical Charts.  And he was a good guy.  But that where the -- the people at Aeronautical Charts started the Youth Council.  I was the leader,  I was the President.  We had Curtis Ball [ title], a couple others who all worked down there.  Monroe Doss [ title], and we put on a real show for St. Louis.  They, they weren't accustomed to the kind of things that we, we did for St. Louis.
Speaker 1: So there was a great deal of excitement in that, at that period of time that you were really making change and making a difference?
Speaker 2: Yes, see this was even before Rosa Parks.  It was about a year before Rosa Parks, about nine months before.  And we were making changes.  St. Louis had started that kind of activity ten years prior, CORE [ Congress of Racial Equality  ], James Farmer [Founder of CORE] and Charlie Oldham , who was the national chairman of CORE and Marion Oldham [ spelling, title].  They started a CORE branch, and they were having sit-in's back in the late '40's.  So it wasn't new to -- but it was such a small -- and CORE at that time was, was very small.  Until the Freedom Rides, CORE would have national conventions with maybe 50 people.  I've been to two with less than a hundred people.  So it wasn't until the Freedom Rides that they became a mass organization.  But they had -- and it was a very disciplined organization though, and they, and they trained for, for their sit-in's.  They had to go to school and study Gandhi and all of that.  But the Youth Council came in and we took everybody at face value.  You're not gonna disturb anything and you're not gonna fight.  And we didn't train them.  And that's how we, we were able to generate the kind of support, 400 or 500 people in picket lines and sit-in's and blocking doors and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: So you said that, you know, when you got back to St. Louis, it was sort of the paper, NAACP [ National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know, the parent -
Speaker 2: It still is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It still is.
Story_ID: 5190
Speaker 1: And then there was the Youth Council that really were the act -- you know, the activists?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there other groups, organizations, CORE, that had -
Speaker 2: CORE was very small.  CORE didn't come -- become large in St. Louis until we were kicked out of the NAACP.
Speaker 1: So you went over to CORE.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Yeah, we took all of our people over.  See, what, what happened and it was an embarrassment to, to the people who were running the, the adult branch because they had made alliances with the downtown people.  And they were raising money, and that became their primary function, not to fight discrimination and segregation, but to raise money to send to New York, to- to support those lawsuits that were being made.  But we thought you can do both.  And so what happened, we were out raising money.  We- we sat down with some Jewish women from the YHWA-- YWHA , and they said, look, "We-- we've been reading about it, what you guys are doing.  We want to help, want to help, want to give a fundraiser."  So we agreed and they said, we're gonna bring in a Jewish folk singer by the name of Pete Seeger.  Well, I'm 24 year -- 23, 24, I didn't know who Pete Seeger was, nor did anybody in our group did.  And so they said, okay.  They signed the contract and started advertising.  And then leaders in the adult branch used that to say that the Communist had infiltrated our group.  And so then we got in touch with Roy Wilkins and Gloster [B.] Currant  and they came in with a big rally-- a big meeting, and took our charter.  So we said, "fine."  So we just moved over to CORE and we kept the demonstrations going and kept the activities going.
Speaker 1: Now, why CORE and maybe not SNCC?  Is it because SNCC was not --  SNCC  [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] wasn't in existance.  That's right.
Speaker 2: And we never had a SNCC in St. Louis anyhow or an SCSC -- SCLC. SCLC. [Southern Christian Leadership Council]
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 1: Now, see you don't -- you've got a black college there, but you never had a black college, not in St. Louis.  You had one in Jefferson City, but now you've got Harris-Stowe College, teachers, which is black.  And it's, and I passed some legislation to make it an historical black college -
Story_ID: 5191
Speaker 1: Was there a presence with the Urban League there?
Speaker 2: It was just as bad as the NAA [NAACP]-- may, may have been worse than the NAACP [National Association for the Advnacement of Colored People].  See, you have to understand the temperament of the times back then.  You had these people who-- I'm explaining it in my book that I'm writing right now, but it was-- and in the Jefferson Bank situation.  It was, they were, they were timid, even though they-- they wanted to-- to act bold, they didn't have the courage to do it.  And they were always saying that you didn't want to jeopardize the rights that we have already gained.  And then, of course, the Communist thing was really the big deal because J. Edgar Hoover [Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director 1924-1972] was trying to paint the whole national organization as Communist, and they wanted to go after them.  And so they were really terrorized by the fact that we had Pete Seeger [renowned folk singer] coming in to raise some money for our organization.
Speaker 1: So that was the thing.  Now, who were some of the people that were, names that were involved with the NAACP at that time, you know, who were the leaders there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ernest-- Ernest Calloway was the president.  He was a Teamster [a labor union], director of the news agency, with Harold Givens.  They had Evelyn Roberts, who was a former president.  And a couple more, but then you had some other people on the other side who were active in the NAACP, and who- who were militant like Margaret Bush Wilson.  But her influence was at the state level.  She was a state president and so they didn't, we didn't identify or associate with her either.  But her father was the one-- she, she came from a long line of civil rights activists.  Her mother was, was very active around 1910 to 1920 and on.  And her father was the one who paid the money to go all the way to the [United States] Supreme Court in Shelly vs. Kramer [1948 lawsuit which originated in St. Louis determined that restrictive homeowner's covenants cannot be used to prevent the sale of houses to blacks] -- that destroyed the restrictive covenants.  So that's the kind of background that Margaret Bush Wilson came from.
Speaker 1: And your group?  Who were the key members of your group, of the Youth Council?  I mean it was you and James -- who else was?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had people like Bob Curtis, Curtis Ball, Herman Thompson, Larry Rush, it was just a whole lot of-- whole lot of youngsters, who spent most of their time-- they wanted to do something positive as opposed to sitting in the cocktail lounges and philosophizing.
Speaker 1: Now, you were, what-- give me dates.  Around what period are we talking about, what years?
Speaker 2: With the Youth Council?
Speaker 1: Youth Council.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five to '57 [1957], '58 [1958] at the latest, but '57 [1957].
Story_ID: 5192
Speaker 1: So you were working also as a real estate broker around that that time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were you doing real estate, no.  Can I -- okay.
Speaker 2: Well, --
Speaker 1: I know -
Speaker 2: I was driving a bus in '56 [ 1956] and '57 [1957], first part of '57 [1957].  And then I went, around February of '57 [1957], I went into the insurance business with Supreme Life Insurance. And as a agent, under debit, and then was promoted to Assistant Manager, then to Manager.  And while I was, was Assistant Manager, I ran for the Board of Aldermen and got elected.  And so I was on the Board Aldermen until '64 [1964].  And I ran for the committeeship and won.  And you can't-- by law, you couldn't hold both positions.  So I had to resign from the Board of Aldermen, but I was looking for power at that time.  And the power was in the committee post who had patronage, just like Chicago.  And in my ward organization, I guess we had seventy-five or eighty dues-paying members.  By dues-paying patronage workers who were paying dues to the organization to keep the organization going.  And so that was my springboard and my base for running for Congress from there.
Story_ID: 5193
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your campaign for alderman, how that even, sort of came about and, you know, what, what made you decide to do it?
Speaker 2: Yes, and it was, I was still under the Youth Council people.  And we were in CORE and all.  And what happened was, a friend of mine who-- who was an attorney, worked in another-- another ward organization, didn't work in our area.  But I guess part of it-- part of it was in our area.  He asked me if I could get some people to go to the ward meeting with him, political meeting.  And so I said, yeah.  So we got about thirty or thirty-five of our people to join him at a meeting, and he had about fifteen or twenty people.  He was going in to see the committeeman, who was also the sheriff of the city, about giving him one of the jobs, Assistant Special Attorney General for the State, which was really -- it wasn't much of a job, but it paid about $1,000 a year -- no, it paid $2,000 a year, which was enough to pay the rent of a struggling, young lawyer and maybe help him to hire somebody, you know.  And so, while we were there, and it was about eighty, eighty-five whites, and they sat on one side and we sat on the other side (laughter) at the meeting.  And I saw them, they kept going up to the front and paying some money and getting a receipt. So I said, Dan-- and incidentally, his name was Dan Tillman, and he became a judge at a later point-- a very distinguished judge.  But he said, "Well, they, they all have jobs in the ward and down at City Hall, and they're paying their, their lug."  So I said," It's only two blacks over there." And he said "That's all the -- the only blacks working for this ward."  I said this ward's got to be 50, 60, 70 percent black.  I didn't even know the boundaries of the ward, but anyhow, I could speculate.  And so afterwards, the sheriff had him to stand up and say, you know, give some remarks.  And then afterwards, I went with him in the back room to talk to the sheriff who was the committee member in the ward.  And so he -- the sheriff said, "Ah, you know, $2,000, that's a lot of money to give to one black lawyer.  I think I'm gonna split it up.  I'm going to hire two and give you a thousand each."  Well, at that point, I said, "You said, what?"  And he said, "Who are you?  " I said, "You'll find out who I am."  And so, and we got into the big discussion afterwards.  I took my people down to a place called Pine Knot, which was a cocktail lounge.  And we got to drinking beer and--and talking.  I said, "You know, I'm gonna file against that guy tomorrow."  So they all said, "That's a great idea.  We can beat him" (laughter).  So I went down and filed for the committeeman, and they told me I couldn't file for that post.  And I said, "Why not?"  Said because "It's not the next election.  The next election is for the Board of Aldermen.  Now, you can file for that if you want."  I said, "Put me down."  So I filed, and then I found out where the ward boundaries were and which was great because that's where I'd been collecting insurance door-to-door for a couple of years.  And I knew a whole lot of people from there.  And that's where a lot of our demonstrations had taken place too, in the Youth Council.  So we had the makings of a- of an organization. And so for that fourteen months, we really applied ourselves full time.  I mean I engaged people and brought them in.  And then a lot of my relatives, I come from a big family on both sides, they came.  And we were, we were in the headquarters and at every meeting, it was packed.  And so I won, even though it was a lot of vote stealing in those days.  They were paper ballots and the people in-- inside could do what they wanted to do.  But we put so many voters in there that they couldn't steal them all.  At any rate, I thought-- I said, I've built this organization.  (laughter) The next meeting very few people showed up.  So I got on the phone the next day and started calling, hey, look, relatives said, "We're not politicians.  We just wanted to make sure the first Clay didn't lose," (laughter), said, we're not interested in that.  So I knew I had to start all over again and really build something (laughter).  But the next year we- by the next year, we had built it and we beat the sheriff -- we beat the committeeman, we didn't beat him as sheriff.  That's a city-wide office, but we beat him for the committeeship.  We took that.  And that-- the committeeship was after-- no, that was before alderman, before-
Speaker 1: No, I, I got elected Alderman in '59 [1959].  I supported a guy by the name of Norman Cey for Committeeman in '60 [1960].  Then in '64 [1964], I- Norman Cey--  we had a disagreement.  And never lost friendship, we're still friends today.  We talk all the time, but I didn't like his politics, and he didn't like mine.  He said I was trying to run the ward and usurp his power.  So we had a disagreement.  It wasn't a bad disagreement.  We just ran against each other.
Speaker 2: We're gonna change tapes.
Story_ID: 5194
Speaker 1: How would you describe Earl B. Dickinson?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a dynamic individual.  He was-- he was one of the colorful people that I've ever met and had such a rich history, background.  He was the founder of the what, Kappas [ Kappa Alpha Psi, a black fraternity]. Yeah, founder-- one of the founders of the Kappa -- I think it was three people who founded it.  And he was very active in Democratic politics when it was, it was not popular.  He was the first black Corporation Counsel in Chicago.  And he served on the Board of Aldermen there back in the '30's [1930s], late '20's [1920s], early '30's [1930s].  But Barry died -- and good businessman.  He, he built Supreme Life.
Speaker 1: Supreme Life [one of nation's largest black owned insurance agencies- father, Truman Gibson, was founding partner] was, wasn't it run by  [Harry] Gibson?
Speaker 2: Gibson was one of them.  He wasn't the -- Gibson was one of the- not owners, this was a stock company, but he was one of the initial guys with Earl B, who helped to build that company.
Story_ID: 5195
Speaker 1: Now, you know, in the book where it shows the picture of the -- you know, the group that helped make you-- elected, you know the group that helped get you elected they all look like young renegades (laughter)  --
Speaker 2: Oh, that was our Youth Group.
Speaker 1: Your youth, oh, these are the guys...
Speaker 2: Oh, man, no (laughing).  No, very mature women got me elected.  I mean, you know, in sixteen elections I had never had a man to run my campaign.  All of them were women.  And I had four women who did it in the sixteen year -- sixteen terms, thirty-two years.  And my top supporters were-- were women because from the very beginning when I started building the organization, I-- you know-- back then you had conditions against, so-- so bad against women and young people.  I mean it wasn't just women, young people--they, nobody wanted to respect them, wanted to pay any attention to them.  I got elected the year before John F. Kennedy got elected President, and he broke the cycle of-- of mistrust of young people because it was bad up to that point.  So what I faced in '59 [1959] at a local level, he faced nationally.  And then for women, all they wanted the women to do was just the-- the tedious kind of work of addressing envelopes and stuffing them and making phone calls and canvassing precincts.  And when it was over, the ones who were the best, they'd make them chairman of the women's division.  The men politicians dominated.  They were always in the front limousine in the tickertape parade and they received all the accolades and all the jobs.  And women got very few jobs, but when I started, I made it clear that whoever produces is gonna get the jobs.  And most of the jobs we had down at city hall went to women, I mean, because they were dynamos.  And they-- they knew how to organize.  And what happened, the word got around and then women who-- who had worked in other wards and were doing all of this heavy work, migrated to our organization.  And so we had a lot of experienced women there.  So now, it was -- the first black senator I promoted in Saint -- female senator, in St. Louis promoted to- black women to Board of Aldermen, to state Legislature, city-wide, license collector.  No, I--I ran a lot of candidates who were females and they were the first to get elected.
Story_ID: 5196
Speaker 1: Well, I want to go back to when you were Alderman.  What lessons did you learn about, you know, in terms of politics?
Speaker 2: To be bold, aggressive, flamboyant and accomplished.  And I did.  The first day I was there, I introduced a resolution to investigate the expenditure of taxpayers' money on a project, a building project that was going on with no black skilled mechanics on it.  And the next meeting, it passed with the support of the president and the board that I had just helped to get elected.  We got elected the same time.  He named me the chairman of the committee and it had subpoena power.  And when I got through with those hearings within six months they had black cement finishers, electricians, plumbers, right down the line.  Every-- every skilled position on every -- had blacks working there for the first time in the history of St. Louis.  Black mechanics had never worked on any major building projects, even in building the Homer G. Phillips Hospital, which was built for black folks, building People's Finance [ a bank?], which was paid for by black businessmen.  The unions would not let blacks work there.  And so you couldn't just force them in there because you wouldn't get anybody to build your buildings.  The orphan home there, Annie Malone, they'd never had any black skilled mechanics to work.  That was the first time.  They were there, they were skilled, but they couldn't work in their skills.  So I busted them from that day, right there the first day.  The second major bill I passed was the-- was to erase arrest records.  When they were arrested and suspected of a crime and not convicted because they had a very -- had the common habit of locking up masses of black folks whenever something happened and charging them with all kinds of crime.  And then they knew they weren't guilty and then let them out, but that remained on their record.  We had an incident in St. Louis where a young white girl was missing over the weekend, claimed that she had been abducted by five blacks, had been taken across the river to Illinois and was raped repeatedly and held hostage for several days.  In one newspaper, the daily paper, which was rotten, racist and anything else you can call it, the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, just ran all of these stories and about how these black folks had done this, and even ran an editorial that said just like the Congo.  That's when they were having all the uproar and the killings in the Congo.  And so they arrested over 500 black folk in town and charged them with suspicion of all kinds of things, suspect of rapes, for anything.  And then they let them out because it- they didn't have any-- any evidence.  Well, the St. Louis Post Dispatch decided after about a week or two to do more investigating and found out that she hadn't been attacked.  She hadn't been kidnapped.  She hadn't been raped.  But she had shacked up a whole weekend with a sailor on leave from Baltimore.  And she was married and she didn't want to tell her husband.  So now here are 500 people walking around with-- with this on their records, permanent records.  Well, I introduced a bill to expunge those, those suspect, suspected crimes.  And, of course, the city went wild.  They were -- newspapers were saying I was trying to aid black criminals, etc.  And all of a sudden, the white aldermen, because it was only six blacks out of twenty-nine on the Board of aldermen.  And the white aldermen started coming to me and saying, "Hey, can I get on your bill."  And I didn't know what the hell had happened.  But what had happened, in the lower-income white areas, they had been subjected to the same thing.  And they started calling on their-- on their aldermen and demanding, hey, you get on the bill.  Before it was over, my bill passed twenty-nine to nothing.  And -- but what happened, the Mayor vetoed it.  He said that he-- that this wasn't the way to legislate.  We overrode the veto, twenty-eight to one.  But then the City Council issued an opinion that the city couldn't legislate against a state law.  Then that's the way they got around it.  But a couple of years later, the State legislatures passed the same bill.  So that was one of them.  And, of course, I passed a bill when I was in jail now (laugther).  Did you hear about that?
Story_ID: 5197
Speaker 1: I-- I heard about-- I mean the -
Speaker 2: The housing, Fair Housing .
Speaker 1: Fair, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  You want to know what happened.  They had a-- by this time, we had about eight black aldermen, I guess, out of the twenty-nine, but I think they had two Republicans or three Republicans.  So it was-- the rest of them twenty-six, twenty-seven Democrats.  And so the-- the Fair Housing bill was coming up for a vote. They had a Democratic caucus and they said- they had a head count.  Dave Grant who was the legislative director, the one that was a friend of Dickerson, he said, "You know, our count shows that the three, even with the three Republicans voting against it, it's gonna be a tie vote.  And on a tie vote, it passes."  And so -- no, it loses.  But, so Joe Clark, who was an alderman, he said, "Well, that's bad news for you white aldermen."  He said, "Because if it loses on a tie vote, Clay's gonna be out of jail in a month or two, we know.  And he'll come in here, and he'll cast the deciding vote, and, you know, he's the biggest claim artist (laughter) in this town.  And he'll take credit for passing  the Fair Housing bill."  So they had another caucus and they ended up getting the extra vote that they needed.  So the newspapers gave me credit for passing the, a bill while I was in jail (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you really took the city by storm in many ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote the Fair Employment bill, and it passed.
Speaker 1: But I mean I'm just saying generally,  you were, you know, young and brash and, you know -
Speaker 2: And stupid.
Speaker 1: I didn't say that.
Speaker 2: You laughed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I didn't (laughter) say.  If you grin, you're in.  And that's a-- that's a  statement in the ghetto.  "If you grin, you're in."
Story_ID: 5198
Speaker 1: But it's just I wasn't expecting that.  But I said, you were young and brash, that was the only way I was headed.  What I was curious about because -- how were you managing being, you know, being a leader in the community and a politician and all the demands that go with it.  That's where I was really headed.
Speaker 2: Had a good support system,  my wife and my children.  They were in every picket line that we were in, hundreds of them for hours and hours and hours.  And when we were in jail, they were outside; everyday, every night, singing with the other hundreds and hundreds of people.  So I had a good support system.
Story_ID: 5199
Speaker 1: And then- now, what moved you to-- but you were also getting some national press for your activities though.
Speaker 2: Some.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  But, now what made you decide to run for, you know, for Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I had eleven years of elected experience.  I was the best-known politician and the most respected in our community.  I can tell you that.  But it was, the--the legislature drew a district that gave the black people an opportunity to elect one of their own.  For years, they've gone through this numbers game.  Every time you got a substantial number of blacks in one district, they would proportion them into three districts equally.  So in 1967, the-- this is it, this is really comical, Democrats controlled the House and the Senate in the state legislature and a Democratic governor.  And you had thirteen black Democrats to side with sixty-seven Republican, white Republicans who drew a district where the blacks could--could elect one of their own.  The Democrats in the House, the Democrats in the Senate, all drew a district that would put blacks in three equal parts.  But the Republican/ black version passed.  The Governor was opposed to it, the Democratic governor.  They filed a lawsuit, went to court to challenge the,the suit-- the district.  And the courts ruled in favor of the black majority district.  So here you had the Republicans and blacks creating a district for a black.  Well, by this time-- you had a number of blacks and a number of whites who--who wanted to run in the new district.  The incumbent who had been in office for twenty-two years decided he wasn't going to face this kind of controversy.  So he announced abruptly that he wasn't running again.  I was in the car on my way somewhere.  And I heard it on the radio.  I pulled over, I made two calls.  I called my wife and I called a friend of mine by the name of Leroy Tyus who was influential.  And they both agreed that I should make the run. So by that time, I turned around-- my car around and went back to my office where I had my real estate [business].  And I had a printing press there.  And I got on the phone and I got ten or twelve of my women on the phone and I got my press to rolling.  By night, we had handbills all over town saying, "Clay is ready.  Are you?"
Story_ID: 5200
Speaker 1: And so I had, I'd claimed the lead, but I was working for a labor union then that was really the substantial financial power base of the Democrats, not only in the city, but across the country.  They only had a thousand members, but they collected almost a million dollars a year because they had-- they were highest paid union in the country.  It was a construction union.  And I had integrated it, had convinced them to bring fifteen blacks in at one time.  So by this time, we had like thirty-nine blacks out of the thousand.  And they would collect a dollar a day from each member. Plus they had like two thousand, what they call special permits.  People came from Illinois, Arkansas, out-state Missouri to work for this union.  But they didn't make them members.  They just, they had special permits.  They charged them two dollars a day and no union membership for the right to work.  So like, when [Lyndon] Johnson ran in '64 [1964], this union gave him $250,000 in '64 [1964].  Do you know what that's like today?  That's a couple of million.  And when I-- and Carston, the incumbent who announced that he, that he wasn't gonna run again, came out of that union.  He had been financed by that union.  And I'm working for the union, but I wasn't gonna give them an opportunity to convince that I shouldn't run.  So by the next morning, when the boss called the meeting, all of my troops were out there.  And he was real peeved. And, of course he said-- he said, "I'm gonna be neutral in this race.  Here's a check for $10,000.  That's all you're gonna get from this union." So I said, okay, fine.  But I-- I knew he didn't want to break that alliance that we had.  We had a real coalition,  we had elected a whole lot of people, Tyus and myself, delivering the ghetto vote. and they were delivering the labor vote and for the lower-income whites.  So we had another friend who was a lawyer, very close to the, to Callanan [Larry], a Lebanese lawyer, who was very politically astute.  He devised a scheme to open up that purse, that political purse.  He knew that Callanan and Harold Gibbons, who was head of the Teamsters and the[St. Louis] Globe-Democrat hated the guy I worked for-- that's the daily paper.  And so he went to one of the reporters and gave him this weird story about how Callanan, who was the head of our union, had called Harold Gibbons who was head of the big Teamsters union.  And so, and told him the story and he printed.  And it came out on the front page story what Callanan-- see, Calloway, who was the one who took our charter away from us from the NAACP, he was a candidate for Congress.  And we had four blacks that were candidates.  And he was a Teamster, a top Teamster official.  So the story broke that Callanan called Gibbons and says, "Look, can't you convince Calloway to get out of the race so that we'll have a unified black community and Clay'll get elected."  And Gibbons fell into the trap.  When the reporter called him, he said, "Get out of the race?"  He says, "This guy ain't got but a thousand members."  And he says, "He ought to be concentrating on building his membership."  He said, "We've got 79,000 members and we've got 4,000 blacks."  So he said, "Nah, nah, we're gonna run Clay under the ground."  Well, that antagonized Calla-- Callanan.  And after that story hit, Callanan says, "Whatever you need, you got," and he handed me a check for $30,000.  Well, Callaway, Gibbons, the three, the--the three main white candidates didn't know it, but they had lost that day.  That was the end of that campaign because I knew what I could do with that kind of money.  See, you have to understand that then you could buy a Cadillac Coupe de Ville for about $3,000.  So what I could do with unlimited money.  I already had $40,000 to start with.  He said, "whatever you need, come back and get it."  So that was the end of that campaign.  I can tell you right now.
Story_ID: 5201
Speaker 1: So how far -- when he gave his support of the money, at what point in the election were you in?  That was still early on, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was getting close.  It was, well-- it probably-- see, the election wasn't that, that long because it wasn't a long period because I think it was like February when Carston announced he wasn't gonna run.  This was an August election.  The primary was the election.  So--so it wasn't-- it might have been in the end of March or early May when he opened his purse strings (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was for the primary.  You do have a general election, right?
Speaker 2: Well, we had one that year.  We had, well, we had a black who had switched from the Democratic party to -- Richard was a good guy, and he-- that was his strategy because he said, with-- with four blacks in there and really one main white contender, who was the frontrunner. And we ended up-- that's who I ended up beating, he says, all of you are gonna lose and I'm gonna be over on the Republican side and I'm gonna win.  And he probably-- it was probably a proper assessment because he was gonna carry the black vote just like I did because he was a very popular Democrat.  And he would have carried it I'm sure.  I would have supported him.
Story_ID: 5202
Speaker 1: But you had more of an organization at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't have much of an organization.  I had a real organization, plus all of the people with org-- most of the people with a organization had come to my side, people like myself, who were committee people.  Tyrus was a committeeman.  All these people had these, these jobs and organization.  And so it was seven--seven black committeemen.  The dean of the black politics at the time, by the name of Weathers , he was with Calloway.  And Troupe, who was another candidate, he was a committeeman in his ward, and he was an official for the steelworkers.  And then you had Joseph Clark, the one I mentioned about the housing.  He was on the Board of Aldermen.  Well, he withdrew, and then eventually, Troupe withdrew and threw his support to me.  But he withdrew too late to get his name off of the-- the voting machine.  And back then, they couldn't block the-- the thing.  So he ended up getting a substantial number of votes, even though he was supporting me, and truthfully supporting me because as a committeeman in his ward, he got, only got about fifty or a hundred votes.  In normal times, he would have got around 3,000, so he was throwing, you know, to me.  But anyhow, Calloway decided he was gonna stay in-- in the race, even though, you know, it looked like he was there to split the vote, which he was.  And Gibbons wasn't gonna let him out, and he didn't want to get out, and he made a lot of garbled statements like he was there to prove a point.  Well, the 'Dean' of the black politics- Weathers- at that point, withdrew his support from Calloway and gave it to me and made a public statement.  He wasn't gonna be a part of the splitting the black vote to keep a person like me from going to Congress. So everything was in place, plus I--I had the-- Callanan and Lawler and their machinery came around.  But they couldn't, you couldn't openly support me.  I mean they would have, but they gave me a choice.  And so they took an insignificant white candidate that was in there and endorsed him.  And they won their wards with this candidate.  I could have not have won their wards because I had been, you know, for fifteen years by now, this [St. Louis] Globe-Democrat just hammered me day and night because I was the leader of all of the activity.  And so in the minds of white people, I was 'persona non grata'.
Story_ID: 5203
Speaker 1: And so-- and to prove that in the-- in the general election against another black, they had two white-- all-white townships in the district that had been added, had never Republican in over fifty years.  They beat me four to one for the Republican, a black Republican out there (laughter).  So, you know, this thing was set up.  Then I had two white committeemen who did endorse me.  They were in black communities.  But they had large patronage followings too.  So everything-- and then I got, oh, I got five of the seven black weekly endorsements.  I ended up with-- no I didn't end up.  The St. Louis-- liberal St. Louis Post Dispatch, wrote an editorial endorsement you would not believe what they said.  And I'm putting all this on the record because I'm putting-- it's in my book anyhow.  They said, started off by saying that they were glad that they drew a district where a black could get elected and that they thought black people had a right to decide on who they wanted to represent them. And it's apparent that the vast majority of blacks in the First Congressional District are in favor of William L. Clay, but we disagree.  We endorse Earnest Calloway.  Can you believe the audacity? (laughing)  Well, he wasn't even a factor in the election.  I think he got like 6,000 votes, 5,000.  Troupe who had pulled out got 4,000.  And I got 27,000 so-- but-- but we disagree.  We.  (laughter)
Story_ID: 5204
Speaker 1: So how did you feel the night of the election that you won?
Speaker 2: Elated.  The only time politically that I felt better than that, that night was just two years ago, the night my son got elected over some tremendous odds.  We had to beat a whole lot of labor unions in order to beat him.  I mean I couldn't believe, what I did for the labor movement in my thirty-two years. And for them, for ten or twelve of them to come out against my son, who for seventeen years in the State Senate had been doing the same thing, it was obnoxious, you know.  But-- because, you know, for thirty-two years, I carried more water for the labor unions than the Mississippi River carries for the Gulf of Mexico.  It's just as simple as that.  And for them to do what they did to try and defeat my son, you know.  And so that night, I made it clear in-- in my speech to the-- to the people how I felt about them. And see, they didn't-- and I did it for them.  They didn't-- they didn't do anything for me.  They didn't even support me the first time I ran for Congress, but I've been better, much nicer to them than they ever have been to me.  I had three labor unions who endorsed me.  Thirty-seven endorsed Carpenter, the man that-- that I defeated.  So I didn't owe them anything.
Speaker 1: But you had had, you had had a long union affiliation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, I had identification with the workers.
Speaker 1: With workers.
Speaker 2: Yes, and right.
Speaker 1: At that point -- oh, okay, we have to change tape.
Story_ID: 5205
Speaker 1: So you got, so you got, you're elected and you arrive in Washington.  And you talked about this in the book, but what did you find there?  I mean that was, you know, what was your experience coming in because at the point that you come, what they're seven, eight-- what, how many are -
Speaker 2: It was six presently in, in Congress.  Three of us came the same day, [Louis] Stokes, [Shirley] Chisolm and myself, made a total of nine--nine blacks, the first time in history that nine had sat simultaneously in the U.S. Congress.  And at that point, Stokes and I decided that maybe we ought to be organized.  They had what they called the Democratic Select Committee which wasn't very organized.  It was-- occasionally they would meet with the Democratic leadership and express their concerns about some legislation.  But we decided that it ought to be formalized.  And we sat with Diggs and Conyers and Hawkins and decided that we ought to structure it so that we, we met regularly, that we raised money, that we hired staff and done all the other things that a caucus should do.  Well, that was during the end of the first term.  And immediate-- the following term, five new black members came to Congress, two of them were replacements.  One replaced [William] Dawson of Chicago and Charlie Rangel [Charles Rangel] replaced-- Metcalf  [Ralph Metcalf] replaced Dawson of Chicago and Rangel, Rangel replaced Adam Clayton Powell.  So that took us up to twelve when we really started the, the caucus to functioning.  And about three months later, Walter Fauntroy was elected from the District as a delegate.  So the thirteen of us became the initiators of the- a program for blacks in the Congress.
Story_ID: 5206
Speaker 1: Can you go back though to who those five were that were serving, you know, when you -- I mean six, I'm changing the number.
Speaker 2: Well, the oldest, the one with the most seniority was [William L.] Dawson. Then you had Adam Clayton Powell. The third was Augustus Hawkins of California.  Then Nix of-- of Philadelphia and John Conyers of Detroit and Diggs, Charlie Diggs of-- of Detroit.  Charlie came in before Hawkins or Robert Nix or Conyers.  He came in, in '50 [1950], '55 [ 1955].
Speaker 1: So what were your impressions of your, you know, fellow, fellow Congressmen, the ones that were already there?  What were your impressions of them?
Speaker 2: Well, they-- they had, they had done some-- some things.  I mean Charlie Diggs was-- was rapidly becoming a spokesperson for--for black Africa.  And Conyers was outspoken on civil rights.  Gus Hawkins was an expert on education.  Dawson was in his waning years and just going through the motions.  I think he was sick.  And-- 'cause he died the next-- he didn't win the next time, and then he died shortly after that.  So I--I was impressed by them.  They--they had made sacrifices and they were still dedicated to, to the cause.  So it was just that they were in such a small number and you had no real impact.  But by the time you hit twelve and thirteen, you did have some impact because ideologically, the House was just about evenly divided between liberals and conservatives and not between-- even though the Democrats had a big majority, a whole lot of them were from the South and they were as conservative as anybody could be. As conservative, which is a nice word, as Strom Thurmand [former Republican senator from South Carolina, arch segregationist].
Story_ID: 5207
Speaker 1: Now, when you-- talk about the early days of the Caucus, you know,  I mean those beginning days, and you've been trying to develop-- I have heard that, you know, like Adam Clayton Powell-- oh, but he was replaced, that's right.  But in those early days -
Speaker 2: Well, Adam wasn't around much.
Speaker 1: He wasn't around, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean Adam took the position.  He- see Adam was sworn in the day that Shirley Chisolm, [Louis] Stokes and myself were sworn in.  He had been out for a couple of years, but the court said you had to take him, seat him.  In seating him, the, they took-- first of all, the Democrats took his seniority.  Secondly, the Congress reduced his pay to 50 percent, I think it was, after they taxed him for-- for some reimbursements that they claim was mismanagement of funds.  And so he took the position, and he said it on several occasions, and when people would say, you know, Adam wasn't there, he says, "Part-time pay, part-time employee."  And that was his position, so he didn't show up much.
Speaker 1: But what was the-- can you speak to just the beginnings of sort of trying to set some agendas and direction and, you know, working together period.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well first of all we had, we had opposition from, from the Democrats in particular.  Mike Mansfield in the Senate refused to meet with us and publicly stated at a press conference that he doesn't meet with any special interest group, defining thirteen black members of Congress as a special interest group.  He could have said that our interests far exceeded the welfare of blacks, far exceeded his own interpretation of what was good for this country. And then we had liberal organizations and liberal whites who resented our organizing.  I mean they thought they should be spokespersons for all liberal causes and especially for blacks.  And we- I mean we encountered that in many situations.  But our agenda was, first of all, it was thirteen of us now.  And we didn't want all of us put on the Education and Labor Committee or on House Administration.  So our agenda was, was to overcome that fixation that they had that all blacks had to be in certain positions.  And our first big fight, the first hurdle was to get Ron Dellums on the Armed Services Committee.  I mean the chairman of the Armed Services Committee took the position that Ron Dellums was opposed to-- to the military and he shouldn't be on there.  And so he-- he said, he wasn't gonna put him on.  Well, we met with the Democratic leadership in the House.  And we just threw the gauntlet down that he goes on.  We don't let anybody from South Carolina decide whose gonna speak for black folks.  And so, it was fish or cut bait.  And Carl Albert, who was the Speaker then, decided that Dellums was gonna go on the Armed Services Committee.  And then we were able to get blacks on other committees.  Shirley [Chisholm] went on Rules Committee, [Louis] Stokes went on Appropriations.  Initially, they had Stokes, they had all three of us on the Education Committee: Chisolm, Stokes and myself.  Then [Augustus]Hawkins was already over there, and so even had a Postal Committee, the Post Office. So we, we said, no, we're gonna spread out.  We got somebody on Banking, Parren Mitchell  went on the Banking Committee.  So that was our initial agenda.  The second was to try and raise some money, which we started, and we were successful.  And we hired a staff director, somebody that Hawkins and I had met in Tokyo, who was the Attach for the Labor Committee of the American Embassy there.  And so he took a leave of absence and came and helped organize the staff and all for the Black Caucus and stayed for a couple of years.
Story_ID: 5208
Speaker 1: Now, I want, just to put this in historical context, this is at least 1970, right?  Is it 19-
Speaker 2: 1971.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we started in '70 [1970], yeah.  And, but see-- and our big confrontation was with, with [Richard] Nixon who refused to meet with us.  And we wasn't gonna let him get away with that.  So, so we started a campaign to force him to meet so that we could present him with, with what we said was a crisis in black America.  And as a result of our agitation, it became worldwide. Tass [Russian newspaper] from the Soviet Union and Chinese, Red Chinese press and all, they, I mean they just distributed all of my releases every time we put something out.  And the pressure from around the world caused Nixon to--to give in and to and to meet with us. And it was a very historic meeting because we presented him with sixty-one recommendations which was probably the most studied and researched project that blacks had ever come up with to determine the economic status of blacks.  It was-- it was performed by Carl, or Urban Coalition -
Speaker 2: Holman.
Speaker 1: Carl--Carl Holman. And it was for-- for weeks they sat in the headquarters of the National Delta Office  [Delta Sigma Theta, a black sorority] -- (phone ringing)  [long pause]
Speaker 2: They sat in the, in the National Office of the Delta Sorority, and people from all over the country, experts came in and those who didn't come to make contributions, they sent, they wrote dissertations and all and Carl Holman and a number of other people, put them into concise form and, and presented these sixty-one recommendations that the Caucus and took to the President of the United States. So it was a very exciting time.  Based on-- two months later, we had our big fundraiser in June at the Shore- Sheraton Hotel, that was the famous speech delivered by Ossie Davis and it's still very relevant to today.
Story_ID: 5209
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that speech a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well, I introduced him.  And in my speech, it was a time I used a quotation about blacks not having any permanent friends, no permanent enemies, just permanent interests.  But Ossie went on to talk about the plan and what we have to do.  And we have to have a plan.  We have to -- and we have to write it out and we have to memorize it and of course, nobody can speak like Ossie as far as I'm-- as far as I'm concerned.  And the way he- he projected it, and even the -- some of the highlights of the speech was like he said, Martin is dead.  That's on page three.  He says, after the funeral, we turn to page four and continue on the plan.  It was just littered with, I mean, with those kinds of phrases.  And the 2,400 black people who were sitting there that never experienced anything like that.  He, he was just magnificent, magnificent.
Speaker 1: And the-
Speaker 2: Excuse me, let me -- and one of the reasons I wrote my book was the next day, The Washington Post said that there were 500 people in attendance at that dinner.  And a couple of years later, they were still using the 500 figure and Stokes said to me one -- he said, you need to write a press release and correct that.  And I said, what we need to do more than that, we need to document the history of this Black Caucus.  And so that became my mission, every night, every weekend for four or five years, I devoted myself to-- to writing that book.
Story_ID: 5210
Speaker 1: Now, I want to-- or maybe I should go to -- but can I just go back to the Caucus for a minute?  The idea of the Caucus.  I mean I'm trying to have you put things in, you know, historical in terms because there weren't -- caucuses were new.  black caucuses were new, right?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I'm trying to establish because even the state -- I remember that in, you know, when I was doing a state project, they were looking at, you know, what you guys had done on the federal level because I'm just saying, where did the idea come from?  And why was there that perception of need at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, it -- I guess it had always been a need for black to-- blacks to unite and, and to and to establish certain kinds of issues that are relevant to them and are being neglected and to make sure that we pushed for that.  And we were the first to organize a caucus of, of that type and it was duplicated all across the country. In fact, in the Alaskan Legislature, you will -- and this is comical, the sole black member of the legislature organized a Black Caucus and got funds from the legislature to come to the Black Caucus Annual Dinner [ in Washington D.C.].  And so that's, that was the kinds of things that happened.  And it-- it-- it inspired -- it became a catalyst for blacks to unite all across this country, even though there weren't that many black elected officials at the time.  But it became the catalyst for it, for that.  And we- we held a number of seminars with black elected officials too.
Speaker 1: And your mandate in your early days was what?  That's what I'm just trying you, to get you to  -- you said, we came up with this six, you know, the sixty-one-point plan.  But when looked at your different areas of the country that you represented, was it difficult to come up with that plan?
Speaker 2: No, well, really we represented blacks all over the country because there were no black representatives in the south.  And so we spoke for black people universally.  It wasn't until years later that you started getting black representation from Southern states.  And Barbara Jordan [U.S. Representative - Texas] was the first to come and Andy Young,  [Andrew Young, U.S. Representative - Georgia] they were the first two to come from the South.  But now, I guess, the majority of the black representatives are from southern states.  So it's a kind of a mixed agenda now.  Before it was- it was strictly focused on civil rights and advancement of those rights and elimination of- of the barriers to- based on race. And now there are all kinds of interests, black members of Congress, which doesn't negate- negate the- the reason for a Caucus.  But they've got agricultural interests.  They've got water interests, a lot of other interests.
Story_ID: 5211
Speaker 1: Now, let me, can you-- I'm going to go to the book for a little bit.  When you start really you decided you were gonna do it-- this is jumping forward, but, when you decided you were gonna do the book, what made you decide to go back to the beginning and trace that?  I was just wondering and -
Speaker 2: Well, I--I was writing on the-- from the Caucus standpoint.  And then when I got in touch with-- with a publisher, he said-- I gave him my material, and he said that he liked it, but he would prefer that I go back and do the history of all of the members of Congress, going back to 1870.  So that took me another 6 or 8 or 10 months to do that, but that's how it went back to, to do the history of black members of Congress.
Speaker 1: Do you think that that gave you a whole different perspective, that going back because there's some interesting history in those?  I mean were you aware of that history?
Speaker 2: No, and most people were not.  And I was fortunate in, after he gave me that assignment to go back, I was fortunate to meet a person.  I was up at Martha's Vineyard, and someone introduced me to an individual who was ninety-eight years old. He had been the President of North Carolina A&T [ historically black university].  In fact, he was the President, I think, when the sit-in's started.  And they threatened to fire him if he didn't pull the chain on these students at the- at the lunch counters.  And he refused and I guess eventually they did get rid of him.  But in talking to him, I told him that I was writing this book and all.  And he said, you know, when I get home, I'm gonna send you a manuscript that I--I did on some research I did on these members of Congress back in the Reconstruction period.  And sure enough he did.  And he sent me, it was about forty pages and just-- it was, it was quotes mostly from the, what was in the Congressional record and citations, the page number and the dates and all.  And so based on that, I could go to the Library of Congress-- I didn't go.  I had the librarian to send it to me because I had jurisdiction over the Library of Congress as chairman of the committee and I also had jurisdiction over the Smithsonian and the Kennedy Center.  Those were, it was side jurisdiction.  It had nothing to do with my chairmanship of post office or my ranking membership on the Education Committee.  That was House Administration.  And he sent me that.  And so we were able to get the-- the right dates and the, the whole speeches and all of that.  And so we knew what the issues were.  And then we were able to find out about these individuals, their background and all, and unlike what--what W. Griffin [ D.W. Griffin, filmmaker of early twentieth century- referring to film 'Birth of A Nation'] said about them, they were not numbskulls.  And they didn't eat chicken on the floor of Congress and throw the bones down.  And they didn't walk around barefooted and--and the State legislatures that they came from.  They all were experienced.  They had legislative experience.  Most of them were very rich.  They were the most educated people in Congress at that time.  And they got their educations around the world, in Canada and England, the School of Economics [ London School of Economics] over there, all.  They were -- I mean they were bankers, large landowners.  They were people of substance, and so I was shocked.  I didn't-- first of all, I didn't know there was twenty-two of them during that period.  And secondly, I certainly didn't know that they had the kind of education and the kind of experience that they had.
Story_ID: 5212
Speaker 1: So when you started sharing it-- because then at this point, you're becoming sort the historian of the, you know--
Speaker 2: Of the Caucus.
Speaker 1: Of the Caucus.  And so when you're sharing this, were people also surprised at what they were hearing?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm sure they were, yeah.  They, oh, they were surprised about the Caucus itself and some of the things that--that transpired during the--the formation of the caucus.
Speaker 1: Right, hearing those things.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how they had developed. Now, you know, you deal in the book about the treatment, you know, a feeling of isolation that had existed, you know, and that white-- I guess anyone coming with great anticipation and alot of times, you know, not even maybe the issue of how to address your constituents concerns when you just have concerns yourself, in terms of how you operate, you know, what you've given, what you're not.  You know, fighting for your own place in that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but by this time, I think a number of us had developed a-- an attitude, if not superior, at least of equality with the rest of the members of--of the Congress.  And it, I think because we came through the Civil Rights Movement and because we had this association with some of these others, we--we knew by then that no race of people who had a monopoly on ignorance and no race of people had a monopoly on skills.  And so we were able to--to operate on an equal level with them.  They couldn't outthink us.  They might have had more influence and more power but--see, power is something that can be positive or negative.  And we realized our negative power.  And we were prepared to use it in every instance.  And we were aggressive about it and outspoken.  We didn't slip around in backrooms and whisper.  And we said right up front, here's what we want, and here's what we're gonna get and if we don't get it, we're gonna be angry.  And you don't want us angry in this Party.  And I think-- it proves that you can get what you want without being in the majority.
Story_ID: 5213
Speaker 1: So what you're really describing is a very vibrant period of time when there was a lot of activity happening?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean daily and almost twenty-four hours a day because we were, you know, there were so many things that we had to do to make sure that this Caucus got off the ground and to make sure that it was a Caucus -- and see even the meaning of it became important.  We weren't going to say this is a Democratic Study Group or this wasn't a Committee of Democrats.  The naming of it was Congressional Black Caucus.  There were some people who raised the question, well, do we have to call ourselves black?  Well, what--what else were you?  You weren't gonna change.  I mean you're black.  And you're here because black people sent you here, so don't- I mean let's don't confuse what the issue is here.  And then, we had to go out, we even had a meeting, calling together the black millionaires to come to Washington, D.C. (laughter).  We had a meeting in Billy Simpson's.  And about five or them did show up.  They weren't the multi-millionaires.  Jessie Hill [former CEO of Atlanta Life Insurance] to represent Atlanta Life.  Jackie Robinson [famed Brooklyn Dodger] even showed.  We had [Norman] Houston from Golden State, his son.  He sent his son.  And a couple of other people, about five.  And we had a good meeting with them, and they- they expressed their--their concern and willingness to help.  And they-- and they did help.  So, you know, we had to go through those kinds of growing pains and which, I guess any organization in its formative days go through.  But- and we had-- we had conferences all around this country.  We- on the media, we had--we jointly, with Howard University [ historically black university in Washington D.C.], hold -- held hearings around the country to document and to point out that blacks didn't have any -- had one television license in the country and only a few radio licenses.  And so, you know, we had to build that support and that agitation for that.
Story_ID: 5214
Speaker 1: We had a conference at-- and this is another sidebar piece of comedy, we had a conference at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] with the, the editors and the publishers of major newspapers.  And it was co-- co-sponsored by the Philadelphia paper, the Boston Globe and one of the Chicago papers.  And, of course, some of the more liberal papers refused to participate.  But we must have had representatives there from thirty-five or forty papers.  And they raised a substantial number of money because  they paid a fee to come.  And then somebody absorbed all of the other expenses, so everything that they paid-- if it was $200, I don't remember, if it was $250.00 per person, it went to the Black Caucus.  And one of the-- the side incidents was [Ron] Dellums, [Louis] Stokes and I got there the night before the conference.  And we were greeted by a very insistent, radical and intelligent young man who said to us that we couldn't hold this conference on the campus of Harvard.  And, of course, we said, "Why?"  He says because they have all of this investment in South Africa and our students are agitating to get them to withdraw the investment.  So I said to him, I said, "Are you in school here?"  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "You can go to school every day on this campus, but we can't come for two days with our agenda? " He started laughing.  So Dellums says, "Well, you want us to join you in a protest?  We'll be glad to do that."  So he said, "Fine."  So we-- we organized the protest and we marched and launched a picket line around the head of the university.  And then we helped print some handbills and all.  And we were in favor, and then when he graduated from law school, he came by my office to see if I knew if anything was open.  I said, "Well, I got an opening.  Would you like to work for me? " And the young man was Randall Robinson, the head of yeah-- TransAfrica [ an organization that spearheaded the movement to influence U.S. policies toward international black leadership.]  He founded TransAfrica and the Caucus helped him do that.  Charlie Diggs, after he left my office, he went for several months or so.  Charlie Diggs hired him because Charlie, as I said earlier, was focusing on Africa.  And Charlie also introduced him to the right people, Afri -- in Africa and here who helped to raise the money to get him started in Trans Africa.  And he'll tell you the story, I've heard him mention it several times.  Also, Gus Hawkins and I and one other, met with the Ford Foundation.  We got the original money for the Joint Center for Political Science.  And, um -
Speaker 2: Eddie Williams.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  It wasn't Eddie Williams then.  It was the guy they named the building, and the city building after down there.  And you see, Joint Center wasn't gonna be, was the name.  It was supposed to be Howard University- Mark, Dr. Clark, Kenneth Clark and the Congressional Black Caucus-- and after Ford [Foundation] made the committment, then they- they backed out on us because Congress had started putting pressure on these tax-exempt organizations about -
Story_ID: 5215
Speaker 1: Let's try to focus on some of the things.  I'd like you to talk about your role with the Hatch Act.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and any of the other legislation, you know, that you're proud of.
Speaker 2: Hatch Act was a long, long period of fighting to get it made the law, twenty-two years after I first introduced it.  I passed it almost every session.  But it was either defeated in the Senate or vetoed by--by the President.  It was undermined one year when we thought sure it was gonna pass.  And that was when Jimmy Carter was the President.  Jimmy Carter went to the Public Employees Union and--and committed to being able- one he would push for the passage and the signing of the Bill.  And then he went to the Democratic National Convention and argued-- he was by then the candidate and he was assured of being the candidate. And went before the, the Rules Committee and got the Rules Committee to--to endorse what was a minority plank, which was the Hatch Act. Got them to reverse their position and come out in favor-- or the Platform Committee, come out in favor of Hatch Act reform and it passed at the [Democratic National] Convention.  The first month we were back in session, I passed it again in the House, sent it over to the Senate and Jimmy Carter convinced Abraham-- the Senator from Connecticut, Senator Ribicoff [Abraham Ribicoff], who was chairman of the committee to kill it in the-- in the committee.  He turned it over to the senator from Arkansas [ref. to Dale Bumpers?]at the sub-committee level.  They had one day of hearing and it was dead because Carter was opposed to what he went to the Democratic Convention and made-- and made a big issue to get the support of federal employees.  So we didn't pass it in his administration.  That's the kind of underhanded things that Presidents and other politicians have done in my thirty-two years in the Congress.  And I don't mind telling people about it.  It was- it was really underhanded.
Story_ID: 5216
Speaker 1: So talk about the Hatch Act and what-- what it - I mean for people who don't know about what its role was?
Speaker 2: Well, Hatch Act was limitations on what federal employees could do politically; the only country in the world that really tried to tie the hands of- of Federal employees.  I mean they took their basic rights of free speech away from them with the Hatch Act.  And it was no- no justification for what they, what they did.  When they passed the Hatch Act limitations back in- during [President Franklin] Roosevelt's administration, there had been some abuse, but they weren't from- from career federal employees.  They were from the people in the initialed agencies, the WPA and all of those agencies, that were really controlling sort of a-- a patronage system for Democratic elected officials, for governors and senators, etc.  And they used some of these people in the election process, misused them really.  And so then there was a demand that you reform the system.  And so they put all of these limitations on federal employees that they could not participate in --in politics.  I mean you couldn't even go to a political rally and make a speech.  You couldn't put a sign in your window.  You couldn't put a bumper sticker on your car, even if-- if your wife drove the car. If it was registered in your name, it was a violation of the Hatch Act.  And it wasn't any scale of punishment.  You were either in violation or not and if you were in violation, you were fired.  It wasn't any-- any provision for suspension or any of that.  And so for twenty-two years, I tried to-- to pass a reform measure that would open it up.  I wanted to open it up all the way, but in compromise, we had to say that the federal employees could not run for public office.  I think that's ludicrous.  I think that's ridiculous as well.  But we did relieve most of the prohibitions they had imposed on federal employees.
Story_ID: 5217
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go off of that to, you're thirty-four years, right -
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Thirty-two, sorry.  Over your thirty-two years, what administrations did you like working with and which ones you didn't?
Speaker 2: Oh, Bill Clinton by far was, was the easiest one to work with and the most enjoyable one.  I spent a considerable amount of time with him and with Hillary.  In fact, you know, I had played a role in the -- I had jurisdiction for federal employees in the healthcare areas.  So that brought Hillary into--into my, my area to try and help devise the, the master plan for providing health for, for the nation.  And, of course, Clinton, the first bill that President Clinton signed was mine, the Family and Medical Leave Act.  And-- and he signed also the-- the Hatch Act Reform and a number of other major pieces of legislation that I--I sponsored.  And I guess, other than that, I didn't have a real rapport with or a real appreciation of any of the others who served.
Speaker 1: Not at all?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I--I wish I'd been able to serve under Lyndon Johnson because he was a fascinating individual.  But I went out as he was-- I came in as he was going out.  He did have me at-- at his State of the Union-- I mean last White House dinner, which was a great honor for me and my wife to-- even before I came to Congress to be guests there. But I just thought he was an individual that was really committed to resolving the problems of poverty and race in this country and extended a tremendous amount of time and effort to do so.
Speaker 1: Because that's against a lot of people's common perceptions out here.  You know they think of the Kennedy's and--and it was really Johnson that took on the -
Speaker 2: Kennedy opposed all the civil rights laws, all of them, and played the game like all the other Presidents of the United States.  We didn't pass a civil rights bill under his leadership.  In fact, some of our civil rights leaders publicly admonished him and he-- he wasn't pushing for civil rights.
Story_ID: 5218
Speaker 1: And, well, you know, the other thing I found so true, as you were saying, in some cases you, there were, there was more ability (unclear) to get things done, aside from Bill Clinton, but you've had some cases of getting things done more under Republican administrations than Democratic.
Speaker 2: Well, one in particular is the Hawkins [Augustus Hawkins, Rep-California]- is the, the--the Martin Luther King Holiday bill.  And that--that bill was,was sabotaged again by Jimmy Carter.  And you-- you have to understand that here we had a House that was controlled by the Democrats, a Senate that was controlled by the Democrats and a Democratic President that was-- blacks had put in and had made the nominee of the Democratic Party in the primary.  And we couldn't get the Holiday bill passed under those circumstances, but the year when Ronald Reagan came in with a Republican Senate, he was the one who had the honor of signing-- reluctantly-- the Martin Luther King Holiday Bill.  And I say reluctantly because he, in his ad-libbing at the ceremony, they asked him if the records of Martin Luther King were gonna be opened, and if that would have any-- any bearing on the Holiday bill.  And he says, "Well, in fifty years, we'll know what kind of person he was, won't we?"  And so, well, even though he signed, the Republican leader in the--the majority leader in the Senate was the one who maneuvered it through.  He-- he held the bill that passed the House.  He held it at the desk so it wouldn't go to the Senate and be-- to the Committee and be killed there.  And then he'd bring it up at a strategic time and it passed.
Story_ID: 5219
Speaker 1: But Jimmy Carter didn't push it, and there's evidence that his-- his operatives were working against it.  So I was very disappointed in that, very disappointed.  The Black Caucus was disappointed in Jimmy Carter, period.  I mean he fought the Hawkins-Humphrey Full-Employment Bill [Hubert Humphrey, Vice-president under Lyndon Johnson and Senator-Minnesota], forced so many amendments on the bill that when he finally signed it--it was useless.  It's the law of the land now.  Nobody ever mentions it.  I mean the bill was, was supposed to use the resources of government to ameliorate poverty in this country.  That means to--to help encourage employment and to also become employee of last resort.  But the President of the United States was supposed to give a report every year documenting how they were gonna use these resources for those purposes.  But then he forced in the-- in the legislation-- that was one of the things that it was optional, that the President didn't have to-- it wasn't mandatory.  He may give it.  And no President since the bill was passed has, has given us a--a statement in advance or even after the fact, how they were gonna use the resources of government to eliminate poverty in this country and create jobs.
Story_ID: 5220
Speaker 1: So do you think it was disappointing -- what was disappointing was that he was elected -- I mean that black people had helped him get elected, like in the case of Bill Clinton and he was a Democratic President, and, you know, the other Presidents were all Republicans, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you had Ford and -- Nixon, Ford, Reagan, Bush.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm just saying that he was the one loner in there sort of -- I mean I'm just saying, was there, was it because everyone had such high hopes or because black people had helped him get elected or, you know, because he was Democratic or is it just -
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was a combination of that, but I don't look at who gets the President elected.  Once he's elected, he should-- he should be the President of all the people, including those who voted against him.  And he should try to do something for everybody in this country instead of trying to do something against them.  And so I--I don't have any high praises for Nixon, Ford, Carter or Bush because I--I don't see, I didn't see them, you know, in the- in the spirit of trying to-- to help people who have been ignored and abandoned and pushed to the side.  You know, I had a conversation with somebody a couple of years ago while I was still in the House.  And they were telling me, "Well, look at the great job he's doing.  He's with this organization that's building houses for people."  And my response was, "One at a time?"  He was the President of the United States.  He could have built millions of houses, but he cut the Housing budget.  That's another issue that the Black Caucus disagreed with him on.  Now, he's Habitat -
Speaker 1: - For Humanity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, building houses, one at a time?  What the hell are we talking about?
Speaker 1: So, poor Carter.  But he got -- well, never mind, got his Nobel Peace Prize.  Well, good. Look I, and maybe he could have got it twenty years earlier if he hadn't run in politics, you know.  He- good, I'm-- I mean I don't begrudge him.  I'm just saying that, that the members of Black Caucus had many, many problems with him.  One year we refused to invite him, affirmatively refused to invite him to our annual affair.  We took a vote of the Caucus.  And the motion was-- was introduced by Gus [Augustus] Hawkins, the author of the- of the Hawkins-Humphrey Full-Employment Bill at a-- at a meeting with all the members there.  And we voted not to invite him to a Caucus affair.  That's just -- the rift between us was-- was as wide and as deep as any that I encountered while we were in -- while I was a member of Congress.
Story_ID: 5221
Speaker 1: Because I don't think -- that's not people's common perception out there.  Let me ask you this.  Of the people that you worked with in your career, are there people that sort of stand, you know, shoulders above the rest, that, you know, you either enjoyed with or you found them equally committed or I mean you've talked about Bill Stokes [ ref. to Louis Stokes- Rep- OH] a little bit -- you talked -
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in the Caucus, of course, we had a lot of heroes and I respected them all, I mean, but they were in separate, different areas of concern.  You had Parren Mitchell doing his job with set-asides for minority businesses and Stokes who was a master appropriator.  I mean he got money for so many projects around this country.  And, of course, Barbara Jordan was, was outstanding and Charlie Rangel.  We just had-- Bill Gray [ William Gray- Rep - Pennsylvania] , I mean these people did all kinds of, of wonderful things and used their influence-- Julian Dixon.  They used their influence to better this world, and that's what I've always thought being in the legislature was about, about improving the quality of life for the people that you represent.
Speaker 1: So you're an old-fashioned politician in many ways.
Speaker 2: Well, I believe that you reward your friends and you punish your enemies, and I-- I've made it this far based on that concept.  And I don't take any, didn't take any prisoners when I was, was out there.  And you can-- you can go out and go back to St. Louis and-- and see the highways littered with dead bodies that I- that I killed in this political process, who double-crossed us as a people.
Story_ID: 5222
Speaker 1: And you never really forgot St. Louis in the whole process either?
Speaker 2: No, that's -
Speaker 1: That was your base.
Speaker 2: That's my only base.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And the people, you know, one of the people, Pearlie, you talked about the women that were, you know -- Pearlie -
Speaker 2: Evans.
Speaker 1: Evans was one person who was very active and, you know, supportive -
Speaker 2: Yeah, she ran my--my office for twenty-five years.  Gwen Giles, who became state senator was my first campaign manager and Doris Moore Glen, school administrator was--was my third campaign manager.  And then another school employee,Gwen Reid.  These are magnificent women who did magnificent jobs of organizing and became experts in various political fields.  I mean Pearline became one of the persons that- for drawing maps of congressional districts and state districts and city districts that a lot of people called on for her expertise.
Story_ID: 5223
Speaker 1: Now, are there other things in your, you know, in your years of service that you're proud of?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well- it's several, I mean, some--some of them in the pension area.  And, you know, I helped to write ERISA [Employee Retirement Income Security Act] and helped to rewrite it several times, but my--my main contribution to the pension reform was when I was chairman of the committee [Pension Reform Committee], the sub-committee that was able to pass a piece of legislation to reduce vesting from ten years to five years.  And that was based on a hearing I had and some-- when one witness said to me, you know why 82 percent of all women who are retired are living on their husband's retirement, not their own?  And I said, no.  And he said because they can't work ten consecutive years for the same employer because they get married -- most of them get married at an early age, right out of high school, work a couple of years, get married, have a baby, quit, go to another job and this is, you know, goes on and on.  And so this was the first time I had heard of it.  And so I introduced a bill to reduce it to five years.  I thought it would be difficult to get through but, you know, it flew through.  In fact, I've been very fortunate in legislation.  I've probably passed more legislation that became law in the thirty years I was there than any other member of congress.  I passed 295 bills that are now law.  And a lot of them were resolutions and citations. But then, a lot of landmark legislation there to and a lot of labor legislation, a lot of legislation in the field of education dealing not only with black colleges or historically black colleges, but other colleges, student loans and health-- Family Medical Healthcare Leave Act.  As we talked about Hatch Act Reform, just a whole lot of major legislation I was responsible for.  And you-- you have to look at it when you, when you consider that about 75 percent of the members of congress spend their career and never pass a piece of legislation.  Gerald Ford was in twenty-five years and never passed any legislation.  But that's because the Democrats were in charge for forty-two years, and they're not gonna let any Republicans pass any legislation.  And now, since '94 [1994], the Republicans have been in charge, and they're not gonna let any Democrats pass any legislation.  So it's 203 Democrats sitting there now.  Any of them that came after '94 [1994], if the Republicans stay in power, aren't gonna ever pass any legislation.  And then if you don't get-- if you're not in strategic positions, if you're not chairman of a sub-committee with key legislation or a full committee with major legislation, you're not gonna pass any major legislation there.  So I was very fortunate to be at the right place at the right time, with the right temperament; and lucky I guess, to have the kind of support among my, among my colleagues.
Story_ID: 5224
Speaker 1: Now, was there any time that you spoke out that you regretted it?
Speaker 2: Probably many times (laughing).  I'll have to stop and think, but I'm, I'm sure that there -
Speaker 1: But there was the -- what about with Agnew?
Speaker 2: Oh, Agnew, nah, I've never regretted that.  I think he- Agnew was a crook when he came to-- came to the White House, and he was crook when they kicked him out of the White House.  He was taking graft in the basement of the White House in little paper bags like people bring their lunch.  This man, look and--and his boss, his boss was a crook.  I didn't-- I didn't regret whatever I did to Nixon and to Agnew.  And for them to try and make a saint out of Nixon and to an extent, out of Agnew, was a disgrace.  It's a shame to this country.  I mean when Nixon died, three weeks of-- of mourning for a man who almost stole our country away from us.  And see, and, and he got personal in his politics. He had 240 people on a list that he called the enemies of the country.  I was one of them.  And for years, I didn't know what happened to me.  I had five grand juries investigate me, and I beat them all.  The Justice Department filed a suit against me for $189,000 for misappropriating my travel allowance.  We settled out of court for $1,875, from $189,000 to $1,785.  And I had to give them a check for $1,875.  And they had to give me a check for $2,500 'cause in my reconstructing my-- my travel, I found $2,500 worth of travel they had never paid me for.  I mean, a U.S. Attorney in open court accused me of selling narcotics, illegal-- illegal narcotics.  This went on for eighteen months.  Every place I went and every time my name appeared in the press, it's alleged to have been selling narcotics.  I couldn't get anybody to listen to me at the Justice Department.  So I got a hundred, I got 108 members of Congress, including Senators-- I think it was eighty-nine members of the House who signed a letter to the Attorney General demanding that he impanel a grand jury to investigate me. Usually it's to drop an investigation.  And so we went over to see him, Tip O'Neill [ Speaker of the House 1973-1986], Jim White, [Louis ] Stokes,  [John] Conyers , Barbara Jordan to see him. To say, "Look, you can't let this man hang out here like this.  Your U.S. Attorney said he had evidence that he was selling illegal narcotics.  He didn't present it in the trial that he was conducting against another individual.  He hasn't presented it now.  We demand an investigation.  If he's got evidence, produce it, indict him, convict him, send this congressman to jail."  Well, then, he said he wasn't gonna have a grand jury, but he was gonna investigate, which he did.  I mean they had thourough-- see I got letters and phone calls from people all over the country in jail, saying that they had interviewed, and all they wanted to know if I was involved with them in narcotics.  Well, then the Attorney General, a Republican, held a press conference and said there's no evidence.  He was the second Republican Attorney General who held a press conference to say that there was no evidence against me, one on the illegal evasion of income tax.  Then I had a Democrat, three Attorney Generals- had a Democratic Attorney General who conducted an investigation.  And he had a press conference to say there's no evidence that I was involved in whatever it was the grand jury was investigating.  Now, I didn't know what was hitting me.  And then, in that count, counter-intelligence thing that came out, they revealed the 240 people that was on this list.  I was one of them on Nixon's list.  Now, this is the man that they've got a-- well, that's typical of us.  Here, we name an airport after Ronald Reagan after he fires 12,000 employees (laughing) associated with air traffic controllers [ PATCO- Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization].  We name the Justice Department's Building after the most corrupt individual ever to serve in government, J. Edgar Hoover [FBI Director 1924-1972].  So it was, I guess it'- it's normal that we would want to, to make a saint out of Richard Nixon.
Story_ID: 5225
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Clay, what do you think, when you look at where politics -- well, I would say, do you see it going in phases?  I mean you've seen -- do you see patterns for things or do you see like, your son is now serving in your slot, and -
Speaker 2: In my slot, in my slot, yeah, (laughter) -
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean not in your slot, I didn't mean it that way.  I didn't, sorry. I didn't mean it that way.
Speaker 2: No, that's okay.  It's my district, yeah, my district, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: I didn't mean it that way.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: It's about sixteen members of Congress now whose fathers were, or mothers were -
Speaker 1: No, I know, but I mean it's a-
Speaker 2: Well, if your father's a doctor, you'll want to be a doctor.  Your father's a lawyer, you'll want to be-- your father's a bum, you'll want to be bum, so...
Speaker 1: But you said-- had said that was, your, you know, you're one of-- besides you winning, you know, your son winning -
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: -- was a very proud moment for you.  And I'm wondering, do you see, you know, do you look forward and with the body that you served and the country that you served, are you looking forward with optimism or are you looking forward with concern?
Speaker 2: Well, it's optimistic concern.  We've been through, I mean the history of this country is, is one that's so jaggered and disconnected, but we have, we've always been able to bounce back.  We, for some reason or other, we've been able to, to make progress among all of the turmoil and, and in spite of all of the obstacles that have been put- placed in our way.  So I'm, I'm optimistic that, that the--the present crew of people who are making policy for this country and the crew that's influencing and dictating to the crew that's making policy, will not succeed to such an extent that they're gonna turn back the clock on all of the progress that we've made.
Story_ID: 5226
Speaker 1: And when you look at the black community, what are, like either your hopes or concerns for that community?
Speaker 2: Well, my major concern at this point is the, the lack of understanding of some of our blacks who contend that they're leaders, don't have much following and organized following, who readily are appeasing and accommodating a group of people that do not have our interests at heart and who would like to take us back to slavery, really.  That's most disturbing to me to see people prostituting their blackness for-- for grants. And now, this President wants to even carry it into the black churches and I guess the--the lure of money is very effective.  I know that during my-- the early days in St. Louis politics, it was easy to- for the power structure to get some black leaders to endorse their anti-black agendas by just taking them to exclusive country clubs and giving them a steak and a cocktail.  It was just that simple.  I mean I can understand in a capitalistic society that maybe if they offered a whole lot of cash, they might be influenced by that, but these blacks weren't anything but a--a Manhattan and a martini and being in some place where they knew they weren't supposed to be because the membership was closed them.  That kind of mentality is creeping back into our politics at this point, and that disturbs me greatly.
Story_ID: 5227
Speaker 1: You're retired.  And you are doing a lot of writing.  And I, you know, can you talk, you know, a little bit about the stories that you have in any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, one is a, is a document on the Jefferson Bank controversy that started in 1963 against one bank, the Jefferson Bank, and then it spread to the entire banking industry.  And it lasted until 1967.  And so I've written a book.  Now, we were in and out of jail, based on appeals, for-- I was in for 118 days, out of the 270 days that the judge had sentenced me to.  There were others, two others in for the same amount of time.  Some people served all of their time.  They were in thirty days, sixty days, ninety days, some were in for one year, but they, they didn't, didn't have to serve the whole year because the community persuaded the judge to relent.  And when I say persuaded, they really did.  After the Supreme Court rejected our appeal in 1967, the judge insisted on us going back to jail, but the community rose up, and it was really something.  I mean they demonstrated in the daytime in front of the jail by the thousands, and then they demonstrated in front of the judge's house at night and burned him in effigy every night.  And it got very intense in that town and the leaders, the powers that be did not want the same kind of experience that was going on across the country, when these towns were burning, if you remember in '67 and '68 [1967 and 1968].  And so, they were able eventually to convince this jug-headed judge, who thought he was protecting the majesty of the court.  You see, we weren't convicted of any crime, but of contempt of court.  Well, his court was contemptible.  And what he did was contemptible and over 500 people went to jail in those, that four-year period.  Most of them weren't charged contempt of court.  Only about nineteen of us were charged with that, even though we didn't violate any of his injunctions. People- he--he said that we were the leaders of the group and that, therefore we had a responsibility to control the group.  And they treated us like we were common criminals.  They set our bail at $10,000 each, when the bail-- the bail for murder and rape-- the highest bail they had in the city of St. Louis for murder and rape was $5,000.  And you had all professional people who were arrested, elected officials.  I was on the City Council.  We had a committeeman who was arrested.  We had a State representative.  We had three school teachers who were arrested.  We weren't going anywhere.  We all owned property.  We were all registered voters.  We certainly weren't gonna escape the city.  We had no, no reason to escape the city.  And we were just trying to improve the city.  And that's the kind of thing that-- the Bar Association [ Missouri State Bar] came out and attempted to, to disbar the two black lawyers who was arrested.  I mean the power structure really came after us.  But our community resisted, and they came back.  Our community put as much weight on the power structure as they put on us.  I mean they disrupted everything in that city.  And they went not only after the- the one bank, but they went after the other banks.  They went to the elected officials, the treasurer and told them to withdraw the money from any bank that wouldn't hire and they demonstrated in City Hall and blocked doors.  I mean hundreds were arrested.  And what the city, the city got smart.  They knew they couldn't charge all these people because the people refusing to get bond and they filled the jails.  So they started charging them with--with minor peace disturbance and not even booking them, giving them the court date at a later date.  And so it was hundreds and hundreds and hundreds who participated and got arrested.  So that's one of the incidents.
Story_ID: 5228
Speaker 1: And, you-- but you're really committed to really blowing out the history and preserving it.
Speaker 2: Yep.  I'm-- right now, I'm doing a history on my political involvement at the local level, which is quite interesting, starting from my first election and the kind of barriers that we had to overcome and the internal strife in our community.  I'm enjoying it, just going back and, and reviewing what happened.
Speaker 1: And in that process of review, is there anything that you think that you might have done differently or that you regret that you did or you, you know, felt that you still, you know, that-- well, you would like to do still?
Speaker 2: You know, I-- you can't, you can't re-do, and second guessing, it, it doesn't help.  I've got a lot of favorable memories, and enjoying the memories of what I did do.  And I made some mistakes in terms of endorsing candidates, white and black, but I can't grieve over it.  It's, it's done.  And in this business, you-- in the political business, you have to take people at their word.  You don't have written contracts, and so you make mistakes.  You can't sue them because it's all verbal.  And, you know, if I give you a commitment that if you elect-- if you'll support me and I get elected, I'm gonna do this, this and this, and particularly in terms of jobs and appointments.
Story_ID: 5229
Speaker 1: If, you know, well we're gonna-- back in those days there were very few blacks appointed to anything-- we're gonna put a black on the Board Elections.  We're gonna put a black on the Police Commission, and we're gonna put a black in our cabinet, we--we took them at their word. And in many instances, some of them just used us.  That was the end, you know.  It's-- they got what they wanted, and they deserted us.  It was a mentality back then that even though we were delivering the big vote -- and I guess it still exists to a certain extent, even though we were delivering the big vote for these white candidates who had no chance of getting elected until they identified with us and we became their big supporters, once they were elected, all of them seemed to have to prove a point to their, to their white supporters, and especially to the power structure, that they had cut ties with us; that they were reversing themselves because they didn't want to be known as being obligated to somebody in the minority community.  And I guess to a certain extent, that's what happens now.  What, what-- the first thing they did was, whoever the major supporters were, they publicly disagreed with them on something and refused to--to recognize any of their people around them and started developing their own cadre of,of leadership or people for appointments. And what they do today, like they put on a Clarence Thomas, who is a disgrace and certainly can't speak for black folks and has not pretended that he wants to speak for us.  He can't even speak for decent people, but that's what they did.  They develop their own, own blacks and--and hopefully that, hope that they can convince the majority of blacks that they're not opposed to, to what the black agenda is.
Story_ID: 5230
Speaker 1: Now, what-- you've enjoyed being a politician, sort of , haven't you?
Speaker 2: I've lived it, yes.
Speaker 1: And you, and a good politician you would define as what?
Speaker 2: Well, that depends, but I, I think a good politician is an honest politician.  I think that, and regardless of what it takes to get you elected, and this is, you know, you've seen it in a lot of instances.  There are a lot of people who, who use unsavory tactics to get elected, but once they get there, they become re-enforcers for good, for decency.  But I, I think that, you know, you can't keep all of your commitments and all of your promises, but I think you can make an effort to do it.  And a good politician will make an effort.  And when he can't, he will explain why he-- he did not keep the commitment.  But too many of them go right in and--and begin to, to forget about what they committed and they've got their own private list of things that they want to do that they didn't make public and certainly didn't discuss during the campaign.  To me, that makes a bad politician.
Story_ID: 5231
Speaker 1: I have one more last question.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I came, I saw, and I changed some things and made it better for people to live in this country.  My vision was always that, very simple, that we are entitled to certain basic freedoms and rights.  And some of them are a decent education in a good school, decent housing in a good neighborhood, a job commensurate with our ability and training, and a living wage, enough jobs so that we can take care of our family and our responsibilities.  I want my lega- legacy to be that I worked towards those goals constantly, consistently and did make a difference in some areas.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 5232
Speaker 1: Several-- several years ago at the -- a tent at the Democratic National Club, National Democratic Club here in Washington, D.C.  And that was his new bride.  They had just gotten married, and that was the celebration with Ali-
Speaker 2: [Photo 1-  William Clay with Muhammed Ali and new wife at the Democratic Club. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5233
Speaker 1: Is Gus Hawkins still alive?
Speaker 2: Yep.  He's ninety -- he lives right down there by the Congress.  He's ninety-six, ninety-seven years old and very active, very -- he walks every day.
Speaker 1: All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of the expanded Congressional Black Caucus.  It's probably thirty-eight, thirty-nine members of the Caucus in this photograph.  It's a long ways from the six that were in Congress when I first got elected.
Speaker 1: You don't want to happen to name them, do you?
Speaker 2: I can name them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What year was this taken?
Speaker 1: Oh, I have no idea.  I'd have to go through the alphabet.  That's [Corinne] Brown there.  Eva Clayton, Louis Stokes, [William L.] Bill Clay, John Conyers, Maxine Waters, Sanford Bishop, [Major] Owens of New York,  [Donald M.] Payne of New Jersey,[ Juanita Millender-] McDonald of California, those are staffers -- no, that's Meeks of -
Speaker 2: Carrie Meeks?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Carrie Meek of Florida.
Speaker 2: The lower row?
Speaker 1: Now there's-- the middle row,
Speaker 2: Is there a middle row?
Speaker 1: I can't see it.  I can't who that one is there.  That's a judge from Florida, but who is that [ Alcee Hastings- former federal court justice and U.S. Representative]?  This has to be in the '90's, don't you think?
Speaker 2: It was in the '90's, yeah.  That's Jackson -
Speaker 1: Probably Jackson [possibly referring to Sheila Jackson-Lee of Texas].
Speaker 2: And what's the judge's name? -- I remember I had to go through the alphabet. I never had to go through that --
Speaker 1: It's on the tip of my tongue.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's [Earl F.] Hilliard from Alabama.  Oh, that's Kirk [ referring to Carolyn Kilpatrick] from Detroit, isn't it?
Speaker 1: In the back, with the--
Speaker 2: [Carolyn Cheeks] Kilpatrick.  I don't know, that's -- I don't recognize that one.  Oh, that's [Robert C.] Scott- Bobby Scott, Jackson,
Speaker 1: Oh, Jesse Jackson [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jesse Jackson [Jr.].
Speaker 1: This was recent.
Speaker 2: This is Al-- Albert Wynn, [Bennett "Bennie" G]. Thompson of Mississippi. Oh, that's the boy out of Illinois, out of Chicago -
Speaker 1: Bobby Rush?
Speaker 2: No, Danny Davis, Cynthia McKinney, [Elijah E.] Cummings, [Ronald ] Dellums, a boy out of New York-- Meek-Meeks [Gregory Meeks], [Charles] Rangel, [ James M.] Clyburn, [William J.] Jefferson, [ John R.] Lewis and [Melvin] Watt.
Speaker 1: [Photo 2 - Group photo of the Congressional Black Caucus, 1998-1999. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5234
Speaker 1: (Off Camera talk about unrelated photo)
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, that's me with President Mandela of South Africa.  And he came to present remarks to the Congressional Black Caucus here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: [Photo 3- WIlliam Clay with South African President, Nelson Mandela.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color- photograph. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5235
Speaker 1: This is a dedication in Housing for the Elderly and one for persons with disabilities that was named after me.
Speaker 2: [Photo 4  Flyer announcing the dedication of the William Clay Senior Housing Building in St. Louis.  MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of flyer. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5236
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  Okay, go ahead, sir.
Speaker 2: This is the reception with Harry Belafonte, Congressman [William] Gray of Pennsylvania, Conyers of Michigan, Alan Wheat of Missouri and myself.  [left to right- William Gray, Alan D. Wheat, Harry Belafonte, John Conyers, William Clay]
Speaker 1: Okay next.
Speaker 2: Do you want me to bring you a box of rubberbands?
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah bring us a box of rubberbands
Speaker 1: Can I disconnect this?
Speaker 2: [Photo 5 - Harry Belafonte joins, from the left, William Gray, Alan Wheat, Belafonte,  and William Clay at a Washington D.C. reception. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5237
Speaker 1: You want just the can, just the can, see you can't see what that is, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, this a picture of the thirteen original members of the Congressional Caucus right after they met with President Richard Nixon, 1971.
Speaker 1: [Photo 6  The original thirteen mebers of the Congressional Black Caucus after thier historic meeting with President Richard Nixon in 1971. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5238
Speaker 1: This is a picture of what the [St. Louis] Post Dispatch described as the Clay -- as the Clay -- well, what did they, how did they describe it?  Anyhow, it's my brother whose a member of the St. Louis Board of Aldermen; my son, who was a member of the Missouri Legislature and myself, a member of Congress.
Speaker 2: Okay, when was this taken?
Speaker 1: This was taken maybe three years ago.  And they called it the Clay Dynasty.
Speaker 2: Photo 7 William Clay, seated, poses with his son William Lacy Clay Jr., left and his brother, State senator Irving C. Clay. Black and white still. Photo courtesy of William Clay
Story_ID: 5239
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And that's me with Senator Ted Kennedy, discussing a bill on education.  Oh, the year first.
Speaker 1: Oh, that would have been about 15 years ago.
Speaker 2: [Photo 7-  Senator Ted Kennedy and William Clay. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay]
Story_ID: 5240
Speaker 1: Okay, see how young you -- that's a picture of President Clinton, the Pope and myself with Bill Richardson in the background whose now the new Governor of New Mexico, taken in St. Louis when the Pope made his visit there about four years ago, five years ago.
Speaker 2: [Photo 8- William Clay meets the Pope,center, along with Secretary of Energy, Bill Richardson, rear, and President Bill Clinton during the Pope's visit to St. Louis in 1999. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5241
Speaker 1: Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: There's the clothes pins.  I can give you some pins, yeah, some big clips, paper clips.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know -- you have to get the -
Speaker 2: That's my wife and I at some formal affair -
Speaker 1: And your wife's name is?
Speaker 2: Carol Clay.  We're both regretting the outfits we have on.
Speaker 1: And is she C-A-R-O-L?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: [Photo 9 - William and Carol Clay. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5242
Speaker 1: A picture of Hall of Famer, Lou Brock of the St. Louis Cardinals.
Speaker 2: [Photo 10- William Clay, right, poses with former St. Louis Cardinal and Hall of Famer, Lou Brock. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5243
Speaker 1: Then Clinton and Vice President Gore, Leon Panetta, who was advisor to the President and myself.  I think I just told a joke.  They were putting me out.  You see I've got a raincoat on.  They were putting me out, they said (laughter) get out of here (laughter).
Speaker 2: [Photo 11- From right to left- William Clay, far right, meets with Vice President Al Gore, President Bill Clinton and Presidential Advisor, Leon Panetta in the White House. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5244
Speaker 1: That's a picture with Astronaut, [Guion] Bluford, Alan Wheat, Congressman from Missouri and Ed Towns, Congressman from New York.
Speaker 2: [Photo 12- from left to right, William Clay poses with the first black American astronaut, Guion Bluford, Congressman Alan Wheat- MO. and Congressman Ed Towns-N.Y. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5245
Speaker 1: That's a can of beer named in my honor for charitable purposes.  It sold for $1.00 a can, and they sold 25,000 cans.
Speaker 2: [Photo 13- Black and white still of beer can with William Clay's likeness which was sold to raise money for charity. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5246
Speaker 1: ...Of a retired captain from Delta Airlines, Perry Jones.  He was assisting me when we, we got a $900,000 appropriation to train black pilots at a school in Michigan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Photo 14- William Clay, right, with Perry Jones, Pan Am Airlines first black pilot. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5247
Speaker 1: It's a picture of my wife and I at a social function.
Speaker 2: Year, hold on a second.
Speaker 1: Well, it's recently.  It's probably 2000.
Speaker 2: [Photo 15- William Clay with his wife at a function in 2000. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5248
Speaker 1: Picture of my son and a staffer at the University of Missouri and myself in the top.  And the bottom is the Chancelor of St.-- the University [of Missouri] at St. Louis.  And it's a dedication of the science building on campus.
Speaker 2: Molecular electronics, that's an honor.
Speaker 1: Yes, I got them $10 million for the building (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hold on one second, please.
Speaker 1: Did you say, ten, ten million?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay,next.
Speaker 2: Its a very modern, very modern building
Speaker 1: [Photo 16- Willam Lacy Clay Jr., left with an unnamed University of Missouri staffer and his father William L. Clay Sr at the dedication of the Molecular Electronics building at Mizzou. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Speaker 2: [Photo 17- William Clay Sr,  with the Chancellor of  the University of Missouri in front of the Molecular Electronics Building named in his honor at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5249
Speaker 1: This is another great baseball player, Bob Gibson, formerly of the St. Louis Cardinals.
Speaker 2: [Photo 18- William Clay, left, talks to former St. Louis Cardinal, Bob Gibson. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph. Courtesy of William Clay.]
Story_ID: 5250
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  That one we'd better put up on the cassette box.  All right, go ahead on the book.  It's sort of self explanatory.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that's the book that I wrote around 1991 on the history of blacks in the U.S. Congress from 1870 until 1991.  You, you said, you wanted to know what some other people, authors had said about me, is that what -- I put a stack in there.  What's wrong?
Speaker 1: No, but you know, okay, that's -- are we finished?
Speaker 2: Almost, I was going in tight so that people can pull copy off the front.  You know, it saves -- Okay, got it.  Did we do this, the Leisure Living Community?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Photo 19- Book cover, "Just Permanent Interests" written by William Clay. MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of book cover (Amistad Press, 1992) . Courtesy of William Clay.]
