Story_ID: 673810
Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Leon Huff to my right, [HistoryMaker] Kenny Gamble to my left.  This was at--this was this year at a record release performance that I did with Jeff Majors for his, for the release of his 'Sacred 4 You' album on which I do the vocals to "Somebody Bigger Than You and I" ["Somebody Bigger"], which is receiving extremely amazing play, air play right.
Speaker 2: "Somebody Bigger Than You and I"?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was Grover Washington, Jr. and myself in the recording studio in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at--what was the name of that studio?  It wasn't Sigma Sounds [sic. Sigma Sound Studios].  It was--oh, shucks.  I'll have to look it up and I'll call it in.
Speaker 2: I went to school with guys at (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next please.
Speaker 2: But this was in eighty- we recorded that in '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSON)
Speaker 2: Okay, this is a surprise party given for me by Kenny Gamble and [HistoryMaker] Dyana Williams who is to my left.  Dyana was an air personality at the time.  She was, she was on WDAS [WDAS Radio] in Philadelphia.  She, before that was on WBLS [WBLS Radio] in, in New York [New York], Frankie Crocker was her program director then.  And she was on WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] back in the '70s [1970s] when my first records were broken.  And they, they surprised me with this party.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the woman in the hat?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's Patti LaBelle and, of course, Teddy Pendergrass is the gentleman.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Good people, good folks.  This was in, let's see, my kids were six 'cause I remember it was a surprise party, and they paid my kids a dollar each to keep the secret 'cause my kids were there, Patti's son, Zuri [Zuri Edwards], was there.  This was in--this had to be--was this before Dyana gave birth to her kids?  No, they weren't born then.  So this had to be '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next, please?
Speaker 2: This is in the studio.  That's Grover Washington, Jr. to my right and Price--what's his first name?  Oh, dear, Terry Price.  He wrote "Closer than Close," which we were recording during this period.  And that's Victoria Oltarsh who wrote one of the songs that went on the 'Closer than Close' album.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, did you tell us a year for this?
Speaker 2: Hm? That was in '85 [1985].
Story_ID: 4748
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Jean Carne, J-E-A-N C-A-R-N-E.
Speaker 1: And what is your maiden name or your--.
Speaker 2: Perkins.
Speaker 1: Perkins, all right.  Okay, and can you give us your date of birth and place of birth please?
Speaker 2: I normally don't tell but I guess I'll tell you if you don't tell anybody, promise.
Speaker 1: We, we won't.
Speaker 2: Okay, I was born March 15th, 1947 in Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a vocalist, vocal producer, recording artist.  I think my first occupation is mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're coach--voice coach as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, vocal coach as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question.  Today is, it's Wednesday the, Wednesday, May, May 7th, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at the Atlanta Hilton and Towers Hotel, Downtown Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 4749
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Corn, any kind of corn, fried corn, boiled corn, corn pie, corn pudding, corn chowder.  I love corn.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Home.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If you don't stand for something, you'll fall for anything.
Story_ID: 4750
Speaker 1: Tell us what you know about your family origins.  How far can you trace your family background?
Speaker 2: Not very far back.  I can trace back to grandparents.  My mother's [Mattie Mae Perkins] family is from LaGrange, Georgia which is about 55 miles from Atlanta [Georgia].  My father's [Aldrich Myron Perkins] family is from New Orleans, Louisiana and I can go back to grandparents.  I've never done a genealogic, genealogical study or anything which I should do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are your grandparents from the same locale?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are there any stories that your grandparents or your parents passed down to you about life during the 19th Century or if you had any ancestors who were in slavery or, or any that struggled through reconstruction or some of the both trials and tribulations?
Speaker 2: Well I, I've heard war stories but Reconstruction, no and slavery, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay well tell us about your grandparents, what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Well on, on--I knew my grandparents on my father's side.  My grandmother was Caldonia [Perkins].  My grandfather was Sam [Perkins].  In fact, my grandmother lived with us before she passed away.  That was--I was in high school.  I was in high school then.  In fact they, they say I got my talent from, from her because she could--.
Speaker 1: From your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was one of those "jack of all trades."  You know she could play the piano and she could sing.  She, she trained church choirs which, which I did from twelve years old.  And my grandfather was a tailor.  On my mother's side my grandfather was, was a farmer and he was one of those folks who took care of the neighborhood.  He, you know, he fed the whole neighborhood with the, with the products of his fields.  And my grandmother was a--what do you call the ladies that, that birth babies?
Speaker 1: She was a midwife.
Speaker 2: A midwife yeah, she was a midwife.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, sounds like a talented group.  A question to get me in trouble now.  Are we rolling?
Speaker 2: We have resumed tape speed.
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this question.  Your grandmother's name was Caldonia. Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: C-A-L-D-O-N-I-A.
Speaker 1: And also let me just say this, that this--that is a famous name in black music.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I sang that song ['Caldonia'] for my kids.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a little bit of a--.
Speaker 2: And they just--oh it just made them laugh you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Can you give us a little bit of that and can you talk about the, the origin of that song or if you know--?
Speaker 2: Let's see, who was that?
Speaker 1: No idea.
Speaker 2: Louis Jordan.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, Louis Jordan and it was, you know it was, it was that, like that call and response thing.  "Caldonia?  Caldonia?  What makes your big head so hard?"
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Exactly, okay all right.  Now, now your grandmother is the first person, real person I've heard with the name Caldonia.  Many have been called Caldonia because of the rest of the song but did she--?
Speaker 2: The only one I've ever known or heard of.
Speaker 1: Is there any, is she, is she the origin of that, of that, that name or I mean how--did she ever say anything about that?
Speaker 2: That was a, that was a common name--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she was saying.  I remember her saying.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know I've never heard it on a person.  I never heard of anybody named Caldonia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, me neither.  But names like, she mentioned names like Sophie, she named a lot of the contemporary names for her, during her upbringing.  And Caldonia wasn't unusual way back then.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  I wonder if there was a story around her being named Caldonia and being a musician too that, that it might not have been some kind of association between her being a musician and that song.
Speaker 2: Good question.  When did, when did Jordan do that song?
Speaker 1: It had to be--.
Speaker 2: Was that in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 1: '40s [1940s] yeah [sic, 1944].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess I'll have to ask her on the other side.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she's not available now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She passed away when I was in high school.
Story_ID: 4751
Speaker 1: First I'll ask you about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Aldrich Myron Perkins, that's A-L-D-R-I-C-H M-Y-R-O-N P-E-R-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Place of birth, New Orleans, Louisiana.  Date of birth, May 13th, 19--1914.
Speaker 1: Now what was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He owned a cab company.  Before that when we lived in Columbus, Georgia he managed a theater and he did the same thing in, in Valdosta, Georgia which is where my brother was born.  When he came to Atlanta [Georgia] he, he managed, he managed and, and partially owned a cab company here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the company?
Speaker 2: Diamond.  Diamond Cab Company.  He also had a transfer company or a moving company which was called Diamond.  He had an employment agency which was called Diamond Employment and he had a, a record store which was on Auburn Avenue and the cab companies were, the cab stands were on Auburn as well.  He had a record, record store and, and fast food place you know and a hot dog place right on Auburn Avenue as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was he like?  What was his temperament like?
Speaker 2: Very easy going, the strong, silent type.  You know I was a daddy's girl.  He taught me, taught me lots.  You know taught me--but he had lots of theories that he usually didn't share with anybody but me you know 'cause I was the, I was the scientist of the family and, and we, we got along famously.
Speaker 1: What were some of his theories?
Speaker 2: Oh when he taught me to drive, he had this theory that you could do two things at once that didn't require a high level of concentration and he called it using both sides of your brain.  He said but you have to practice being able to divert your attention.  You know it's like patting your head and rubbing your stomach you know and then, then, then reversing it.  So yeah, he taught me things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what kinds of things did he think that you could do, two, two--what, what, like what, what two things for instance would, would he try to do?
Speaker 2: Oh like, like, like making out your, making out your bill payments while you talked on the phone or, or, or talk to two kids at once, you know.  Talk to one kid, listen to the other.  You know just, just things that didn't require super concentration but, but they could be done at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, what some people call today multi-tasking.  Is that what?
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I guess that is what they would call it now.  Yeah, but of course he didn't have a, a name for it as such he just knew it could be done and he taught me.  He also taught me how to drive like a, like a truck driver, drive very defensively, very cautiously and look out for you know for everything that's going on around you while you're behind the wheel.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well anything else about your father that's outstanding that you--?
Speaker 2: Oh lot, lots of outstanding things but I guess you sort of take them for granted when you're, when you're growing up with them.  He was a good provider.  It was just, just my brother and myself.  I don't know.  He, he, was talented.  Oh yeah he played piano by ear and he, he played mostly with the black keys and he imitated 'Satchmo' [Louis Armstrong].
Speaker 1: He played mostly with the black keys, that's--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sounds like a [Rashaan] Roland Kirk theory.
Speaker 2: Check that.
Speaker 1: Remember when Roland Kirk in the album called 'Blacknuss' said I'm just going to play the black keys. I ain't--I'm not trying to offend anybody but I'm just going to play the black keys.
Speaker 2: Bright moments, black keys yeah.  Yeah, I hadn't thought about that.
Speaker 1: And you said something else about him I just forgot it.  Was it--?
Speaker 2: I forgot too.
Speaker 1: You said he played the black keys of the piano--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he--oh he imitated Satchmo.
Speaker 2: He imitated Satchmo, yeah he could do Satchmo really well 'cause--.
Speaker 1: So he was a musician too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he just played by ear and we would have jam sessions in our basement.  And, and Daddy would play piano and I would sing and, and my brother would play the trumpet and I had a cousin who would play the drums.  In fact he ended up playing drums with the Clouds of Joy, the Mighty Clouds of Joy, my, my cousin did.
Speaker 1: Famous gospel group (unclear). Sam Cooke was with them?
Speaker 2: He was in the Soul Stirrers.
Speaker 1: Soul Stirrers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, all right.  Okay, it sounds like a lively family.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 4752
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother.  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mattie Mae Perkins, M-A-T-T-I-E M-A-E P-E-R-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And when was she born and where?
Speaker 2: She was born February 17th, 19--1913, right a year before my father.
Speaker 1: She was born in Georgia--.
Speaker 2: In LaGrange, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Oh she was, she was just a masterful mother.  Early on when I first started singing in church choirs I was like four years old.  At that church she was a Sunday School teacher and she was a member of the choir.  She was a nurse by profession and a super mom.  In fact she was the, the grandmother to my entire neighborhood, the neighborhood where I grew, where I raised my children in East Point [Georgia].  Everybody could come to our house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was like the I guess you would call the Big Mama type?
Speaker 2: Exactly and that was her, her nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the kids called her that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else about her?
Speaker 2: Well she was a, she was a strong mother and she taught us well, very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she play any instruments or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no she didn't, she didn't play any instruments but like I said she sang in the choir.
Story_ID: 4753
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: My first church was Greater Mount Calvary Baptist [Church, Atlanta, Georgia], that was where I started singing at four in, in the choir.
Speaker 1: Four? Isn't that small?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact I would lead songs and they would have to stand me on a box otherwise you couldn't see--there was a railing in the choir stand, otherwise you couldn't see me, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you would lead the songs at age four on a box and--?
Speaker 2: I've been singing since before I could remember yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so now that was your first church you said but you, when you--is that the church you grew up in?
Speaker 2: I grew up in St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] because you know it was, it was our neighborhood church, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now--.
Speaker 2: And I played for church choirs from twelve and that was the first church I played for.
Story_ID: 4754
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about how it was to grow up--now what neighborhood was it that you grew up in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I grew up on Stafford Street and Tatnal Streets.  Stafford Street is off of, off of what used to be Hunter Street which is now Martin Luther King [Jr.] Drive.  Tatnal Street is off of that as well.  Tatnal is near Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] which was my college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's [Clark] Atlanta University area over there?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Is there a name for that area?
Speaker 2: That's, that's the West Side.
Speaker 1: Okay, well I want you to take us back and kind of reflect on your childhood and tell us what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here.
Speaker 2: Early on of course the, the church choir was a wonderful experience.  I was a Sunday school teacher like, like my mother [Mattie Mae Perkins] starting must have been ten-ish starting then.  And I played for, I played and trained church choirs for numerous churches around the city.  I started taking piano lessons at five and I played numerous instruments in, in high school and college and I majored in, in music in, in college at Morris Brown.
Speaker 1: Now I don't want to take you that far.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I want to talk about the neighborhood when you were a little kid.
Speaker 2: Okay, the neighborhood when I was a little kid.  Well I recall doing concerts for anybody that'd come to our house.  Yeah, you had to sit there and you had to take it.  And we had relatives who would, who would come, and cousins who if they came to Atlanta to, to go to beauty school or nursing school or, or business college they would live with us cause we always had big houses and everybody knew you know my mom will take care of you.
Story_ID: 4755
Speaker 1: I remember working my songs out with my, with my cousins you know, well you got to listen to this one.  And they'll tell me about it today you know you had me sitting listening to, to Teresa Brewer's version of 'Empty Arms' and 'Dynamite' by--I loved Teresa Brewer when I was growing up and I, I get those stories still you know still today.
Speaker 2: And 'Dynamite' by who, who was it?
Speaker 1: Teresa Brewer.
Speaker 2: Teresa Brewer, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact that was the first song that I was dancing to when I got my picture in the paper first.  It was a summer that my brother and I spent in, in Rantoul, Illinois on Chanute Air Force Base.  I had a cousin who was a, a dentist in the Air Force and we--my brother and I spent a summer there and every day we'd go to the dependent center you know and you'd learn archery and we'd go to the driving range and we learned to swim.  In fact that was the year I got my first cut bangs, you know my first cut bangs 'cause otherwise they'd, they'd be rolled up you know and they'd fall down on my face.  And I, I was dancing with my best girlfriend who was, you know, 'cause girls danced with girls, you know, then 'cause we were young.  And some people came from the, from the, the base newspaper and they took pictures and my picture was, was on the front page of the base newspaper dancing with, with, with my friend to 'Dynamite', to, to Teresa Brewer's 'Dynamite'.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what were some of the--your other favorite songs?
Speaker 1: Oh gosh I had a, a broad range of, of songs 'cause I started collecting records 'cause I had my own phonograph at five so I started collecting records that early.  Geez, I loved everybody from, from Mahalia Jackson to, to of course I loved 'Satchmo' [Louis Armstrong].  I got to see a lot of the big bands cause my dad [Aldrich Myron Perkins] would--anytime a big band came anywhere close to, to Atlanta [Georgia] my dad and I would go.  You know he--'cause I got exposed to that.  Oh I loved, I loved [Enrico] Caruso 'cause my mother [Mattie Mae Perkins] had some Caruso records.  I loved, oh gosh, instrumentally early on aside from 'Satchmo' oh gosh I can't think of anybody now.  But say as, as late as twelve, thirteen I liked the, the musicals 'cause I played piano and I, I played the, the double reeds, bassoon, English horn and oboe so I loved a lot of the, lot of the, the musicals, 'Rhapsody in Blue'.  I loved, oh geez, 'The Unsinkable Molly Brown', 'Around the World in Eighty Days', 'The Sound of Music'.
Speaker 2: 'My Fair Lady'.
Speaker 1: Of course, 'My Fair Lady', yeah how can I forget that one, 'West Side Story'.  I knew all the songs from you know all the, the female songs from, from those situations.  I loved the classics as well cause I'm a, I'm a coloratura soprano so I've sung the soprano arias from, from the, the 'Messiah' and [Charles Camille] Saint-Saëns's 'Christmas Oratorio'.  I know a lot of the arias, the soprano arias from a lot of your operas your [Giuseppe] Verdi and your [Giacomo] Puccini and, and various, various classical and, and baroque composers.  I, I love their material as well.  So it was kind of diverse growing up.
Story_ID: 4756
Speaker 1: So did you do mostly musical things for enjoyment when you were coming up or did you, did, did you play other games or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah you know we played the, the normal stuff, hopscotch and checkers and a little chess.  And in fact I learned canasta when I was in, in Rantoul, Illinois 'cause, 'cause my, my cousin was in a canasta club instead of bridge club.  It's a game similar, quite similar to bridge and I, I, I loved canasta for a long time.  That was, that was my favorite card game.  And I was no good at, at games like, like tonk and all of those.  I, I didn't quite get those.  They, I, I don't think they were complex enough 'cause canasta you had to score like five thousand points and it was a little more involved so it really piqued my, my curiosity and it kept my interest.  But none of those other games did I ever master or become interested in.
Story_ID: 4757
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school in--?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia] where I participated in the choir.
Speaker 1: Grade school first.
Speaker 2: Okay, grade school was John Hope Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] and Frank L. Stanton Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].  Oh, and E. A. Ware Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] where I was president of the student body.
Speaker 1: Oh that's significant.  Now, so you were a pretty good student then, right?
Speaker 2: Excellent student, yeah.  I was blessed with a brain.
Speaker 1: And popular too I guess if you were elected president?
Speaker 2: I guess yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in grade school what were your favorite subjects?  I don't know, I guess music has to be in there somewhere?
Speaker 2: Yeah music but most of my music was you know outside of school 'cause--with the piano lessons and, and all my, my choir activities.  But I was a science nut, you know I loved, I loved science.
Speaker 1: Okay, biology or chemistry or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, all of the above, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you went to high school at Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now--well back to grade school for a second.  Were there any teachers there that, that were particularly important in mentoring you or anybody when you were a kid growing up at the church or anybody else that, that, anybody other than your parents who you know tried to help, to help you and move you along?
Speaker 2: Oh I had many influences.  In elementary school I remember Ms. Epps, Ms. Smith, Mr. Cleveland, they you know they, they were role model like teachers for me, teachers who, whom I emulated.  I loved their favorite Bible verses 'cause you know then we, we recited Bible verses in school.  That was before you know before the, the tragedy of downing prayer and Bible verses in school.  They were, these, they were very progressive teachers, elementary you know to--on, on the elementary level.  They were--one of them was the, the Bluebird leader and the Brownie Scout leader you know which were childhood organizations that I, I was a member of.  In fact I was a honorary Cub Scout because I used to have to wait for my brother at Cub Scout meetings you know 'cause my dad [Aldrich Myron Perkins] would pick us up at the same time so they made me an honorary Cub Scout 'cause I was the only female to be--.
Speaker 1: They made you an honorary Cub Scout?
Speaker 2: Yeah--to be bestowed that honor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a lot of support growing up?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now at Booker T. Washington High School I mean was that your neighborhood school or was it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: And well tell me about Booker T. Washington.  Did you, were you engaged in a lot of extracurricular activities or did you just focus on certain things?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was band and chorus.  And the, they had us on an experimental course of study from the eighth grade 'cause then high school started.  We didn't have middle school.  High school started at the eighth grade and they tested us in elementary school and certain of us qualified for this experimental course of study.  We started out with, with advanced sciences and advanced math.  Our language choices starting in the eighth grade were, for this program were, we had a choice between Japanese and Russian.  I, I chose Russian.  Our instructor Billy Davis had been a Vassar [College, Poughkeepsie, New York] student, that was where she learned Russian and we communicated.  There was one other high school Russian class in the U.S., and we communicated.  They were our pen pals.  We had--we subscribed to 'Pravda' so 'Pravda' came to our homes in Russian.  In fact I, I had problems with that when I was in college 'cause I was, I was chosen to, to go to Moscow [Russia] to represent the U.S. at, at a symposium that was being held in, in Moscow.  It was on education in the U.S.  And my Russian teacher, that was my college Russian teacher then crammed me in a quick course of Ukrainian because you had to be literate in two Slavic languages.  So I qualified for that but they had to, the [United States] Secret Service had to investigate you, you know before you could go to Russia.  And one of the--.
Speaker 1: 'Cause this is the Cold War (unclear).
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah this was definitely in the heart of the Cold War.  So during the, during the qualification phase I had to--they, we had to explain why I, why we received 'Pravda' at, at my house cause they thought well you must be a communist you know and you know of course that wasn't the way I went.
Story_ID: 4758
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington [High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  We were talking about all the activities.
Speaker 2: Oh and, and the [United States] Secret Service--.
Speaker 1: Yeah going to--.
Speaker 2: --wanting to know why, yeah why--.
Speaker 1: --you were getting ready to go to Russia.
Speaker 2: --yeah why we received the 'Pravda'.
Speaker 1: Now that is really something how you know--.
Speaker 2: It is unusual now that I look back on it 'cause I didn't know everybody wasn't able to do that, you know didn't come up that way.
Speaker 1: Now that's in 1963 or something?
Speaker 2: That was in sixty--let's see the Russian thing was, the Russian trip was in sixty--'62 [1962], '63 [1963], yeah.
Speaker 1: Now that's just when Lee Harvey Oswald shoots [President John F.] Kennedy and it's revealed that he went to Russia and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And all that stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People starting to think you know I mean that was--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a touchy time to go to, very sensitive time to be talking about Russia.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: The Cuban Missile Crisis--good grief.
Speaker 2: Yeah so anybody who--are we recording?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah we're rolling.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.  So anybody who had, who had the 'Pravda' to come to their house on a subscription basis was suspect and understandably so.  But it was just cause you know we, we translated--cause I remember my dad, when, when [Nikita] Khrushchev would come on, on television my dad would give me money if I could translate before the translator 'cause you know you could, you could hear him and then they had the translator after him so, so I made money that way.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a little Russian?  Can you remember any?
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see.  (Speaks in Russian), that's "hello."  (Speaks in Russian) that's "how are you?"  (Speaks in Russian), that's "very fine thank you.  And, and you?"  (Speaks in Russian), Jean Carne.  (Speaks  in Russian)--tell me your name again?
Speaker 1: Larry Crowe.
Speaker 2: That's right, Larry Crowe.  (Speaks in Russian), Larry, Larry Crowe.  (Speaks in Russian).
Story_ID: 4759
Speaker 1: We had William Warfield sing 'Old Man River' for us--.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --in German.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Just a few bars of it.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So I wanted you to sing something in German--in Russian for us, just for a couple of bars.
Speaker 2: What about something in Italian?
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It would make a nice clip I think.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see.  Oh boy, hope I got the voice.  Didn't warm up now.  (Sings in Italian).  Oh boy.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: With no warm up, understand.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: But speaking of William Warfield, I, I was at a, it was, a family reunion for the family of Dr. Herbert Bridgewater who, who's here in Atlanta [Georgia] and William Warfield was the MC [master of ceremonies].  And I sat next to him and I was so excited by you know just, just the propinquity of William Warfield I couldn't eat my dinner.  And, and, and I got his autograph too and I still have it.  Yeah, and they called him Bill you know 'cause he was like an uncle to them but speaking of William Warfield.
Story_ID: 4760
Speaker 1: Did you go to Russia?  Did you get a chance to go to the--did the [United States] Secret Service?
Speaker 2: You know I didn't get to go 'cause well the excitement of the Secret Service investigation and, and the fact that you know that was touchy territory at the time.  My folks you know, and of course I was, I was underage so my folks would have had to sign for me so couldn't get permission, couldn't get them to, to agree 'cause they--my mother [Mattie Mae Perkins] said no, you can take a picture of the wrong thing and we, we'll never see you again so I didn't get to go.  In fact I was invited to, to Russia by Grover Washington, Jr.  He, he went over on a, on a, on a tour situation but I didn't get to go then either 'cause I had a schedule conflict and, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you've never been to Russia?
Speaker 2: Never been to Russia.
Speaker 1: You know they should hurry up and get a Russian concert tour for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That will be a treat for the Russians.
Speaker 2: Be a treat for me, yeah.
Story_ID: 4761
Speaker 1: What are the other highlights of high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh geez, high school.  Well aside from--oh I trained a couple of vocal groups in high school.  You know some of my best girlfriends you know.  I, I was in the band and the, the orchestra.  In fact my band director was at, in high school moved on to my college [Robert Morris College, Atlanta, Georgia] so he was my band director in college as well and he was a double reed expert and that was where I got my, my longing for, you know for, for the double reeds cause I played bassoon, English horn and oboe.  And of course I played clarinet, you know the single reeds.
Speaker 1: But those are difficult instruments to play.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've heard it said.  I, you know I know clarinet players and a lot of them would not want to try the oboe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they're wonderful sounding instruments, very unusual instruments.  And I've always had, had a propensity for the, the unusual and the, and the unique, the exotic so that was right up my alley, yeah.  And you make your own reeds.  You know you, you get a reed kit and you, and you get the wire and stuff and you make your own reed kit, make your own reeds.  So it's, it's a fun situation, yeah.
Speaker 1: It makes you unique in the, in the concert world I mean you can play one of those.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there aren't many of us.
Speaker 1: A good oboe player and a good bassoon player, hard to find.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you get a chance to play in concerts with an orchestra, play for--?
Speaker 2: Well the, the school orchestra.  I never got to play with you know with the Atlanta Symphony [Orchestra] or anything 'cause, cause I was into vocals once I, once I turned professional.  And I'm probably not good enough now.  You know I'd have wood chip for a couple of years but maybe I'll do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's--it would seem like those instruments would have a nice quality for certain kinds of jazz.
Speaker 2: But I'd do it on, probably on the classic level, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, 'cause I never heard of a jazz oboe player.
Speaker 2: Me neither.  Now who--somebody played--didn't Rufus Harley play bassoon as well as the bagpipes?
Speaker 1: I think you're right he played bagpipes and the bassoon too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the, the one person that recall was a, was a bassoon player.
Speaker 1: Rufus Harley.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was somebody we don't hear that much about anymore. Real creative musician.
Speaker 2: Yeah, heard another drummer, yeah.
Speaker 1: So now were you involved in clubs and activities in high school too, I mean other than what you've talked about already?
Speaker 2: Sure, student government.
Speaker 1: Were you the president at this time of the student government?
Speaker 2: Not in high school, you know the National Honor Society, well you know of course band and, and chorus and, and orchestra kept you busy.  In fact that forced me to go to football games 'cause you know I was never interested in football.  So we had the--are we late?
Speaker 1: No, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, they're just checking on us. In fact now when I, when I sing the national anthem at basketball games, football games, that kind of thing, I never developed an interest in the sport so I usually either, either leave after I sing 'cause I, I'd probably fall asleep you know trying to watch the game or I'd bring my novel and I'd read.  So I was forced to, to go to games from very early you know 'cause being in the band we had to be there.  But, but that made, that made the games fun and the, the music too.
Speaker 1: So you did marching and all that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the marching band.  There I played clarinet, the glockenspiel, baritone horn and then during concert season you know was when I played the double reeds 'cause you can't take those on the field 'cause they're pretty delicate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Trying to march and play an oboe.
Speaker 2: Well it's--no the oboe, the oboe is just like a clarinet but, but the bassoon yeah that's problematic.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now, well you were--could you be a music major in high school when you were in high school or could--was that possible then?
Speaker 2: Well, no we didn't have majors as such 'cause with that program that you know that we were on a lot of us went to summer school cause we couldn't take the, you know in our program were, weren't any, any of the useful things like home economics and typing and things like that so we'd take those things in summer school 'cause we were taking analytical geometry and calculus and physics and you know, and, and, and, and the, the, the advanced sciences.  So yeah, yeah I went to summer school and took some practical things.  But we didn't have majors as such in, in high school and--.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a chance to go to places like Interlochen [Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan] and the summer camps for musicians where they get into intense study?
Speaker 2: In college I went to Wittenberg University in Springfield, Ohio for, for a couple of summers but, but I didn't, I didn't get--.
Speaker 1: Not in high school?
Speaker 2: I didn't do that in high school.
Story_ID: 4762
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation from high school [at Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia], did you know exactly where you were going to go to school and what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I got a number of scholarship offers cause we had started taking the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] in--well the PSAT [Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test] in eighth grade so by the time we got to tenth grade we were scoring so well that, that a lot of us got, got scholarship offers in like the tenth grade.  So our principal allowed--there must have been close to thirty of us to go from the tenth grade to the twelfth grade to keep anybody from being tempted, I guess his reason was to keep anybody from being tempted to, to take, accept any of those college offers.  But being, you know being an early admission student I had to go to school eight blocks from home cause I couldn't accept any of those out of town offers.
Speaker 1: So you went to Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And tell us about Morris Brown.  What is Morris Brown like and it's people?  Not everybody knows a lot about it.  You know it's part of that what they call Atlanta University Complex.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But what is the significance of Morris Brown itself and what, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Morris Brown is an AME supported school, African Methodist Episcopal Church supported school and our, our strong point during, during my period of, of matriculation was music.  Our band was every year invited to the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade and, and the band and, and the chorus, the chorus traveled in the spring and, and we received rave reviews.  So music was our strong suit with, within the Atlanta University Center which was a center where Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark, it was Clark College then it's Clark [Atlanta] University now and the Interdenominational Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia] were all a portion, a part of the Atlanta University Center.  And students from any of those schools could take courses at the other, at the other center schools.  And it made for, for just an excellent situation 'cause okay Morehouse was strong in, in sciences so you could take courses there.  I sang with the Morehouse Spelman Glee Club.  I sang with the Clark jazz band and, and was able to matriculate in those, those various schools and then you stay with your school which has--and each school maintains its autonomy and its, its history and its, its, its sovereignity so it was just an ideal situation coming up.
Speaker 1: That does sound ideal.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And well what were some of the highlights of your college career?
Speaker 2: Oh geez, there were, there were many.  I learned, I learned a lot about small towns in Georgia 'cause we had an ensemble from the choir that followed our president when he would make the reports to the various AME churches cause they--you know we were a church supported school.  And we would, you know we, we had, we would supply the music and we would meet with the, with the gatherings at the church and, and we supplied entertainment for them.  And we, we were hired--we had an ensemble within the choir that was hired for, for banquets and bar mitzvahs and receptions and, and things of that nature.  In fact we were supported by, that ensemble was supported by Norris B. Herndon who was our, I guess he was our benefactor.  He was, he was a wonderful man and just a patron of the arts, a true, true patron of the arts.  His, his home which is, which is I guess a museum [The Herndon Home, Atlanta, Georgia] now was, was adjacent to the, to our campus and I recall several occasions when, when the ensemble needed, needed dresses or gowns and the guys needed tuxedos for, for our various endeavors we just had to go to, go to Mr. Herndon and he would, he would, he would benefit us.  When we needed new instruments in the, in the music department he was right there.  And I remember the music department brought Andre Watts to do a concert and he needed, he needed a grand piano to, to rehearse on the, the evening before the concert.  And Herndon bought a grand piano, put it in his living room so that Andre could, could rehearse.  So he was, he was, he was a wonderful, wonderful man, really good for us and we, we appreciated him.  And every spring I think I mentioned we did a choir tour and we traveled up the eastern seaboard, that was, that was really wonderful, advanced training for me.  You know you got to do different audiences, different mentalities.  Usually the, the concerts were sponsored by members of the alumni, the Morris Brown Alumni Association.  That, that was--those were excellent experiences.  It was, and we had a, had a good--it's been a good ride, you know an excellent ride.
Story_ID: 4763
Speaker 1: While we're on Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and this has not that much to do with you but Morris Brown is in serious trouble now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's on the verge of closing, right?
Speaker 2: It is.  In fact we lost our accreditation approximately a month ago and we have two years to, to acquire the money that's going to be necessary 'cause there, there weren't academic issues that were, that were the reasoning for the, this association that accredits southern schools.  The, the reasons weren't academic it was, it was strictly fiscal.  And we have two years now to raise some twenty seven million dollars.  In fact I have, I'm involved in a committee that, that I co-founded with a lady who grew up in Atlanta, Mattie Taylor.  She, she didn't attend Morris Brown she went to school in Virginia.  But she grew up in Atlanta and she lived on Morris Brown's campus.  You know she went to Oglethorpe [County High School, Lexington, Georgia].  So, so coming up you know she, she had a very close association.  She is the foster sister of Dan McCoy and she heads the Dan McCoy Music Company, Inc., Dan McCoy Music, Inc.  In fact I did a recording for her. It's called 'Carne Sings McCoy'.  It's a CD with all Dan McCoy compositions.  She along with myself and, and a lady who lives here in Georgia now, Dr. Jill Crawford are all--we got together and formed a committee that's raising funds for, to help deplete that, that deficit.
Speaker 1: Yeah I would hope that that could be done.  You know the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church seems to, I would think would have the resources to, the membership to help Morris Brown get back on its feet.
Speaker 2: Yeah well they, they have, they have been very you know very forthcoming with, with funding but I guess that's, that's a pretty big number.  And the Matah Network, it's a, it's a network, it's a distribution network for black products.  They have over two hundred black manufactured and creative products, they have joined my committee in, in--there's, there's a--you can log onto mymatah, that's M-A-T-A-H/MBC.  And whatever you buy from the, the network the profits go to Morris Brown.  That's an ongoing situation they have with, with my committee.
Speaker 1: Good, that's a good thing.
Speaker 2: We're grateful to them for that, yeah.
Story_ID: 4764
Speaker 1: Now are there any other highlights from Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Lots of, lots of--.
Speaker 1: And you're talking about primarily the musical activities of Morris Brown.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was my foundation of course.  That was, that was my major.
Speaker 1: How was your social life at Morris Brown?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: You were a young lady in college even though you were down the street from your home, your family.
Speaker 2: Well it, socially it was, it was okay.  You know I was a, I was a debutant and things like you know all the regular stuff.
Speaker 1: Some people aren't debutants so you know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Sure, sure but you know my circle you know was.  Most of, I guess the, the, the basis of my activities were, were musical.
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in a sorority or anything?
Speaker 2: Actually I, I never, never pledged.  I never, never pledged.  In fact just last weekend I was honored by the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  They had a, a wonderful mother/daughter luncheon where they honored my favorite singer here in, in Atlanta, Theresa Hightower.  And they honored several other Atlanta--it was, it was women in, in the arts, several other Atlanta artists.  And they brought in Yolanda Adams, she was honored as well.  We had a lovely time.  So I'm, I'm really very partial to Alpha Kappa Alpha.
Story_ID: 4765
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation from Morris Brown, where, what was your next move?  Where were you going and what were you going to do?
Speaker 2: Actually instead of graduating I went to--I eloped with Doug [Carn] and--'cause I was supposed to graduate Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and go to [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York] 'cause I, I'd been accepted to, to Juilliard and I had a, I had a job in the paid professional choir at West Side [New York, New York] church and I had a part in the 'Hello, Dolly!' stage chorus that, that Pearl Bailey was, was starring in.  But--.
Speaker 1: So all this was in New York, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But instead I fell in love and I got married.
Speaker 1: Now how did this happen?  Tell us about how did you meet Doug Carn, 'cause this is significant?
Speaker 2: I met Doug when he transferred from Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida] to Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and he, he did, he, he was doing, doing gigs.  You know he had a group.  And there was a friend of my father's whom I was setting, I was setting up his, his bookkeeping system.  He had a, a talent agency and I was, I was you know doing office work for him and, and things like that.  And, and I met Doug there 'cause Doug was an artist being booked by, by, by that agency and I was just fascinated with his, his, his genius and so we fell in love.
Story_ID: 4766
Speaker 1: You could fall in love and still go to school.  But what happened to, that you wouldn't, I mean was there another aspect to, I guess to--was it getting involved in another whole creative process?  I mean what happened that made you not want to complete school and go on to [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, I guess had I gone, had I gone on to Juilliard it would have been--I would have, I would have delved more in the legitimate side you know.  I would have been classically grounded and, and that wasn't, that wasn't a, that wasn't a favored thing of [husband] Doug [Carn]'s.  And so we could, we could get into jazz you know 'cause I started singing in, in his jazz band.  And he you know 'cause he, he's not, not a fan of the classics so, so California was a better situation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the age of--what year is this?  This is in the 19--?
Speaker 2: This was '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: '69 [1969] okay, this is at the height of the black power movement.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: People were talking--there was a lot of discussion about culture and the Black Arts Movement--.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And people were talking about like why--I don't know if this was the discussion, you know you can correct me or stop me or whatever, but a discussion I know in a lot of places was like why play the European classics?  You know why should we aspire to do this when we have neglected our own music for so long I mean to you know legitimize it and to develop it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at a higher level and all that.
Speaker 2: And that was definitely one, one, one train of thought.  But I came up with, with all these different, different styles and different classifications of music so, so I loved them all 'cause you know like I said I've been exposed to jazz since, since I was a little girl and I collected records.  You know I could collect blues, I could collect gospel, I could collect classical, R&B [rhythm and blues] so I never, I never had those prejudices.  I, I just loved music.  It was this, this one big living body and maybe, maybe R&B was the arms and, and jazz was the legs and classical was the, was the head.  And it would all just serve to, to, to compose this, this one beautiful body called music.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did Doug feel the same way about it or did he--?
Speaker 2: No, he was, I guess you could call him a musical bigot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For lack of a better term.
Speaker 1: All right, I mean 'cause I figured that at least one of you must have had that idea or, or you would--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah and so--but like what resulting work ended up being was something very unique and powerful--.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: --and unusual in the music business that a husband and wife team would actually make records under their, both of their names you know like Doug is Doug and Jean Carn.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And the music was really unique.
Story_ID: 4767
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about this musical marriage [to Doug Carn]?  I guess it was a regular marriage too but it was also a musical marriage?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was a regular marriage and, and it was definitely a musical marriage.  The songs that, that appeared on the 'Infant Eyes', 'Spirit of the New Land' and, and 'Revelation' albums were, were instrumental classics basically that were our favorite, our, that were on our favorite records that we, that we had around the house.  And I, you know, I could hum and whistle you know the whole song including the solos, etc.  And, and we were very concerned about the fact that large audiences couldn't extract the message from the, the horn line or the piano line or, or the instrumental line.  So we thought if we put lyrics to these, these classic melodies, these [John] Coltrane melodies and McCoy Tyner and, and Horace Silver and, and, and those, those various jazz greats that we could get that message out to a greater audience cause everybody can understand the, the song line.  So we, we went about putting lyrics to 'Acknowledgment' of '[A] Love Supreme', 'Contemplation', 'Search for the New Land', Lee Morgan's song, 'Peace' of Horace Silver's, etcetera, etcetera.  And, and some of the, some of the songs were, were original ones as well.  Some of the instrumental tunes were originals as well you know songs like 'Power and Glory' and, and, 'Arise and Shine'.  But they all had messages incorporated in this, in these beautiful melodic lines with these classic instrumental songs and instrumental tunes underneath.  We, we wanted to subliminally raise the consciousness of the listener so that while you're, they're being entertained and taken to another sphere, to another level you, you, you got the goodness of that message as well and, and it, it served that purpose.
Speaker 1: Now this music was a call for black people--
Speaker 2: I agree.
Speaker 1: --to do something.  'Arise and Shine', beautiful people arise.  You know I remember that--.
Speaker 2: Arise in the light of God's wisdom, beautiful people arise.
Speaker 1: Go back to your--.
Speaker 2: Your time has come.
Speaker 1: Yeah, go back to your old town religion you know and--your time, right.  All that you know kind of, they were meditating songs.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: I mean the melodies and, and lyrics.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: 'Contemplation' and yeah you know this was really motivational music.
Speaker 2: Oh definitely.  Definitely.
Speaker 1: And you know 'Power and Glory'--.
Speaker 2: 'Power and Glory' yeah.
Speaker 1: You know long ago spoke to--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the, the responses--I think I said off camera that I thought that maybe distribution was an issue in a sense that those records are widely distributed in certain in urban areas weren't as available in some other areas you know.  And, and few people had--and you know they weren't the easiest albums to find all the time.  But when people wanted to find them they could you know, they--some people had a burning desire to find these.  You know you had to look hard but you could get them.  But what was your, what was the public's response to that music?
Speaker 2: Oh it was tremendous.  It was really tremendous because not sense your, your King Pleasure had, had lyrics been put to instrumental classics, to jazz classics.  So, so the public was ready for that.  You know the, the listening public was ready for it.  And, and Black Jazz Records, you know being a small label is probably the reason that they weren't as broadly distributed, those products weren't as broadly distributed as say records on, on Blue Note Records would have been.  But we had a formidable audience thank goodness.
Story_ID: 4768
Speaker 1: Now I think you said off camera that you all were inspired by you know the music of John Coltrane and Pharoah Sanders and Horace Silver, some others.  How did those people react to your albums?  Did you get any feedback from those musicians?
Speaker 2: Oh definitely.  I remember when, when Doug [Carn] took the, took 'Peace' to, to Horace Silver, Horace had just done a version of 'Peace' with lyrics.  In fact Andy Bey did the vocals on, on that, my good friend Andy Bey.  And, and Horace told Doug that he liked our lyrics better and so we were, we were pleased with that.  And 'Search for the New Land', we called ours, we called that album 'Spirit of the New Land', that was a Lee Morgan tune.  And Doug was about to, to come to New York to take, to, to take that song to, to Lee Morgan you know 'cause, 'cause you didn't have to get approval per se but it was a matter of courtesy you know to, to, to let them, let, let the originator of these, these melodies hear the embellishments that we had, we had done to, to their, their children if you will, their musical children.  And just before, just as Doug was about to come back East 'cause we were living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at the time, Lee Morgan was shot at, at Slugs [New York, New York] yeah, so, so he didn't get to, to, to hear our, our version of that.  And of course 'Trane' [John Coltrane] was already gone by, by that time.
Speaker 1: He died in '68 [1968] I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but McCoy, McCoy loved our, our product.
Speaker 1: McCoy Tyner?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4769
Speaker 1: Did you all go on tour with this music at all?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we, we worked a good deal.  We, in fact we, we had some, some really strange pairings where, where the, the music's concerned.  I remember at Columbia University [New York, New York] we did a concert with Patti LaBelle and the Bluebelles.  It was like Doug and Jean Carn and Pattie LaBelle and the Bluebelles.  Now that's diverse.  That's, that's as polar as you can get.  I love, love Patti's music but it was, that a strange pairing.  And I remember at University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] we did a concert with Ravi Shankar.  Now that was a, that was a lot closer because the--.
Speaker 1: Closer.
Speaker 2: --the levels of consciousness were, were kind of paralleled in those two, in, in--with us and them.  But yeah, yeah we, we got the music out there.
Speaker 1: And did you ever work with Alice Coltrane?  When you mentioned Ravi Shankar it reminded me of Alice Coltrane?
Speaker 2: No, I, I had met Alice Coltrane but I, I didn't get to--we, we didn't get to, to know her you know or anything during, during, during the composing of the music.  But speaking of Alice Coltrane I, I recently did a version of 'Somebody Bigger than You and I'.  It's a, it's was one of my mother's [Mattie Mae Perkins] favorite gospel tunes, on an album of Jeff Majors.  Jeff is a harpist.  He's a Christian harpist and he was trained by Alice Coltrane.  So just a little point speaking of Alice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you--those lyrics are so wonderful.  Could you just--I'm not going to ask you to sing them but if you could just recite a couple of the lyrics?  Can you--'cause you know them all by heart and I think it might be great to--.
Speaker 2: Oh let's see.
Speaker 1: --give people an idea of what we're talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Doug Carn plays the keyboard.  He plays the organ?
Speaker 2: And the synthesizer and the piano.
Speaker 1: He was a great musician.
Speaker 2: Sheer genius.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Real genius.
Speaker 1: And your vocals you know with these lyrics you know are really special.  So you might, could you recite one of the--I don't know which one.  But--.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'Peace', Horace Silver's 'Peace'.  All we need in this world is to have a time of peace.  A time of life and love with all guidance from above, a time when man can understand being free.  All in a time of peace.  We need peace for our children so that they may live a better life.  What a joy divine, what a perfect state of mind with their worries and cares left behind, all in a time of peace.  Oh what a peaceful time.
Speaker 1: That's beautiful.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Because so many of the lyrics are really--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --just powerful lyrics you know.  When you think of the kind of thing we usually hear in popular culture on the radio, you just wonder what kind of world it would be if you know 'Contemplation' was playing--.
Speaker 2: Hear, hear.
Speaker 1: --instead of get back sucker or whatever is on the radio you now.  So yeah it's--.
Speaker 2: Gives us something to strive for.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Maybe it will come full circle.
Speaker 1: Perhaps.  So this collaboration lasted I think three albums.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And three children.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you all were married from '69 [1969] to seventy--?
Speaker 2: '72ish [1972].
Speaker 1: --two or three?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And quite frankly you know, you don't hear much from Doug Carn.  I mean I guess I, maybe I'm not listening to the right music but you don't hear anymore, you don't hear his music as much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he hasn't done much new music you know since that time.  But he runs a club.  He has a club in Savannah [Georgia], yeah so he's a, he's a club owner now.
Speaker 1: Is it a jazz club?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, it's called Adagio.  Yeah.  Yeah, Adagio.
Story_ID: 4770
Speaker 1: Well, so what happened next?  I mean what happened after that collaboration ended?
Speaker 2: After that I--well I considered who I'd like to go with so, so I, I wrote down some names.  Among them were Norman Connors, Rashaan Roland Kirk and Thad Jones and Mel Lewis.  So I, I got in touch with all of them and they were all you know they, they loved the idea.  So I went to, to Rashaan's rehearsal, went to Thad and, and Mel's rehearsal, went to Norman's rehearsal and I found that the most compatible situation for me at, at the time was, was Norman's situation cause Thad and Mel were going to Russia actually and I didn't have a passport at the time.  So they were going in like, like a week or two.  So--.
Speaker 1: That was another Russian trip you missed?
Speaker 2: It would have been--yeah there I go missing Russia again.  So, so that you know that, that was, that was basically the reason for not going with Thad and Mel.  And Rashaan's situation, I loved it musically but, but I, I did, just didn't know--he didn't have enough vocal material so it, there would have been the task of putting lyrics to his, his classics, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he did, I mean to give him some props on some level, he, the lyrics that, I mean I--he would often take songs that were already out here and adapt lyrics too you know in some ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And certain things became classics you know from him that I think may have been by some other people like 'Spirits Up Above' or--.
Speaker 2: Okay yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Why, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Why Do the Birds Sing Their Song', you know and all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this--.
Speaker 2: But, but that wouldn't have been a smooth enough transition.  And you know that would have taken time to, to, to go into lyrics for you know for a lot of his instrumental things. So Norman Connors won by default.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Norman Connors was basically a drummer and an arranger?
Speaker 2: A drummer and, and producer.  And Norman is I dare say the best talent scout on the planet 'cause Norman has, has been instrumental in the beginning of a lot of careers like, like Dee Dee Bridgewater, Prince Phillip Mitchell, Michael Henderson--well you should know, Adaritha, 'cause she's a Chicagoan, Eleanor Mills, who else, Phyllis Hyman.  In fact, Phyllis was asked to do Norman's, Norman's album, that first album which was a first album for her, the album that had 'Betcha By Golly Wow'.  I had signed with [Kenny] Gamble and [Leon] Huff and we, we were looking for somebody to take my place in--on his album and Phyllis was appearing at McKells in New York.  And he called me and told me to meet him at McKells.  He said I think I found your replacement.  So we went there.  Phyllis had just come from Florida.  She had been performing in Florida and obviously the first couple of bars it was obvious you know that she was, she was a force to be reckoned with and the rest they say is history.
Speaker 1: Now you were with Norman Connors for how long now?
Speaker 2: Well I, I recorded two albums with him but I do vocal productions on, on most of his projects, yeah.
Story_ID: 4771
Speaker 1: Next you became part of a--you were produced by [Kenny] Gamble and [Leon] Huff, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I went solo.  In fact Gamble said that his next door neighbor had given him the 'Infant Eyes' album when, when Doug [Carn] and I first got started so he had followed me all during that period.  And when he became aware that I was, that I was a solo he, he got in touch with me and he got in touch with me through, through a musician, through a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] musician.  And on the, it was on the, the evening of an [Muhammad] Ali fight.  He was fighting in, in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  I came to, to the company in, in Philadelphia, came to the, to the building, to his Philly International Record Building and we were--Gamble and I were going to talk and then he was going to catch the train and go on to AC [Atlantic City] 'cause everybody else had left.  And we talked right through the whole bout and, and I ended up signing with you know with, you know, with Gamble and Huff.  And it was, it was one of the best decisions I've ever made 'cause it was such a family situation and, and I learned so much.  And I was, I was encouraged and, and protected and, and, and taught and it was, it was, it was everything you could imagine your solo career being at its, at its beginnings.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know at this time too Gamble and Huff were, I think they started off mainly with love songs and party records.  And so they, their lyrics started turning into positive messages, consciously created messages for African Americans.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: They were very concerned about you know extolling like certain positive values for the community.
Speaker 2: Very true.  Very true, yeah.  In fact their, their mantra was understand while you dance.  So you're being positively brainwashed while you're boogying so it was the best of both worlds.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause there's albums like 'Ship Ahoy' by the O'Jays. You know they're like fairly classical style you know I mean, you know R&B [rhythm and blues] pieces but there's a lot of messages in them.
Speaker 2: Many, many, many messages.  You know, 'Wake Up Everybody', 'Family Reunion', geez, in fact I, I remember my first single was 'Free Love'.  And if you listen to the lyrics it, it wasn't talking about you know the, the love of the time you know the, the, the free love you know the flower, the flower syndrome love it talked about let's see, free love, don't be a slave to your passion.  Free love, you might get a negative reaction.  Don't go around giving your love to just anyone.  Find somebody who loves you not just for your body.  So you know therein again you're boogying and you're getting that, that positive brainwashing.  So it was just, just an ideal situation.  And Gamble's doing wonderful things even now.  He's, he's building housing in Philadelphia [Universal Community Homes] for, for lower income folks and for people in the, in the economically depressed areas.  He's, he's a renaissance man I must say.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Yeah, he is.  He's transforming the neighborhood he used to live in, you know, from one that was in squalor basically to you know that's--.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --it's coming up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and while, while I was on the label he had the Clean Up the Ghetto campaign where they, you know they would, they would encourage the, the members of the, of the ghetto communities to come out you know and, and clean off your stoop and plant your yard and paint your house and you know they were guided and encouraged and, and financed you know by his movement.  It was just positive, positive.
Speaker 1: You know that's a different approach to it.
Speaker 2: It certainly is, a wonderful approach.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So now how long did you work with Gamble and Huff?
Speaker 2: I did four albums on, on the label.
Story_ID: 4772
Speaker 1: Then [Kenny] Gamble decided to, to, to sort of downsize and he, he conferred with me and, and he wanted to know what label did I feel would be easier to go to, would be smoother to go to?  And I, I thought maybe Motown [Records] would, would be a good transition, you know family run company.  And, and Philly International [Records] for me was like a family.  So, so Gamble was instrumental in, in negotiating my deal with Motown but it wasn't quite the marriage that, that I had with Philly International.
Speaker 2: Well Motown was going through some changes too I guess.
Speaker 1: Well yeah as companies do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well what happened though?
Speaker 1: Well it was, it was, it was good product but I didn't get the, get the promotions that, that, that it deserved.
Story_ID: 4773
Speaker 1: Now this is something that you know, I guess I dare say this.  You are a talent that is, your talent is, is recognized by so many people that hear you.  You've got a--your fans are probably somewhat loyal on the planet earth I guess.
Speaker 2: I am blessed, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you're not widely known you know, you're not really widely known not as wide as we suspect someone with this kind of talent should be. And maybe you know I don't know, but do you have a sense for why you're sort of like a special wine that somebody keeps on a, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well I, I work more than most of the artists I know.  I have a big audience in Europe you know 'cause I'm in Europe every year.  In fact my last, my last CD was released by a, a European company, Expansion Records.  It was a compilation called 'Collaborations'.  I think you had some information on, I saw that you had pulled off the internet.  That was, that was a European CD.  But I--enough folks know me to keep me vital.  So--.
Speaker 1: I'm not suggesting that.
Speaker 2: I'm very pleased.
Speaker 1: I'm suggesting that you are so gifted and you know and the people that really appreciate you, you know have a great appreciation, have a tremendous appreciation but you may not be known as widely as you, you know--.
Speaker 2: So I'm not a household name?
Speaker 1: No, I mean you, in, you're only in certain households.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know that's--yeah that would be the--yeah that's it.
Speaker 2: Yeah well--.
Speaker 1: Just general observation.  But you know.
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: It's not, it doesn't any way diminish what you do.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm, you know, I'm happy with the, the way things are.  You know perhaps the fact that when I, when I go in the studio I never think well if I do this that way it'll sell more pieces.  You know I, and I've never, I've never wanted to know how many pieces of project sold or you know 'cause that, that sort of would ruin the, the aesthetic for me.  So that's not my motivation.
Story_ID: 4774
Speaker 1: I'm satisfied with, with, with a number one record thanks to Grover [Washington, Jr.].  You know I appreciate Grover for--.
Speaker 2: Okay well tell me about the--.
Speaker 1: --for the Closer, 'Closer than Close'.
Speaker 2: Tell us about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Grover, Grover Washington, Jr., the, the wonderful late, great Grover Washington, Jr. has been a, was a Philadelphian for many years.  In fact he was a favorite son.  And a gentleman from, from Atlanta [Georgia], Vernon Odom mentioned to me many years ago that Grover and I should do something together 'cause Grover's a good friend, was a, was a good friend of his.  And my management mentioned the same thing to me.  It must have been '84 [1984] and he, he suggested, he said why, "Why don't you and Grover do something together?"  And I said you know, "I would love that, you know 'cause Grover's one of my favorite, one of my very favorite saxophonists."  So he made the, made the arrangements and Grover and I ended up being kindred sprits.  I mean we heard things just alike.  I remember when we were choosing the songs for the 'Closer than Close' album we, you know, were sitting there listening to songs that were being submitted and we always chose the same songs.  In the studio we were listening to playbacks and, and, and you're listening there, you're concentrating and then you'd hear something and we'd both look up at the same time.  We'd hear the same discrepancies or we'd hear the, the same--(pause).
Speaker 2: Start over again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We'd hear the same discrepancies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'd, we'd hear the same discrepancies, we'd hear the same tonal problems.  We'd hear whatever needed to be done over maybe, maybe on, on a take and it, and the engineers thought it was very eerie cause here we were never having known each other before except musically.  We were, we were just on the, on the, on that same track.
Speaker 2: So you sort of confirmed each other's intelligence around the material that you--?
Speaker 1: Definitely.  Definitely and it was, it was a wonderful situation.  And Grover was one of those folks that, that I could go to if, if there was a situation where I wanted to do a benefit and say let's do a benefit for, for Spencer Harrison for instance who was, was my background singer.  His first recording was on the 'Closer than Close' album and he, he traveled with Grover as well during, during the course of his career.  And Spencer came down with AIDS and we did it, Grover and I did a benefit for him to, to defray his, his, his hospital bills.  And then, then when Phyllis [Hyman] passed away the next year actually Grover and I did a, did a tribute concert at, at Bill Gray's church [Bright Hope Baptist Church] in, in Philadelphia, Reverend Bill [William H.] Gray [III] who was then Congressman Bill Gray in tribute to Phyllis.  So I, I could always go to Grover when there was something that you weren't getting remuneration for.  You know he was a giver like, like I am and, and I really miss him.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Grover Washington died in--?
Speaker 1: It was in--four years ago now, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's truly a loss.
Speaker 1: Just before Christmas, yeah.
Story_ID: 4775
Speaker 1: What would you consider some of the highlights of your musical career other than what we've already mentioned?
Speaker 2: Having performed with Duke Ellington was definitely, definitely a highlight.  I, I worked with him just before he passed away in '74 [1974].  And, and the one thing I regret about that situation was his book had just come out and, 'Music is My Mistress', and everybody got their copies autographed.  I didn't.  I guess I thought he was forever although, although he was, he was ill at the time.  But you know it didn't seem major to me 'cause, 'cause I remember the last that I did with him was at the Rainbow Grill, well it's, it's called the Rainbow Room now in, in New York and he--I would sing to him 'cause he would rest between shows.  And, and he would ask me to sing very high and very soft because he, he made me aware that there's a special kind of control that goes with singing.  He said anybody can sing high and loud he said but, but it takes very special control to sing high and soft.  So I would sing to him and he, he would say "I love you madly" in languages you know at the end of his show so, so I taught him some Russian you know, taught him some Russian phrases 'cause he's--very intelligent man and like a sponge I mean all the way, all the way to the end.  And he, he dyed his hair all the way to the end 'cause he used to introduce his son Mercer [Ellington], cause Mercer let his hair gray and, and the Duke would introduce his Mercer--his son as, "The fellow over there with the gray hair is my son Mercer."  He was a delightful man and that's, that's an experience I, I wouldn't take anything for.
Story_ID: 4776
Speaker 1: We didn't talk about Earth, Wind and Fire at all.  Now Earth, Wind and Fire, did you get involved with them immediately after the collaboration with Doug Carn and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Actually that was before and during because, okay, the first album, 'Earth, Wind and Fire', I did with them, Doug and I did with them.  And the, their second album, 'The Need of Love', I did with them and these were on Warner Bros. [Records].  After that they went, they went with CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System], with Columbia [Records].  And I--we all lived in the same apartment building so--in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] 'cause they had come from Chicago [Illinois] and Doug and I had come from Atlanta [Georgia].  I, I learned a lot in, in that building, living in that building observing you know 'cause I came from a, from a, from a home where, where nobody drank.  My father [Aldrich Myron Perkins] smoked a pipe 'cause in fact his, his cab drivers would--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --call him Pipe, yeah.
Speaker 1: --put tobacco in it I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Nothing you know nothing, nothing strange went on in our household.  So, so I could, I observed a lot of, a lot of lessons that were being taught to me by other people's mistakes.  In fact Janis Joplin passed away in that, in the building we lived in.  It was, it was called The Landmark.  It was a building on Highland Avenue in, in Hollywood.  And I, I just saw a lot of folks go--lot of entertainers 'cause it was an apartment hotel and so lots of entertainers lived there and I, I saw a lot of us go through a lot of, a lot of trauma, a lot of challenge, a lot of mistakes.  And it was, it was, it was quite a, quite a proving ground to be able to, to observe and not participate you know cause I, I've never, never drank, smoke or done drugs.  I don't even use profanity.  So yeah so it was, it was wonderful to be able to observe these, these acts that you should remember.  You know never go there and, and it made me, it made me, it fortified me in a sense.  It kind of let me know well maybe you, you're on the right track 'cause don't let, don't be influenced.  'Cause my mother [Mattie Mae Perkins] always said don't be easily influenced you know.  She always said you can be in it and not of it.  So my attitude toward the business is that it is, it's my business, it's my, my vocation, it's my, my livelihood and it's very wonderful.  It's been good to me and it's good for me and it will be as good to me as I am to it.  It's like nature, if you abuse nature it strikes back.  And this business is the same way.  So I appreciate Earth, Wind and Fire for that reason.  But Maurice [White] became--he got familiar with my voice cause Doug and I were working on the 'Infant Eyes' album.  We, 'cause we worked on that project for close to a year.  And we went into the studio with, with Earth, Wind and Fire before we recorded 'Infant Eyes'.  And, and we actually recorded 'Infant Eyes' in the same studio that, that Maurice had, had done, had done their, their first album and it was called Sunset Sounds 'cause we didn't know of any other studio.  That was our first time going into the recording studio so we kind of learned from the genius cause Maurice is definitely a genius.
Speaker 1: Maurice--Earth, Wind and Fire really didn't get big until 1972, '73 [1973], I guess.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Their, their trip to, to CBS, their changing to CBS really catapulted them to the stardom they deserved.
Story_ID: 4777
Speaker 1: Do you think that, I mean are there musicians that you've observed that are really good that never got a real break, you know?  Or do you think they all pretty much--?
Speaker 2: You mean within Earth, Wind and Fire?
Speaker 1: No, within--?
Speaker 2: Or musicians?
Speaker 1: --the community of musicians?  I'm sure you met a lot of musicians and I don't know.
Speaker 2: Oh numerous, numerous and I, I still run into musicians you know that--in, in the various cities.  You know Harry Belafonte calls them the local kings and queens, musical kings and queens in, in cities all over the U.S. and all over the world, folks who, who do just fine there in, in that milleu, in that territory so they're, they're, they're a big fish in a little pond.  And that, and that works.  That works for, for a lot of artists 'cause everybody can't, can't be a national artist.  So the various cities are blessed to have these local kings and queens.
Story_ID: 4778
Speaker 1: what have you been working on lately?
Speaker 2: I am working on a project, it's a tribute product.  It's called 'Divas: The Voices of my Life'.  And it--in fact, I, I tried it out on my, on my British audience in, in January.  It's paying tribute to twenty-three divas who, whom during the course of my life and my career have, have been an influence to me, Lena Horne and, and Shirley Horn and Etta James and Morgana King of course Sarah [Vaughan] and Ella [Fitzgerald] and Carmen [McRae] and, and divas that, that have acted as influences and inspirations and, and life lessons to me.  So I'm working on, on that right now.
Story_ID: 4779
Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of art or music?
Speaker 2: I actually live my philosophy.  I've always been, been a teacher 'cause I taught, I taught school while I was at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I taught elementary school during the summers.  And I, I have this philosophy for, for young folks.  Over the years you know the, all the years that I've been in the business as a solo I've hired young musicians and, and I, I take them on the road and, and I, I encourage them and teach them to perfect their, their, their skills and their crafts.  And, and I teach them that we can get out here and we can be in it and not of it and by example.  I teach them you know that hey, we don't sound any better when you smoke or when you drink or when you do drugs.  It's, it's not a necessary part of the, part of our, our business like, like rumor has it or as legend has it.
Speaker 1: There's a--yeah I have to confirm that for the people you know, as somebody in entertainment for a while, a lot of musicians were under the delusion that they actually sounded better when they were high you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that is an illusion.  It's, has no basis in fact.  So I've raised up a nation of, of musicians.  A lot of them are self taught so I teach them musical term, terminology and teach them to read.  And, and I teach my singers an instrument and I teach my instrumentalists to sing.  So by the time you leave my organization you can sing rivaling me, you know if you, if you've done your homework.  So that, that's my life philosophy and, and it's, it served me well.  And hopeful, hopefully it served that army of, of artists I've raised.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're very much concerned about the upcoming generation of music--.
Speaker 2: Oh, we have to be.
Speaker 1: Do you have any concerns about today's music and the direction that it's going?
Speaker 2: I'm just praying it will come full circle.  I'm, I'm hoping that, that the youth who are now the record buyers will get tired of the lack of melody and, and the lack of, of, of instrumentation and the lack of positivity and the lack of great lyrics and great voices and they'll, they'll come back around to, to what it is we produced for you know for, for the listening audiences.  That's my hope.  That's my prayer.
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: Well elevation again.  Hopefully maybe once the, once the music comes, comes around to something positive and, and melodic and, and, and consciousness raising the, the community will follow suit.
Story_ID: 4780
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite musician?  I know you probably do but--.
Speaker 2: Oh many.
Speaker 1: --do you feel comfortable about talking about who your favorites are?  Do you have an absolute favorite?
Speaker 2: Oh geez, many.  A lot of my--you mean among the, the newer genre or, or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's start with the new ones and maybe we can go on back.
Speaker 2: Okay, for the new--geez.  You know I'm loving a lot of these kids I'm hearing on 'American Idol' and on, and on 'Star Search'.  They're really going to--I'm hoping they can be instrumental in, in raising the level of musicianship and, and competence in, in this music cause, cause a lot of, a lot of your, your today artists are, are lacking in their musicality and in their accuracy and in their, their positivity and they're lacking in a few areas.  And I'm hoping the influence of these kids who are singing, I mean who are singing their hearts out leaves these--even, even, even the comedians and, and the youths, the comedians on 'Star Search' and on 'American Idol' are--well on Star Search' are, are, they're not blue.  You know they're, they're G Rated which is, which is good and maybe that will catch fire and just spread all over the country and all over the world.  And as far as, as far as older artists and, and your vintage artists, your pioneering artists are concerned I really love, well we have to pay homage to your [John] Coltranes and your--and of course we miss, we miss Grover Washington, Jr. tremendously.
Speaker 1: Could you start that over 'cause that sound is going to be over the line.
Speaker 2: Okay.  As far as, as vintage artists are concerned I must pay tribute to, to our pioneers like, like 'Bird' [Charlie Parker] and Coltrane and of course I miss Grover Washington, Jr. tremendously.  I miss Stanley Turrentine.  I called him Uncle Stanley.  I miss Noel Pointer, miss Phyllis Hyman and--.
Speaker 1: He played the violin.
Speaker 2: Violin, amazing violin, amazing violin, miss Phyllis and I miss, miss all, all those wonderful souls who, who contributed to, to our music you know to make it what it is today.
Story_ID: 4781
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point I guess to be your legacy?  I know you're still young.
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess I hope I can be remembered for, for pulling as many people especially young folks along with me on, on this journey as I could.
Speaker 1: And the last question we actually ask is, is about how you would like to be remembered which is slightly different from legacy.  But how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a giver, as a, as a great mom, as, as one who, who did the best that she could to, to pay homage to a, to a wonderful craft.
