Story_ID: 202657
Speaker 1: My name is Clarissa Myrick-Harris, and I am the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and we have as an observer, Ms. Sally Warner, and I am here today interviewing [HistoryMaker] Mrs. Ann Cooper at her home here in Atlanta, Georgia, at her home of almost seventy years.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta, Georgia, and today's date is March 24, 2004.  How are you today, Ms. Cooper?
Speaker 2: Fine, thank you.  How are you?
Speaker 1: I'm doing great, thank you.  Would you please state your name for us?
Speaker 2: Well I am Ann Louise Nixon Cooper.
Speaker 1: Would you spell you name please?
Speaker 2: A-N-N, N-I-X-O-N, C-O-O-P-E-R, Ann Nixon Cooper.  I left off the Louise (laughter).
Speaker 1: And I understand that there's a story behind your name.  You changed it at some point.  What was it originally?
Speaker 2: Oh, Annie Lou and I just had the I-E cut off of Ann (laughter) and the, let's see, I-S-E, Louise, I put Louise instead, and just plain Annie Lou.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I must have been all of eleven years old when I decided I just did not like that Annie Lou, (laughter), so I just asked my mother [Mollie George Nixon] if I could drop that I-E and add I and U-S-E, Louise, however it went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she saw nothing wrong with that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Didn't have to go to court or anything about it, but there was a time that they did not record children's names, but I learned in later life that we all were recorded as we were born, way back in Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and location?
Speaker 2: January the 9th, 1902, and I'm not certain how I would say exactly where, but some place in Bedford County, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: And would you state your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, no I never had an occupation even after growing up I've just been a homemaker and a mother.  No occupation.  I've spent my time doing volunteer work.  I've done a lot of volunteer work, but never had a paying job.
Speaker 1: Well, in my book those are occupations for sure.  They are definitely full-time jobs.
Story_ID: 202658
Speaker 1: We start out here with five questions and this is really, these are kind of People magazine type questions and they kind of warm us up, break the ice, whatever.  First, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite foods.  I don't have any favorite foods.  I think about and I believe I liked everything except Brussels sprouts (laughter).  All kinds of vegetables and all kind of meats.  I just don't think--but a very few things that I don't like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh now, that's something else.  Spring is really my time of year.  I like beautiful sunshine.  I can feel alive, anytime the sun is shining, and that's one thing I enjoy about being right here.  If I get up before eight o'clock, the sunshine comes through those kitchen windows, all up into my room and all, it brings out all the different colors up there, blue, pink, light pink or dark pink and I used to well, have a time sometime, didn't wanna wake up and get up, and my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] would be saying get up, get up and I said, one, one morning well where is the sunshine?  He said, now look, I do everything I can for you, but now I can't make the sun shine and there's not gonna be any sunshine today, so you get up (laughter), so that's something, that stays with me how much--and I look out now if I don't get out of the bed until after the sun rises and comes through all those blinds and I was just telling Sally [Warner] about the policemen or anybody who comes here telling me close these blinds, and I thought well now I wanna wake up with the sunshine shining, so sunshine.  Spring is my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Great. And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have no favorite colors.  I think I like all colors.  I can't think of anything, no one thing or one color that I don't like.  No, no favorite colors.  I can always say thought that my [husband], I got to bring him into everything, 'cause he was crazy about loud colors and wanted me to wear something with flowers and we had a lot of flowers and he would sometimes come in and think flowers look so pretty.  You go put on your most flowery thing, and then call the photographer, come take my picture, me and the flowers.  But, I had no, anything like that, but that was one of his favorite things to keep a photographer nearby and we took pictures.  He had a good camera and when he saw something he liked, go and take a pict- get his camera and take a picture of it.  So, I like all, I must say I like all colors.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: That, too, is something that I don't think I could say any special place.  I haven't been everywhere like some of my friends because I've never been to Europe, but I have spent time in different islands like I have spent February or something like that in the Virgin Islands and enjoyed being down there.  When my husband died, we were all packed to go to Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago].  We didn't get there, so I can't compare that with any other place, but I did enjoy going to the warm spots, and we always spent February some place other than Atlanta [Georgia].  So anywhere that I could get off the plane, and tell you, how come it's so cold back here we just left-- (laughter), so, so no, no special favorite place, just any place out of the cold because I don't like cold much.  I hate to have to get out in the cold.  I bring him into it again.  I said he would joke about it that I hadn't had my feet on the ground all of say January or something you know because if I didn't have to get up and go I didn't go.  He would just get all wrapped up and go to church on Sundays and if I didn't have to come out any other time I stayed in here.  So, I know springtime is my favorite time of year and I don't like cold weather.  I can draw up in a knot and sit right back there and keep warm and I'm happy (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the last of these questions, your favorite fa- your favorite phrase or saying, something that comes to you over time?
Speaker 2: I did have this favorite saying, "To thine own self be true," that's some of, let's see, but that is something that I've held onto from young girlhood, to thine own self be true, and then I think that's some of whose writing, [William] Shakespeare or something like that you know.  So, I think that's about something that has stuck with me throughout the years.
Story_ID: 202659
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you about your family history.  Your mother first of all, please tell me her name?
Speaker 2: Mollie, M-O-L-L-I-E, Mollie George.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: That I am not certain, but I would think around in Bedford County, Tennessee because we all originated in a little place called Shelbyville [Tennessee] and that's in Bedford County I think.  So, that's one thing that as we grow older we wonder why our parents never really told us anything and I didn't start wondering about it until I'm grown and got children of my own and I wondered why my father's [James Henry Nixon] brothers would come to see us, but no, not a one of my mother's anybody ever came and well I finally asked, but nobody, none of my older sisters knew, but why nobody ever came and then I wondered more and more since nobody knew anything to tell me I got in touch with a young man who writes things about history and families and he looked it up for me to tell me that my mother's maiden name at least, and didn't say anything about her parents though.  I think my older sister got, sisters got to know one brother and they never know him, knew him well enough to tell us anything about him.  But, I had thought maybe my parents ran away and got married and my mother's parents just threw her away, because didn't any of them come to see about it, she got to having all those children, nobody ever came out of her family and I was so curious about that I started looking into it, and I learned though, I have in writing now that my father's oldest brother witnessed their marriage, my mother and father's marriage, so I guess they--it still didn't tell me how old they were, but I have that, but I know they didn't run away and get married (laughter).  So, I have that in writing and I have that the oldest brother witnessed their marriage and I know now that they--I don't remember the year, but I have it in writing somewhere and it was in February something and so you see I know that they, although they weren't grown up, but they didn't run away from home, and she didn't get disinherited.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever talk to you at all about any--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's what I said, I don't remember them telling us anything, and in reading these years now everybody's saying parents never talked about their younger days and it has been recommended that parents have at least one meal a day with all the children around, and talk about those things, but now of course we did that.  My immediate family here now, we did that a lot.  My children know all about how we met and everything, but nobody ever told us about our parents.  So, no they, I don't remember telling us anything about family when she was growing up.  And I wish so much that I had known her because I thought she was the greatest something you know.  Well, I was being this baby for four years, oh I did love mom, mama, mama, and I tried to follow mama everywhere she went, and she let me do it, and I guess if I couldn't, you know, I would have a spasm or something, but she never really stopped to tell us anything about how she grew up and I don't know why nobody, those girls older than I, why some of them didn't get curious and look up something before everybody had died out.
Story_ID: 202660
Speaker 1: So, I'm the only one now trying to find out little by little, and I was just telling my grandsons on the Cooper side why you know they didn't look into more of their parents, but they had a little more to go by than I had because my husband's [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] mother was born right here in Atlanta [Georgia] and when you--there was an old lady in my church she died at 103 a couple of years ago she knew my husband's family.  She was born on Auburn Avenue, and she could tell me a few things about my husband's people.  But, other than that everybody that I knew who might have known them had already died, you know, but Ms. [Kathleen] Adams lived to be more than 103 years old.
Speaker 2: That's Kathleen.
Speaker 1: She was still active and in the church.  Her daddy didn't work for white people (laughter).  He had a grocery store on Auburn Avenue; that set her apart from most black folks.  So, you see, it's knowing things when you growing up, but who takes the time to find out.  I, was always, I was curious about a lot of things.  I couldn't understand why black people didn't, weren't allowed to pay taxes and all that so they could fuss, but, and I know going Lester Maddox was, whatever he was, we went to hear an entertainment at City Auditorium [sic. Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia], and he making everybody go in the back door.  I wonder but how you do that, so things like that bothered me always.
Story_ID: 202661
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Mollie George Nixon]?  You've talked about liking, the fact that you liked to be around her a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I do remember she was a very playful somebody.  She had to play with us a lot, you know, because nothing else for us to do and we'd get together and do things together like, well we had to go and pick all the fruits and stuff around.  We'd all go, and then as some of us were too little to do any good, they could stay home and maybe she'd stay home with maybe two or three of us.  But, blackberry season we had to get out and go pick blackberries and we'd get chiggers.  You know what chiggers are?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: All in our hair and everything.  It took all of her time trying to scrub the chiggers out of our heads and, and then we'd gather and say there were a lot of black walnut trees in those days and hickory nut trees.  We had to gather all of that and take care of that and they'd make stuff out of that and of course you know you used to have black walnut in ice cream.  Well, they stopped putting black walnuts in ice cream because a black walnut was so hard to crack and just in recent years they've come back to it.  But, you see I can remember when we enjoyed making ice, my mother making ice cream herself 'cause we had one cow and you put, brought the milk in to get warm by the fireplace and then make butter and make ice cream.  So, you see we had a lot of things to keep us happy, having good things to eat (laughter).
Story_ID: 202662
Speaker 1: And your father [James Henry Nixon], what do you know about his background, his family?
Speaker 2: Don't know anything other than it was a big family.  There were six Nixon brothers and six Nixon sisters, pretty ladies all everywhere and I wish I knew more because when we went to stay in the little one room schoolhouse it was one of our cousins who would be the teacher, and then after I was married and living down here and we'd drive from here to Nashville [Tennessee] I said to my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] one Sunday we were going, and I asked him if we could just drive through Shelbyville [Tennessee].  We didn't have to go that way, and I don't know whether it was any closer or anything, but we went through and because I wanted to see if I could find somebody and the first person we saw was a black man, and I said let's stop and ask him about this cousin who taught up there.  Asked him, "Do you know Stella Smith?"  "I ought to know her she's my wife," so I thought (laughter), well anyway I think, well I said, could we go to see her.  She is in Nashville in summer school.  Everybody who taught in those schools had to go to summer school at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  So, she was at Tennessee State, and I'm wondering, and I have wondered all these years, now my husband was there, my children ought to have been thinking age, and I said did any of us get her address, and I just wonder, we had chance to get in touch with some of them.  We didn't do it.  She never--well I think I must have left there saying tell her, her cousin came past (laughter), something like that.  So, no I lost all contact with my father's people, but they were everywhere.  As I grew older, a lot of my father's nieces and things like that were around there.  One was teaching out at Tennessee State, and of course she was so high and mighty she didn't have any time for we folks who--(laughter).  No, and, but that could have been a lead you could--I just, we just lost touch with all of them because when my parents died all those sisters were around someplace, but how would you notify folks that so and so is dead?  I think you had to be buried right away or something like that.  So, no I don't know enough about them, but I, when I asked that they do a little research on it, I found that there were those, my father's sisters and brothers and the brothers went on off to New York and someplace--
Story_ID: 202663
Speaker 1: I got folks everywhere that I don't know, because my sister's husband, now let's see that was about my fourth sister one that--whose grandson is here working at WSB[-TV, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: David Bowden.  I said, of course his mother went off and got married to this man from the Honduras.  They'd been all everywhere, but they didn't try to keep up with anybody.  Now, sisters and nieces and brothers are all over California, all over New York and everywhere, and this, David's mother come here, comes here from Miami [Florida] now.  They retired from New York City [New York, New York], and they live in Miami and she's in touch with a good many nieces and things around, out of California.  But, everybody seems to have good jobs and recently one had come and taken them on a cruise and they down there in Miami doing nothing but going on cruises, but and said we'd take you.  No, I ain't going nowhere without my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] (laughter).  So, I guess we could know--through different ones of the family, we could get together and get to know more of them.  But they--as I said the family is scattered and went away years ago and never wanted, never came back I guess because I think some of them got to be real--in my sister Willie's [Willie Nixon Harris] family there were men who had good voices and they could sing, so got to be very important, but we wouldn't know them from anybody else, you know.  But, we used to go to New York kind of often and little by little we would get in touch with somebody there and then little by little one nephew, one of the cousins had married a man who finished dentistry from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and they located in Knoxville, Tennessee, and she taught, and she had to come to Nashville and go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] every summer, so I got to know her.  She stayed with us in Nashville while she was going to summer school and when she died she had two sons.  They lived in California then.  Somehow they looked me up and I met one of them in New York.  He had a picture of the one that we, my Aunt Joyce's [Joyce Nixon] mother, that was his grandmother too, you know.  He had a picture of her and now why we didn't keep that contact I don't know.
Story_ID: 202664
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [James Henry Nixon]?
Speaker 2: Oh well you know we thought he was a jewel, because he was kind of, not a big man, but he was kind of Indian [Native American].  I think we had a lot of Indian in our backgrounds.  He was, and of course being a farmer, he was always sunburned, but he was more red then, and had pretty hair, pretty wavy hair.  And this is what I remember most about him, he would go to town Saturday nights and buy--you know they put shoes and things for children out on the tables, he could figure out everybody's foot size and one time when I don't remember how old I was, but then we were living there in Gallatin [Tennessee], hadn't been that long, and the girls from town came out on Sunday to meet the country girls and everybody had on new shoes but me.  The shoes that he had for me were too little.  I never could get them on, but I remember they all dressed up in their new shoes and you didn't do anything for entertainment.  Well, my mother [Mollie George Nixon] always had lemonade, you know, and we drank lemonade and go out walking and so here we are, I'm just proud stepping along with the big girls, I'm barefoot.  They said, "Why she didn't put on her shoes?"  My little mother sister said, "She has some, but they're too little (laughter)."
Story_ID: 202665
Speaker 1: I'd like you to talk about your childhood memories.  Can you describe your family life, what that was like, special events, holidays?
Speaker 2: In the country, I guess the most exciting times would be say a county fair.  When my daddy [John Henry Nixon] would come with a wagon drawn by two mules I expect, take us to the fair.  Now you know that was big time, when we so excited about the different exhibits that they had in farm animals, cows, and then I think what fascinated we children most would be the little horses that drove, you know pulled the little carts, somebody riding that there, riding that little cart and to watch that horse trot and all that sort of thing.  And there would be ribbons given for the best cow, things like that, and you trying to see what you would think about that one and all.  Well, mostly it was farm doings, you know, but you'd have something to ride on like a merry-go-round and what else would be for children.  Well it was just about the biggest thing that would happen in a year's time.  You looked forward to the county fair coming.  And that went on and on even after I was grown up.  Nashville [Tennessee] was still the kind of country place, but by the time for the schools to open and the--and as you know Nashville was kind of like Atlanta [Georgia] with the colleges, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and the other schools, well everybody's coming there to go to school, you know, and there'd be all these young men coming to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and blah, blah, blah.  You just up and go to the fair (laughter) and everything that went on we were right in the midst of it.  That's the biggest thing for everybody to participate in, and of course there were other things, the opening of the schools brought in entertainment, so it was a place like Atlanta, we didn't get to go off to New York [New York] or Chicago [Illinois] to see things, so somebody would be appearing at our black theaters, someone, so.  You got that to look forward to you know.  Pay a few dollars and go to hear whoever was performing at the black theater.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the performers, who they were?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, who would we go to see?  Well, right now it just doesn't come to me.  Let's see, it seems to me that Broadway Rascals [ph.] was somebody.  I can't remember what Broadway Rascals did, but I think we looked forward to going to that and that as we grew out of teenage years, into our teenage years some of these fellows would scrape up a little--well they would work at hotels serving parties and everything, get a little money and they could take you to see whatever was appearing, you know.  So, it was always a lively place in Nashville because of the schools just like here.  You know, a lot of people come here because of all these schools and you would have artistic affairs to go to see and, because I know here the only way you could go to a decent movie was to go down the alley to the Loew's [Grand] Theatre [Atlanta, Georgia] and the Fox [Theatre, Atlanta, Georgia] was kind of new way back in the '20s [1920s], and we had children, and we'd climb up those steps and get in there and think about, Lord if you started falling there was nothing to stop you.  One time my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.], we went to see something and he thought, why am I bringing my children way up in this dangerous place?  He decided then when my first two children were young, we ain't coming here no more.  Anything that we just wanted to see, just get up and go all the way to New York or Chicago to see 'em.  And so we knew where we lived, we knew how we had to do, so didn't nobody fuss about it we just (laughter) did the best we could.
Story_ID: 202666
Speaker 1: Now getting back to your childhood, going back to your childhood--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --for a little bit--
Speaker 2: Oh let's see where was I?
Speaker 1: Well, you told me about your name change--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I understand there's more to that story.  Could you tell us the rest of that story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I think I had already, Sally [Warner] and I had laughed about that.  It seems that when I was born and the midwife said to my mother [Mollie George Nixon], my mother said to her well I can't think of anything to name her.  I can't think of--everybody had a double name and I didn't realize that that was so important.  I wondered why we all had those double names after I'm grown you know, but it seems that everybody named their girls like that.  Say, Sadie Mae, or Johnnie Mae, or something like that.  So, my mother said well I can't think of two names for her.  So the old midwife said, well just name her after me.  Name her Annie Lou, and her name was Ms. Annie Lou Mullins.  Now, I think about myself how can I--I bet none of my sisters or anybody would remember Ms. Mullins' name, but I remember Ms. Annie Lou Mullins 'cause soon as I was old enough they told me who I was named for and I wondered how come I had to be Ms. Annie Lou Mullins.  But now the way I decided to change my name, when we moved out of Bedford County [Tennessee] to this great estate in Nashville, Tennessee and we lived and some of those people had plantations like outside of the city you know, so I think in Gallatin [Tennessee] they had a place and all big families would get together on these big estates.  There were about three families in this house of the Berry house, and they had, when they moved out there in that country, there were no other children out there, you know no school or anything for white children, just the people who worked at this place, this estate Langley Hall [Gallatin, Tennessee].  I got pictures of that.
Story_ID: 202667
Speaker 1: And your family moved from your farm--
Speaker 2: From, yeah from--now we living now in Gallatin [Tennessee] and this estate is in Gallatin, but that was nearer Nashville [Tennessee] you know, then of course nearer to where than where we came from in Bedford County [Tennessee], in Shelbyville [Tennessee] and things like that.  So anyway since there were no other big families out there at Langley Hall [Gallatin, Tennessee] and they had one little girl was my age and so they looked around for somebody to come and be playing with her, amuse her, and so they chose me.  I'd get up and they'd take me up there to play with I think the name was Eleanor.  Most white people was named Eleanor in those days, so I was accepted in that house just like the little white girl, and I remember one Christmas she got a pony for Christmas, and she'd ride on that pony and I'm riding on the pony holding on to her you know, so then after we all grown up and I talked about this niece of mine and David Bowden's mother's sister there, they all ended up where there ain't so much money around, they got a home that's near where my niece lived, and I'd go up there to Gallatin, and so they was still looking after my sister who she and her husband had to give up work and they was still members of that family in Nashville, the president of First National Bank [First Tennessee Bank; Nashville, Tennessee] and all that.  So, they were living there and they carried me to see the white people who was still coming into my niece's home looking after my sister, Mary [Nixon Graves], who she and her husband had worked for the Berry family in Nashville.  Anyway, we went to see this woman and we were all talking about the childhood days and I said to her once one day we went there, and I said, "Are you the one that Santa Claus brought a pony one Christmas?"  "Yeah."  I said, "Well I'm the little girl that would ride behind you on that pony (laughter)."  Oh, don't you know that was fun getting together after those years.  They weren't rich people anymore, they just had a nice home out there and she--I don't remember any of her family, but she was there still going looking after my sister and my sister's husband.  So, we both all grown up now and we got to know each other all over again and I haven't looked into their family situation in a number of years 'cause after my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] died I didn't get up that way often anymore.  I did, I started about telling you I had one grandson who is driving a Greyhound bus and he went through, he had to pick up something in Shelbyville.  He was riding me up to Nashville and I, when he told me he was going to Shelbyville I said will you let me get off the bus and put my feet on the ground and see what's it like.  Well, of all the little towns went through Shelbyville looked like it had suffered the most of--well nothing had developed, just bad looking anywhere you go, to the restroom everybody used the same restroom.  So, I thought, well I guess it good we got out of there 'cause Shelbyville didn't seem to grow at all.  Most of the little towns between Nashville and Atlanta [Georgia] had made progress, so I, that, I don't know that might have been four or more, three or four years ago that I got a ride on the Greyhound bus first (laughter).
Story_ID: 202668
Speaker 1: Now, when your family moved to the Nashville [Tennessee] area, Langley Hall [Gallatin, Tennessee], were your parents [James Henry Nixon and Mollie George Nixon] employed there?  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's what we were doing there.
Speaker 1: What were their jobs?
Speaker 2: They went from Bedford County [Tennessee] to be employed by that family and that family was, as I told you, branched out through about three different families.  I remember the Allens, the Gills [ph.], and there was one other family there [the Trousdale family] that lived in this great place.  And it was similar to this place in North Carolina now that everybody goes--
Speaker 1: Biltmore.
Speaker 2: --that house was built for.
Speaker 1: The Biltmore Estates [sic. Biltmore Estate, Asheville, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Biltmore Estates.  I've been there and going through everything there I said to the people, I said well I grew up in a place like this.  It just wasn't this much of it, wasn't that big, but we had everything from all kind of animals, peacocks, guinea, hogs, cows, all kind of grape arbors.  Yeah well, that place is something else, but it really didn't upset me too much I said because I had lived all over Langley Hall.  I know the first time I went, see they had to have their own power and all that sort of thing and one day I was up there and they let me go out where the lady was ironing and I didn't know there were electric irons then, but I wondered where that light came from.  She went in there, I climbed up there and stuck my finger and it knocked me down (laughter).  So, that's something that I had to remember.  I said good thing I wasn't wet or anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: What jobs did your mother and father have at Langley Hall?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother never had a job.  She never left us to go to work as long as she lived, but my father would do, you know, whatever was important like growing the garden or running the--well, I don't know because when hay--you gather the hay and then there was a threshing time and folks would come from, that was a big thing.  Folks come from miles around to that.  And that's when we'd see a lot of other employees and let me see and hog killing time.  You didn't have freezers and everything.  You had a smokehouse, and my father would be the one, you know, to look after all that sort of thing and, but--and then at our house, oh I guess all the colored folks who came to those things would be fed someplace, and must have been at our house because there would be a lot of cooking going on.  So, I can think back over a lot of exciting times 'cause you didn't see anybody, but say the few folks who lived down the road from you and things like that until certain seas like, seasons like hog killing time, threshing time.  But, we had a barn and all of the stuff that you didn't use all the time, maybe hay stored up in the loft of the barn and the older sisters would have fun throwing us out (laughter) down on the hay.
Story_ID: 202669
Speaker 1: But I'd say, what I think I told Sally [Warner] one time my mother [Mollie George Nixon] went off and I don't know where she was, but that one time I didn't go with her and we heard the bigger girls in the kitchen having the most fun.  We little ones had to go and see what that's was all about.  They said, they were marking themselves, that must have been after one of those times when I could have been lost forever, you know, being washed away.  So, and they were in there mark- just marking themselves.  I said if anybody found us we'd have our names (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, are you saying--
Speaker 1: So we asked what's going, what you doing.  Say we're marking ourselves so if we get lost, you know, we have our names on us, now see that didn't make a bit of sense, but to us we wanted to be marked too.
Speaker 2: Were you ever lost?  Was there ever a time that--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, okay.
Speaker 1: No, not, we were just lost that time when I almost got lost with the river.  Well anyway they were marking, they had gotten into carbolic acid.  They were marking themselves with their names on their arms and everything, so they screaming and laughing about it and well, told us what they were doing.  Well, we wanted to be marked too if we got lost.  There were three of us.  I don't remember just who, but my little sister who was a little bit older than I, and I think my brother [James Henry Nixon, Jr.] must have been along then.  Well, if we were so brave they say it's not gonna hurt.  It burns.  That's all right we wanted to be marked, so if we got lost somebody would know who (laughter), but my mother came home and everybody was screaming and going on about this stuff burning us up.  Lord what in the world.  Well, I don't remember anybody getting whipped or anything, but all she knew to do was put talcum powder on us and try to relieve all this burning.  But, I told Sally I had A-L-N on my arm until I was way grown and A-N-N on this one (laughter), so, so I said you couldn't do, didn't have anything interesting to do you always made something interesting to do (laughter).
Story_ID: 202670
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your siblings, your brothers and sisters.  What were their names in order of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see I only had that one brother [James Henry Nixon, Jr.] and I say he was after my father [James Henry Nixon], and everybody had waited for a boy.  He was the one who was just the, almost the last.  One of the sisters [Georgia Nixon] was born after he was born, but see when my daddy would come in and say, "Well how is that little Buck?"  And so they started from the very beginning calling him Buck.  So, I said poor Buck died still Buck (laughter).  And so now there was his son.  His son now is an entertainer there in Nashville [Tennessee], and see he was born on Easter and they called him Bunny, Easter Bunny.  He is a grown man now.  I don't remember how old, but he's still Bunny (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is one--
Speaker 2: That's my nephew--
Speaker 1: --of your brother's, your brother's son.
Speaker 2: --my brother's only son, but he has two sons now.  They're in Nashville.  They're all musicians.
Story_ID: 202671
Speaker 1: My husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] said his mother, he was born Valdosta, Georgia, and it seems that his daddy, I'm talking about my, my husband's mother now.  No, my husband's, this is his daddy's mother.  Yeah my husband's father's mother.  The husband died when they--he was born in, in Valdosta, Georgia, and when the daddy died, mother moved to Savannah [Georgia] I think when he was six years old and Mrs. Yates' [Mae Maxwell Yates] mother who was the one woman who ran Carrie Steele-Pitts Nursing Home [sic. Carrie Steele - Pitts Home (CSPH), Atlanta, Georgia], and she was married to a Mr. Maxwell, but she took an interest in my husband's father- grandfather and so when their first child was born, when my husband was born, Ms. [Clara Maxwell] Pitts had been so nice to him and saw to it that he went through Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Well, and he was there when one of her babies was born, but they named him after Ms. Yates' daddy and her name, his name was Maxwell.  So, they named him, my husband's mother had just given birth to him, my husband, and they named him Albert Maxwell 'cause his daddy, he would have been Albert Berry Cooper, Jr., and so he said when he got about twelve years old he went, how come I'm named Albert Maxwell.  Who is this Maxwell, and so he asked his mother if he could change it just make him Albert Berry Cooper, Jr., and she, kind of like my mother, didn't see anything wrong with it.  So, you didn't have to go to the courthouse and change it, so he was just took his daddy's name, Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.  So, that's who we are now.
Story_ID: 202672
Speaker 1: And getting back to your brothers and sisters, you said you had one brother [James Henry Nixon, Jr.].
Speaker 2: I only had that one brother.
Speaker 1: And were there six sisters?  How many sisters did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were seven of us--
Speaker 1: Seven, okay, altogether.
Speaker 2: --and yeah well they've all died of different things.  That third sister [Willie Lee Harris], who was David Bowden's grandmother, she's the one that I told you when her first son was killed in war, you said it must have been World War II [WWII], she just didn't try to get over it.  She's buried in his Purple Heart and so she just had hypertension.  I'd go up there and her husband [George Harris] didn't want to put her in the hospital, but finally I didn't see any progress that she was making not being in a hospital.  I put her in the hospital and stayed, well that didn't help, but she finally just died from I said, hypertension.  And then the next one, the next one was what I called my mother, Joyce [Nixon].  Joyce was down here visiting me, and our daughter [Gwendolyn Cooper Mannings] had just entered Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Joyce told my daughter, Gwen, said, I found a little knot in my breast, said would you feel it.  Gwen, freshman at Meharry then, told us Aunt Joyce [Nixon] I can't tell anything about it, but as soon as you get home you go to your doctor and so she went and that was when the first thing we knew about cancer.  And they did the operation and she never--well she was able to be up and about.  I know she was here when, when who got, I guess when Joyce [Nixon Cooper Bobo, Ann Cooper's daughter] got married.  Yeah, able to work and do around, but it looked like and they really didn't know what they were doing, but many things showed up like maybe her feet would be bad and tender or something was always wrong, but she never fully recovered from that.
Story_ID: 202673
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper, what sights, sounds and smells remind you of your childhood and growing up with your sisters and brother [James Henry Nixon, Jr.]?  Sights, sounds, smells remind you of childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, that many children together we were always doing something that kept us happy and eating, eating too much I guess (laughter).  So, I can remember going to school and all of us in this one-room schoolhouse, and mama [Mollie George Nixon] would pack a bucket and eating time, at lunch, I read about cutting out recesses, I thought that was the greatest time, spread out like a big picnic (laughter).  So, yeah we had a lot of happy times.  I had a very happy childhood.  That's all I have to say about that childhood because we were all there together and looked like to us we had everything.  First, I was talking about my daddy [James Henry Nixon] what we thought about him and I thought he was sort of a genius--
Story_ID: 202674
Speaker 1: You had additional memories about your father [James Henry Nixon], so if you would share those with us, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well I say we thought, 'cause we had nobody to look up to but our parents, we thought our mother [Mollie George Nixon] and father could save us from everything, but we thought papa was mighty smart because he had what he called equipment to half-sole your shoes and he had an iron thing that stood up and it had the shoe size thing that stuck on that and he would take the children's shoes, and he could trim leather like a professional, you know, and how he could sit there and half-sole all our shoes.  We sitting there watching him cutting all this, you know, and he had to have certain little tacks and things, but you come out of there and your shoes have soles just like new shoes, you know.  So, I didn't think too much about that 'cause I didn't know every daddy couldn't do that (laughter), but as, as I grew older and watched other things and thought about how he could take care of everything I thought, well he was just gifted.  All daddies couldn't do that.  We'd sit all around this great big fire and papa was sitting there with that we called it a last.  It was on an iron bar and these different size iron shoes would be on that and you know you wear a size five or something. He got one that size and he'd sit there and trim that leather, and you got new shoes.  So, of course I said we thought papa was very smart, but then if they didn't last forever you'd go into town or he'd go out on Saturday nights and buy shoes for everybody and that time he had shoes, he thought he had had shoes for everybody.  I don't ever remembering him taking anybody with him because he could know your size and well this would be for Mary [Nixon Graves], this would be for Georgia [Nixon] and on and on.  Well, there I was, still baby [HistoryMaker] Ann [Cooper], and had those pretty little black patent leather slippers and they wouldn't go on my feet no kind of way, but I told you, when the girls had come out on a Sunday afternoon and everybody walking and they had on their new shoes and mine--one friend said to my little mother why she doesn't put on her shoes?  She got some, but they too little.  Every once in a while, and then they put my shoes in the trunk tray.  Every once in a while I said, momma can I see if I can get on my little shoes (laughter).  Now you know even my older sister and nobody ever said to me now honey you grow every day you couldn't get 'em on months ago, your feet are growing every day.  My momma, I said momma can I try and see if I can get on my shoes.  Wash your feet.  Wash my feet, and I'd work and work.  But, you know I think about it today, I said now looked like most any little girl would have cried about that.  I was a big girl, I didn't cry about it, but I often wonder what became of them pretty little black patent leather slippers (laughter).
Story_ID: 202675
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper, before we talk about your education, elementary school, I wanted to ask you about any memories you have of relationships between whites and blacks in your community?  Were there ever any hostilities, ever any Ku Klux Klan [KKK] or any racial incidences occur?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, everybody was friends, you know, folks lived, white folks, down the lane they weren't any better off than we were you know, so no, no jealousy there.  But, I don't know about school.  We never had any of the little white ones in our schools, so I don't know about that.  But, the mothers and everybody just visited each other.  Sit on the porch and drink lemonade or something, the white women and my mother [Mollie George Nixon] were friends.  And it wasn't like you could call on say--there was white women calling on my mother to do anything.  No, she never went out to work, do housework.  So, so far as you know, relationships it never occurred to us.  I know when we lived there on the--I told you I remembered the name of the people who were the, I guess we, the house that we lived in belonged to them and they were the Gallaghers [ph.].  All the houses had tin roofs and you ought to hear it rain on a tin roof, you know in the night, but anyway sometimes those places they would have leaks and Eugene [ph.] was the son of the Gallaghers, and they sent Eugene one time to fix our roof and Eugene fell off the roof (laughter).  I remember that and we all running to him trying to help him, you know.  It wasn't bad.  It wasn't high enough to really do him any real harm.  But, little things like that they just kind of come back to me, you know, but no, no friction between the white and blacks, see.  Everybody respected everybody as far as I can recall because--and we didn't have a church that you got up and went to every Sunday morning.  A minister would come by and then sometimes they'd have revival and papa [James Henry Nixon] would take, we'd go to revival and things like that, but it must have been too far for us to get up and go walk to church, but the minister would come by and see us every once in a while.  And I don't remember how papa would take us, but I remember going sometimes at night when he would testify, you know, and I always say something about how he tried to always do right and we thought papa couldn't do no wrong.  Wasn't nobody out there to do any wrong (laughter).
Story_ID: 202676
Speaker 1: And then after I had been taken away from home, Grace [Nixon] had been taken away from home because Cousin Nanny [ph.] who lived there in Gallatin [Tennessee] took Gwen [sic. Grace Nixon] right on from, to her house.  She taught in the City of Gallatin and then but she would have to come to Nashville [Tennessee] and go to Tennessee State [Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] like all the other county teachers.  And when she came the first time after they had separated Grace and me, and we were so glad to see each other well and then my folks, Aunt Joyce [Nixon] and all of 'em thought it really was a shame for them to have kept us apart.
Speaker 2: Why were you kept apart?
Speaker 1: Well 'cause Nanny lived in one place and I'm all the way in Nashville.  She lives in Gallatin, thirty-eight miles away.
Speaker 2: Why was your, this is your sister who--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Your sister was taken away you said.
Speaker 1: I said when my mother [Mollie George Nixon] died these folks from Nashville came to see what they could do.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: They took, they would take one 'cause Nanny already lived there in Gallatin she would take one.  So, I went to Nashville and Grace stayed in Gallatin in cousin Nanny's house in town.  She was one of the teachers in town, and so I said, but then summer school time started, 'cause Nanny had to come to Nashville and go to Tennessee State.  She brought Grace 'cause she couldn't leave Grace at home by herself, you know, and when they saw how we belonged together, well the my aunt started, we're taking, she took, had those two and then as the older girls got older and Aunt Joyce was running everything at the rich folks' house.  She just put this one to work and this one as a nurse, and this one as a maid and on and on and on.  So, it ended up that she was responsible for all of us, but then one of my father's [James Henry Nixon] sisters that lived back there in Shelbyville [Tennessee] took Buck [James Henry Nixon, Jr.], my brother, and they had one son and so they reared Buck.  We scattered here, there, and yonder.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: But, now Buck is the one I told you--my brother was working up high and fell and broke his neck.  I'm living down here [Atlanta, Georgia] then.  I went back to his funeral and he already had those three children.  He had two girls and a boy.  Now, I told you about his son who is a musician and, and now his son has two fine young men.  They are all musicians.  They came here to my birthday party and, was that this last one, Sally [Warner]? Am I 100, no it was 100 and, just 100 because, then my daughters had breakfast here for all the folks who was staying at a hotel and my nephew Buck- Bunny had brought his guitar and he played the piano and his youngest son who is eleven, I think accompanied him on the piano and so both of his sons are musicians.
Story_ID: 202677
Speaker 1: Your education, your elementary school years, what was that experience like? Was it a school building that you attended or a schoolhouse?
Speaker 2: Just public school, you know--
Speaker 1: It was a regular public school?
Speaker 2: --and we had to attend school in our own areas, you know, and so I never got to finish high school because we had a program and a plan there.  I already had met this young man [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] who wanted me to marry him, but all them previous years you had to prepare yourself to be able to help a doctor get started, so of course Ms. Irene [ph.] that I lived with--Nashville [Tennessee] always had high schools.  She graduated from Pearl High School [Martin Luther King Jr. Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1908 and the women who did that then, they went to a school that was called--they'd get normal training.  You had two years of normal, you can teach school in the city and so Irene did that, but so I kept telling my husband we couldn't get married because I hadn't been able to get in Walden University [Nashville, Tennessee].  Well, he kept telling me he didn't want me to help him, but that was the program.  You prepared yourself to be the leader in a small town when your husband is the doctor, gone there and you got to be the teacher, just like when your--my mother-in-law say when Pa got a church she had to go and be, live in the parsonage, you know, no matter what kind of home they had, you gotta go and live in the pastor's house.  So, that program had gone on and on, but--and we laughed about sometimes the young women that had taken care of those men all the years going through med schools and then when they got ready to go they didn't want 'em anymore, so, so they had to start reporting them to the president and the president would withhold their degrees until they did something about the problems that they had created.  So, anyway it turned out that my husband told me all the time he didn't want my help, he didn't need my help or anything, so by the time I was ready to get into that school it changed all together.  Walden was taken over by the Baptists and it was called the Baptist something.  I don't know, but a friend here, a father was called to run that and they moved to Nashville to run that, but, so we were all still, I got a picture of one of the sons out there we still were, you know, family friends--
Story_ID: 202678
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] and when did you meet him?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh that's--well now you see, they were drafting all these youngsters right out of their first years in college.  My husband, as I told you was drafted.  He was in Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], but he was drafted and had to go--they--now somebody in government decided that taking all these young men out of college, they had to make some kind of plans for them, so they came up with this plan you can be in the [U.S.] Army, and study for profession at the same time and there was a time, if you gonna study medicine you had to have four years of college.  Well, they accepted folks right out of high school and of course my husband hadn't thought about stud- what he was going to do when he grew up.  But, I guess, and the program it came out that dental, he could get into dental school, go to school, be in the Army and so but then the federal government thought too, it ought be something way to entertain these young folks, and in our group there was a family there, mother, father, and daughter were already teaching school and they had one son.  This son entered the dental class and during the summers he travelled all around everywhere and had learned all whatever was popular in entertainment and dancing.  He came back and started a dancing class, so we had what we called the elite dancing class every Saturday afternoon, all those young men and all the girls.  And my cousin would take me there, we'd dance and dance, and dance doing all schottisches, you know, you didn't just squeeze up and dance, you doing all kind of steps like the electric slide (laughter).  So then I'd always been full of rhythm and sometimes the young man, the instructor, would let me dance with him, and of course then everybody wanted to dance with this cute little girl (laughter).  So anyway I was say dancing with a young man who couldn't keep step.  He was what they called a freshman crab.  My husband had--I guess was standing off watching and said, "Now look crab, you can't dance, get out of the way," and he took me away from him and so then the next dance was a cheek to cheek we called it and he kissed me on the cheek and asked me my name and if he could come to see me and gave him my telephone number and all that and it must have been December 'cause I went home and told my cousin about it and she always had a Christmas dance at our house.  So, I asked her if I could--this young man was gonna call me and I asked if I could invite him.  She said yes.
Story_ID: 202679
Speaker 1: And so when he [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] called he said he had gotten a chance to go home.  Now that one woman that who had been, he had been seeing this woman, had been, our colored banks, worked at the bank and I imagine anything he needed, you know, she'd been supplying that.  She had gotten a job teaching in Kentucky and of course she--I guess they correspond all the time, but he didn't want nobody to come see me you know.  So, I think she told him that she was coming and she expected him to carry her around and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] had a lot to do with Christmas dances and parties all the time and so we all planned for that every year.  Irene [ph.], my cousin, had already married one dental student.  He was living with us and being my daddy, running my business and everything, so anyway they'd get dressed up and go every night to something and my husband, my boyfriend had come to me with the greatest intention of my allowing him to just go and take somebody else and he gonna send somebody to take me.  So, I didn't like that a little bit.  He said now this woman was coming, and she expected him to take her around.  Now he done kept me from all the other fellows (laughter), so I, he would send one of his friends to take me to the affair and he taking this woman.  I didn't like that and I told him I didn't like it, I cried about it, and I told--Irene and I were just like, you know she was my guardian, but, and she was thirteen years older than I, she was my guide and everything.  So, I had asked her if I could invite him.  She had said I could and then I didn't tell her that he couldn't come because he was, and this woman was coming and he had to take her around.  That wasn't right at all, but anyway that's the way it ended and I sat there and cried and he gonna send somebody to take me and they'd dress--and so that was the first night.  She told me now if I don't see you there I gonna do, blah, blah, blah, blah, so anyway I got ready and this friend came to take me and I remember we had to go up some steps to get to the dance hall.  We ran into each other right then, and he stumbling up the steps and falling.  So, anyway neither, didn't any of us enjoy that, you know, I didn't, he didn't, and the woman that he had didn't enjoy it.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: We had gotten--
Speaker 2: What year was this, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper?
Speaker 1: --we had gotten to 1920 by then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I said I was just sick about the whole thing and I sat around crying all the time and the next night she told me again now if I don't see you there I'm gonna do this, that, and the other, you can't do this, that, and the other.  Anyway, I wasn't feeling like going, but anyway she said, now you get yourself dressed and you better be there.  All right I had stopped crying long enough to get dressed and I'm sitting there waiting for this date to come.  The bell rang, it's the second night of the dance, you know and when I opened the door it was him and so I thought--(unclear)--we fell into each other's arms and we never got out of there (laughter).
Speaker 2: And tell me again your husband's name, your husband's name?
Speaker 1: Yeah Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.  He had made himself Jr. when he was twelve years old.
Speaker 2: And at that time he was attending Meharry Dental School [School of Dentistry, Meharry Medical College]--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah--
Speaker 2: --in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: --he was in Meharry when I'm talking about now in 1920.
Story_ID: 202680
Speaker 1: So, anyway that brought us to--you know, made us realize that we really meant something to each other and so of course he [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] didn't, we didn't care what became of that other woman.  We don't know what became of her, but from that time on he was there all the time.  But then, my folks, my guardian and her husband they were hard on him then.  He can't come here no more.  He can't do you like that and so he was so sure he knew what he wanted that he would stand up and would go--so one afternoon we were ready to leave in this dancing class and he said to me now baby you go on home and I'm gonna do--(unclear)--.  She said, "You can't be telling us what to do, you don't what we"--he said, "Irene [ph.], I don't know what you gonna do, but the baby's going home."  So, (laughter) they never made it up from then on (laughter) she, oh they fussed and fought, but then you know he, he wasn't just downright ugly with anybody, but he had his mind made up then, so from that time on when he left to go off to work that summer he said, "Now will you write to me every week?"  I said, "I would answer every letter you write to me."  He said, "You mean you wouldn't just write to me."  No, but anyway he went to Cleveland [Ohio] that year and then he write to me and send me, you know it cost about two cents to mail a letter, send me stamps, please write to me (laughter) and so we wrote all of that year and when he came back he came right to me and so I stayed with him.  I still didn't take things seriously enough because I'm just good and twenty about that time.  See he was twenty when I met him, but I said he stuck so close and, and telling me what I could do and what I couldn't do, don't put on any lipstick, don't put on, you just stay like you are (laughter).  So, I just told him, said, "I must have been thirty-five years old before I was allowed to wear lipstick," (laughter) 'cause he wanted me to look just like I looked when he first saw me, but I think he fell in love with my feet and legs because we were wearing high-top shoes, laced shoes.  I had some tan shoes with tan satin tops and I guess them little legs be hanging over them tops and he thought he'd never seen anything like it.  When we got married, he carried me all over New York [New York] everywhere trying to find me--I had little bitty feet.  I'm sure shoe sizes had changed as well as everything else, but I was wearing a size one and a half and I couldn't find shoes that looked grown up, you know.  So, we went to New York and he'd take me to all the places trying to find some grown up shoes and I remember one clerk saying, "Well they--I tell that you're from the South," saying, "up here we have big feet because we have to walk a lot.  We walk long blocks," said, southerners don't have long, but said, "I can always tell when I have a southerner, a southern customer."  So, he never found anything that would fit me and he tried to have some made for me and they could make right blunt looking shoes--
Story_ID: 202681
Speaker 1: The move to Atlanta [Georgia], that's what I'd like you to talk about.
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe she has shown you the picture that--he [Cooper's husband, Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] came to Atlanta bringing my picture and I didn't hear from him for, oh, at least ten days, and then he called to tell me that he was in practice, practice in dentistry.  His father [Albert Berry Cooper] had helped him to get this loan, and he got a loan from Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia] that had just opened in 1921, and so he called me to say that he was in practice and what is that he had, his daddy had helped him get a loan from this bank, and as soon as he could he's coming up there and we gonna get, not gonna have to wait to Christmas to get married, that was in the summertime.  So, he came up on there on the train and we weren't doing so much flying then, came on the train, he told me that he already had gotten the license and everything and you see I just didn't go to school.  Irene [ph.] let me don't, don't go to school (laughter) and so anyway we went to a minister's house.  He had contacted a friend who had been one of his teachers in the dental school [School of Dentistry, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and he was a man who came out of Albany, Georgia and so when he got in touch with him, and his name was [Joseph] Joe [Henry] Ellis.  Joe Ellis stood with us when we went to the minister's house.  He was Reverend Ellis, but nobody there.  I think the reverend's wife also witnessed our wedding.  So, then he got a Ford and brought me back home and then he went to the Union Station and came back to Georgia and then all right, we're married now, and the women can stop bringing all of their daughters down there to meet the new dentist.  Well, anyway, his practice went well and as soon as my folks could get me ready to--well my aunt had a shower for me and we had it at the minister's home.  Our minister was, he owned the church.  He was the biggest undertaker, and he owned the cemetery and a park.  They, their home was in a park and right now I'm not too sure, I won't say the name of the cemetery and park, but anyway my aunt and the minister's wife had this shower because they had gone to--I maybe didn't get around to telling you that my aunt's father, who was one of the old master's son, told him he'd like to leave the plantation so his children could get educated and get jobs.  So, he's the one who gave him five hundred dollars and he went to Nashville [Tennessee] and bought this place and so when I had it looked up, I found that's where I had grown up, you know.  But, anyway that will come in a little later, but he was already in practice now and I could come on down here and he had gone into Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] out of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] and he still was in touch with those people, and a man had built a nice house around here.  He was the tailor and so he wrote me about this new house we were gonna live in, and of course by the time we got here, somebody else had that.  But, the man in the business office when my husband was going to get his office started invited him to come and live with them, and he's the one that we went in there paying five dollars a week I think and he's the one that beat his wife.  She taught in the night school.  And then I got in here, and scared to stay there and that's when my husband allowed me to get out and try to get a job 'cause I was scared to stay there with that mean man.  Well, anyway when I got the job and as I think I told you I was pregnant before I really got too far into that job and then when I was pregnant he was determined that we'd find a house to live in.  We walked everywhere trying to find a house, but we didn't find anything that he thought would be good for us.  But, in our church, there was a man building some houses, and somebody told us about three houses that he was building on this street.  We went to look at that, and we bought one of those.  So, see, had a brand new house to come into (laughter).
Story_ID: 202682
Speaker 1: And what house was that?  Was it this house that we're in?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't this house.  We [Cooper and her husband, Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] had bought that little house brand new and we was so happy there, but by that time we had had a little boy and we'd already had the two little girls, and he always insisted that we have live-in nurses and so we had added a little on to that house, added what we called a slip, sweep, sleeping porch and fixed it for all the children to live out there.  Little girls, my two little girls and my boy and because we always had to have a room for a nurse.  That, that house had just two bedrooms, but when we built the sleeping porch we put three beds out there.  All right then, but we lived there for fifteen years and now we, I got Better Homes and Gardens magazine every month and we picked us out, we gonna build, we bought a lot and everything over there.  We gonna build that house.  I still got those plans (laughter), but anyway we--a real estate man put us in touch with this.  A man was having this built for his bride, but they said by the time he got all the things that he demanded, well it cost more than he had anticipated, and he the contractor fell out, he wouldn't take it, so they told him we ready to build, remember we're the only one that got any money (laughter).  We done saved our money and we gonna build our house like we wanted it.  So, we may not have been contacted among the first of the folks, but when they contacted us, well yes, he would look at it.  He came and looked at it and thought well and everybody had told him save you a lot of headaches trying to build.  All right he liked it and he brought me to see it and I thought well it certainly would accommodate our family because we had the little room for our little boy, and what did we have three bedrooms and our, we took the garage as the years went by and made it in after the girls grew up and got married.  I'm coming home and that's my room downstairs and all that, but anyway that's how we--and that was we had lived in my little house for fifteen years and we took this over in what 1938 I believe and we've been here since that.  We've added on and on and on, and bought more land and added on to the house, so we've been in here since what 1938, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 202683
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your memories of Atlanta [Georgia] in the 1920s and 1930s, especially Auburn Avenue.  There was so much activity there.  What do you recall about life and activities in that community?
Speaker 2: Well yes there was a lot of activity among the blacks down there because remember you still couldn't get into any hotels or anything.  The colored people had a hotel down there and could go there but well it wasn't a big place but yet that was a black hotel and it was on Auburn Avenue and we who had homes that we could take in anybody.  They counted on people who had an extra bedroom or something and as entertainers would come here to Atlanta well whoever was in charge of bringing them here they'd find a place for them.  And in those years, now my good friend, a woman who called herself Atlanta's society leader, Ms. Karen Johnson [ph.], had gone to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  She knew a lot of folks.  I don't think she ever knew Marian Anderson, but I think when Marian Anderson came here to appear you see she couldn't even walk through the white waiting room at the station, but Ms. [Florence Matilda] Read, the president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], was somebody who could look after things like that, look at getting Marian Anderson situated some place.  I don't remember who took Marian Anderson, but I remember Ms. Johnson taking Roland Hayes because he had gone to Fisk a little and, and people like that, you know, some, you knew some of the people.  And I don't say that we knew anybody so well, but as our children grew up and needed, our last two needed some place to go other than [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Well, when they, we sent them to North Carolina to [Alice Freeman] Palmer Memorial Institute [Sedalia, North Carolina] the president [Charlotte Hawkins Brown] there, her niece had married Nat King Cole, and that's where we got to be friends with Nat King Cole and his wife [Maria Ellington Cole] and they would come here to appear and then after they appeared they'd come out to our house for coffee and whatever and, then we got to be real friends and Nat and Maria bought a house in California that the white people resented and that was a great fight.  Dr. Brown spent about everything she had trying to help them retain that place, but I think they finally put them out, because the first time we went to California looking for them they were not well situated in that neighborhood.  So that's just the way things went then, you know. We, as I said we knew where we lived and nobody fought anything and I always wondered about it though.  When Lester Maddox would make us go in the back door down there when Nat King Cole was here and most of our friends had sense enough not to go in.  We got down there and they were all out on the street fussing and we didn't know what it was all about, at city auditorium [Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia], so and they told us what it was and we couldn't get in touch with Nat 'cause he had left complimentary tickets for us all the time.  We brought them out here and it was all discussed, so he said of course he'd never come here again, but he went from here to Birmingham [Alabama] and the same situation went on over there, so then he would never come south again.  But, we used to see, used to see a lot of him because our children and other children in Detroit [Michigan] went to Dr. Brown's school in North Carolina and he was appearing, let me see, had a different setup other than the Nat King Cole Trio [sic. The King Cole Trio], and we'd be together a lot at places like Detroit or Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 202684
Speaker 1: You mentioned Ms. Brown, Charlotte Hawkins Brown, the founder of the [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial] Institute [Sedalia, North Carolina], could you tell me your impressions of her?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know we all thought Dr. Brown was everything.  She was determined--I guess she went to school [State Normal School, Salem, Massachusetts] in Boston [Massachusetts, sic.].  She was determined to make ladies and gentlemen, not just women, but men too, teach them how to be gentlemen, and she started this school down there in North Carolina after the Boston trend, you know, in those years and everybody could afford it sent their--went to Palmer.  Didn't anybody out here go to Palmer, not nowhere, no one that we knew personally, but some folks who had been ahead of our children had.  I knew one minister whose wife went to Palmer and he was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, but very recently seems that she went into Alzheimer's [disease] and her home was burned lately, I mean not that race had anything to do with it, but anyway she was one person that I had known who went to Palmer.  But, it was a wonderful school.  We put our children up there and Ann Marie [Cooper] being my youngest child, being a baby, she was, well she was twelve years old.  My son [Albert Berry Cooper, III] had to go there because they had just built [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] and it was so overcrowded that the children didn't get any attention there.
Speaker 1: And this was around 1923?  Well actually it was in the '30s [1930s] the, the time period that you're talking about that you sent your children to Palmer.  Was it in the 1930s by this time?
Speaker 2: No, it was past the '30s [1930s].  Let me see. Well, Washington High was built in nineteen twenty--
Speaker 1: Twenty-three [1923].
Speaker 2: --nineteen twenty-four [1924].
Speaker 1: Twenty-four [1924].
Speaker 2: Well, it must have been--I just don't remember what year we went, but it was way beyond the '30s [1930s] when Ann Marie was, Ann Marie was born in 1932--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had the practice school of Atlanta University [Oglethorpe School, Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia] all before our children, our two girls had grown up.  By the time Ann Marie [Cooper] got ready for the school on AU camp- on Spelman's [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, well then they cut it out, the practice school so we had to find some place for her, twelve years old.  And we looked all around Georgia and nothing was suitable.  We already had these friends in Detroit [Michigan] who had been here looking for a boarding school for their children 'cause they weren't so crazy about, they were from Nashville [Tennessee] and places like that.  They didn't want to put their children in school, with the integrated schools.  So, they got onto Dr. Brown first and sent--they had children the same age as our girls and then they were so satisfied with it, then I wrote Dr. Brown and you had to be screened and everything, but she accepted my two.  And Ann Marie didn't like being away from home.  Her daddy [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] said he wasn't gonna make her stay anyplace she wasn't happy, so we just got up and went to get her and didn't tell Dr. Brown we were (laughter)--she said what you doing up here?  Well, we came to take our baby home.  Get on away from here, said this my business to teach little girls how to stay away from their parents.  So, then don't come back up here (laughter) until I invite you.  We got a lot of respect for Dr. Brown.  Whenever she had a speech or anything here, she stayed in this house with us and we became real good friends.  My husband was on the board of directors of her school.  At that time, Mordecai Johnson was president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and so they would go to board meetings.  Ms. [Karen] Johnson [ph.] and I would go, you know, with our husbands.  They had a handsome son that was in my son's class.  We became friends that way.  Their son came to Morehouse [University, Atlanta, Georgia] with my son, but then I don't know what became of Timmy [ph.].  I don't know, but he was so handsome, but they were glad to get him out of Washington [D.C.], but they all dead now, but I don't know where the son is.  We kept in touch for a number of years.
Story_ID: 202685
Speaker 1: Did you also know the Thurmans? Howard Thurman, who was on faculty at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] during that time period, late '30s [1930s] and early '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: I didn't know too many people on the faculty when Dr. [Mordecai] Johnson was president of Howard, Mordecai Johnson.  Well, of course we did have a friend who was on that faculty.  E. Franklin Frazier who came here to run the social--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --school [Atlanta School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia].  He was our good friend and my second daughter's [Joyce Nixon Cooper Bobo] godfather, E. Franklin Frazier.  Well, from here when he wrote about the 'Black Bourgeoisie' [E. Franklin Frazier], the white folks didn't like that for some reason.  I never read it.  I didn't know what it was, but they thought it best for him to leave Atlanta [Georgia] and he wouldn't, they, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] wanted him all along, so he and that friend, they as I said was my second daughter's godparents they went to Fisk and they stayed up there a few years and then of course in the summers they would want him other places and we'd been, they would get on a boat to go, he was going to South America one summer.  We all went up there and they had Joyce's [Cooper] birthday party on the boat on the way--they were going to South America, so we had these relationships in and out, you know, so of course finally when Dr. Frazier died my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] was still living and they had established residence in Washington [D.C.].  That's where they lived after he left Fisk and when my husband died and I looked everywhere for Marie [Frazier] and I couldn't find her, but she was living in Italy at that time.  Well, as soon as she got back and learned what had happened she came and spent a month or so with me.
Speaker 1: And this was Marie, Nat King Cole's wife you talk, Nat King's Cole's wife, Marie?
Speaker 2: No, that's Dr. E. Franklin--
Speaker 1: Oh, Dr. Frazier's wife--
Speaker 2: --Frazier's wife.
Speaker 1: --Marie, okay.
Speaker 2: No, Marie [Ellington Cole] and I never got really to know each other too well.  We, I mean, you know Nat's wife.  She, she had a sister who lived on the campus at [Alice Freeman] Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] when my children were there.  I got to know her, and she had a little daughter.  We got to know her, but then when Dr. [Charlotte Hawkins] Brown, of course, didn't like Nat at first with all that straightened hair and all that, but she learned to like him and they had that one daughter you know, and I just read in one of these Jets that she and the husband, that last husband she had, they've been living in Nashville [Tennessee] years ago, now they're divorced.  But you see I watched her grow up and kept in touch with her all the time that she was growing up.
Story_ID: 202686
Speaker 1: You were here in Atlanta [Georgia], you've been here since the '20s [1920s], so you were here during the period, the second period that W.E.B. Du Bois was on faculty at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Did you ever meet him?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, go to parties and things with.
Speaker 1: What were your impressions of him?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, of course you know we thought he was a great man, but we decided one time that we didn't like him.  He went through and I guess, I don't know what his reports, what he had to report on, but my husband's [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] father [Albert Berry Cooper] was president of the A.M.E. School [Edward Waters College] in Jacksonville, Florida and then Dr. Du Bois came back here and came out in the paper that this Reverend Cooper down there was a weak leader.  He was such a preacher, and everybody said he was too honest to be, you know, they all the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] worked toward getting to be bishops and everybody said papa would never get to be a bishop because he was too honest and all that sort of things, so that, marked him as not a pusher or anything.  So, we read that Dr. Du Bois had said that Cooper was a weak leader and so we didn't like Dr. Du Bois talking about our pa (laughter).  So, I never got to--I never knew whether he had a wife or not.  I just been reading about her since, since he been dead, but she must have lived here too, but I never got to know her, although there were clubs that he would, and he--there was a woman who taught at [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia].  Her husband was a dentist and they fell out and sometimes Dr. Du Bois would bring her to some of these parties that we went to, Mrs. [Henrietta] Shivery.  But, I never got to know Mrs. Du Bois, and I didn't try to get to know Dr. Du Bois.  He was so high above everybody you know and, so never even got close enough to him to talk to him, but there was a club here, the fine arts club and my husband's sister was a great pianist and her husband taught French at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, they belonged to that fine arts club.  But, and therefore we would go, be invited to those affairs and I'd see Dr. Du Bois everywhere there, but I never really got, my husband didn't know him well, just knew he was a big man and he was here on the faculty.
Story_ID: 202687
Speaker 1: You were here in the 1940s and into the 1950s during the period that the Civil Rights Movement really began to come about here in the Atlanta [Georgia] area, voter registration drives.  Do you remember the election of 1944 when Ellen [sic.], Helen [Douglas] Mankin was running and the Atlanta University Center [Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] and other organizations and institutions in the community rallied the black voters, registered voters.  Do you remember that election?
Speaker 2: Well, of course we kept abreast of what was going on and would add our little bit of whatever we could, like say, donuts, sending donuts to some of the gatherings and things like that, but my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] was a dentist and he said that is what I do and he never gave up just being there and didn't take a lot of time getting into these drives and things, but he always supported them all and I'm here sending out donuts and never got into marching and all that sort of thing, no.
Speaker 1: But, I do want to talk about the bus incident, but before we move to that, you knew the Herndon family, your job, the job that you had for six months did you say--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was with, what company was that with?
Speaker 2: That was at Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], but the, I didn't get to know Mrs. [Jessie] Herndon by working there.  Mrs. Herndon was a woman that, and Mr. [Alonzo] Herndon's second wife, you know, so I didn't get to know the first Mrs. [Adrienne McNeil] Herndon because she died when I was, well I think way back then--
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: --when I was a child.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But, yeah I knew Ms. Jessie and Ms. Jessie and I were good friends.  She sat right in front of me at church and we, when she'd have a party and I'd go to Ms. Jessie's bridge parties and she'd come to my bridge parties, so.  I have a big bowl that, back there with my fruit on it I won playing bridge at Ms. Jessie's house.
Story_ID: 202688
Speaker 1: --You were gonna tell me about the Herndon family and going to functions, to affairs in their home, and those lovely gloves.  Where did you wear those?  What occasion?
Speaker 2: I don't think I ever wore these to Ms. Jessie's [Jessie Herndon] house.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: But, I do remember wearing that pair because I had a yellow taffeta dress with all those live flowers in it, and she was entertaining for some of her younger friends from Chicago [Illinois] and I went with these gloves, these long gloves and this yellow taffeta dress with all these great big flowers and everybody wondered well who in the world is that.  But, now these, a friend was a model, a friend of mine lives in Miami [Florida] and you know you couldn't buy much in Miami 'cause they didn't allow colored people to ride the elevators or anything, but this friend was a model and they would send things to her house since she couldn't go in the stores and try on.  But, we would go to Miami every winter when before we started going someplace like Virgin Islands and this friend would come up here and she could, we'd entertain for her and she'd show some of the things that she modeled and then she'd buy all these nice materials and she made me what these went with, these gloves, and a dress to match, but then I don't think I ever went to anything that I could wear these to Ms. Jessie's because all I remember is we would dance out on the terracotta porch at Ms. Jessie's.  Oh they changed, Norris [Herndon] changed all that after Ms. Jessie died.
Story_ID: 202689
Speaker 1: Did you ever dance on the roof of the house?
Speaker 2: Well, no--
Speaker 1: Was that finished?
Speaker 2: --no, no. I don't think they [Herndon family] had any dancing on the roof.  I think the only dances they had would be right outside of the glass doors where the piano is still there and, but what we had--if anybody told you about a roof garden, now the roof garden was in that big, large building down on the corner of--
Speaker 1: The Odd Fellows Building [and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the big Odd Fellows Building.  And my husband's [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] office was in the Odd Fellows Auditorium, but yes, the only affairs dancing and everything we had in those years was at the roof garden of the Odd Fellows Building.
Speaker 1: Was that the only building where African Americans could have evening formal dances at the time?  Were there others?
Speaker 2: I don't think we ever went any place but the roof garden and the Catholics had a place over on Auburn Avenue sometimes that we could go to and dance.
Speaker 1: What about the--
Speaker 2: But, there weren't many places that--I don't know where most of the dances were held, the fraternity dances and things.  It must have been at the roof garden, you know?
Speaker 1: What about the Waluhaje [Building, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well it wasn't here until recent years, you know.  Well I wouldn't say recent years, but I know (laughter), yeah we would go to dances there after that was built, and that was built so we wouldn't have to take everybody who came to Atlanta [Georgia] in here.  They, you could stay at Waluhaje and of course most of our friends, Mr. [Walter H.] Aiken especially, was a friendly man, but his wife [Lucy Rucker Aiken] and her people you know, her father [Henry Allen Rucker] and all of 'em had been in politics way back then before and so they didn't know any colored folks.
Story_ID: 202690
Speaker 1: You're talking about the Ruckers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but me (laughter) [HistoryMaker] Ms. Ann [Cooper] (laughter).  Ms. Ann'd drive up there, they'd be so glad to see somebody, "Oh yeah, Ann!"
Speaker 1: Would you visit them at their home on Simpson [Road, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, see they built that there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, they had one sister, her name was Ann [Rucker Anderson] and I think I knew about them before I got married and came here because she married--(unclear)--and got around with us sometimes.  That was the youngest one, Ann, and Ann married a black man, but that didn't last long, but see, we had become acquainted with each other in Nashville [Tennessee].  And when they built out here on Simpson they built a guest house and Ann, after that, she and that black man fell out and she came home.  See she came to Nashville with a job and that's how she got mixed up with colored people (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Rucker family was an African American family.  They were just extremely light-skinned.  So, in terms of her marrying a black man--
Speaker 2: Black man.
Speaker 1: --you meant dark complexion.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was black.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, and her husband, Lucy's [Lucy Rucker] husband Walter [H.] Aiken did you know him as well, the, the developer?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Mr. Aiken.  Mr. Aiken built this house.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: He didn't build it for us, but I'm saying the man he was building for wouldn't take it when he got through adding on to it.  Yes, and Mr. Aiken was in the church, First Congregational Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  And it is said that Mr. Aiken, you know, well this is being recorded we talking (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ah right anyway we looked to Mr. Aiken as a very big fine man, 'cause he was a coach here, there, and yonder.  After he left here he was coaching at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and all around, but I got to know them all because I was the kind who would just go (laughter).  So, yeah, but we won't talk too much about Mr. Aiken, but we just know that he was a powerful man.  He built a lot on this side of town and he built the Waluhaje [Building, Atlanta, Georgia], and then when those Rucker girls came back to Atlanta [Georgia] after working in other places, like maybe husband teaching at a school in Augusta [Georgia] 'cause they didn't look at me when I lived on --(unclear)--they held their head so high we never did say hello to each other--but anyway when they came back and came into the church they worked beautifully with me in the missionary society at church and I got to thinking how we became such good friends working that way and I got to thinking about a book those two sisters gave me and I kept it in here and I woke up the other morning thinking about it.  Where are my 'Leaves of Gold'--
Speaker 1: Walt Whitman [sic. LeRoy Brownlow], yeah.
Speaker 2: --that Lillie [Rucker] and Hazel [Rucker] gave me.  Well, I don't know who moved it out of here, but I got up the other morning and looked for it.  I found my 'Leaves of Gold' and you know I have, everybody knows, everybody at church especially, I had all these auxiliaries you know and they all know that Ann loved beautiful words.  Everybody gave me beautiful words.  So, I'm going around now doing the, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou's Woman, I Am Woman ['Phenomenal Woman', Maya Angelou] (laughter) so, I said I got so much of it I tell them in these different places.  I'm gonna share all these beautiful words that y'all give me and I had it going in my literary club and as they changed administrations, you know, ain't nobody got time for that now, you just go and eat and go home.
Story_ID: 202691
Speaker 1: Were you a member, have you ever been a member of the Chautauqua Circle [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, Chautauqua is older than we are, than the Utopians [Utopian Literary Club, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah.  You know I used to attend all those meetings.  I have friends in them.  My friend Ms. [Karen] Johnson [ph.] was one of those.  They celebrated their ninetieth year a few weeks ago.  We aren't quite ninety, but there is another literary club, the--(unclear)--I believe.  Well, there are three or four of them, but we've been, the Utopians are the only ones who decided that every year they would entertain all the friends, you know new people coming to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and all these schools so women could meet each other.  Well, that's still going on.  When we--it was organized in 1916, and they first started out, I think, inviting the husbands every once in a while, then as time went on and the schools grew, and more and more new people came in here, they thought that would be a nice way for the newcomers and the local people to get to know folks.  So, we'd invite all those folks and they'd come in and get to know us and like us.  We got one that came here and didn't stay long. I think his name is Carter [ph.].  He was something over there in the university system.  She cried so when they had to leave so soon.  She came to the last meeting and brought all--there always tried to be twenty-five of them, brought us all one rose, so we still carried her name as one of the ones that we remember.  And this Saturday we are having our, I don't remember now whether it is the eighty-ninth, or somewhere along in there, having this party and we couldn't get into any place to have them and we had just decided that anybody's home that we could get into, that's when we would have this annual party for friends.  Just a few years ago we could get into hotels and now we, well we can get into anything that we can pay for (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this is the Utopian Club now--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --that's celebrating its eighty-eighth anniversary.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Well I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No it's past eighty we've already--
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight.
Speaker 2: --celebrated our eighty-fifth.  I don't remember which one this is.
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight.
Speaker 2: It's on our roster, what year it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway we're having it on this Saturday.
Story_ID: 202692
Speaker 1: I wanted you to say a few words about a few people, well known people, prominent in terms of African American history.  The first is John Hope.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you asked about him.
Speaker 1: Before we weren't rolling then.  We're rolling now, so could you tell me your recollections of John Hope?
Speaker 2: Didn't get to know him personally, but he was, everybody considered him a powerful man, you know, in the system over there, there was just Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at that time and I was telling you that Mrs. [Lugenia Burns] Hope thought she could make you do anything she wanted you to do.  Mrs. Hope and I never got to the point where we would say to each other, no, I'm not gonna do it.  She'd tell you to go to the Neighborhood Union [Atlanta, Georgia] and do this, and then you'd go raise the Neighborhood Union.  But, I just did not have time and they had my name and there was another woman that I'm thinking now, they got me confused with an Annie Cooper, you know.  I took that I-E off my name years ago, but they all dead now and, when they started digging up things about the Neighborhood Union they called me wanting--no, that ain't me.  They said, well, what little I did do, they still, I still deserved some honor for what I did when Ms. Hope was gonna made me do things.
Speaker 1: And this was--
Speaker 2: So, I got a few recognitions from and back, there that I can even show you.
Speaker 1: And this is Lugenia Burns Hope, the wife of John Hope who established--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Neighborhood Union, the social work organization.
Speaker 2: But, but we, we never got to be real friendly.  We just knew who they were and they knew who I was, but Mrs. Hope, and I'll tell you Ms. Carrie Connelly [ph.] my--Ms. Connelly's boys, two of them, were in maybe my girls' classes and one, the younger boy, died and the older one is still at church, we--but the mother and father been dead a long time, but they were my church members and I used to, they always came in the side door way just in time for the sermon and then I asked them, I said, "Ms. Carrie how come y'all come so late?"  We don't like the preliminaries, we just (laughter) so, so they just come to hear the sermon and went on back home.  They lived up there on Walnut Street not too far from the schools, but they had their way and highly respected people, two nice sons.  I don't know whether the youn- I don't remember the younger boy's wife, but Norris [Connelly] got married twice.  He doesn't have a wife now though.  He sitting over there getting old in my church (laughter).
Story_ID: 202693
Speaker 1: The Mayses, Benjamin Mays and Sadie Mays, what do you recall about them?
Speaker 2: Well, we did love them so much.  What do I know about Sadie then--that she couldn't cook, but that was all right with me, you wouldn't go there hungry, you'd do the best you could (laughter).  But, then everybody respected [Buck] Benny [Benjamin Mays] so highly and my children, you know, when Gwen [Gwendolyn Cooper Mannings] got married the first time Benny performed that ceremony, and let me see what else did we do?  Anyway, we're just close friends and, and Christmas, during the holidays they had open house and everybody would go and enjoy whatever would be offered just to be with the Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] crowd, and he was a great example for the young boys you know.  Everybody was so crazy about, Benny Mays, and my sister-in-law's husband, Dr. [Edward Allen] Jones, was the French teacher there and in that way we attended everything that went on, because it went on and on until it cost a lot to go to this Candle in the Dark.  My sister-in-law's husband wrote that, '[A] Candle in the Dark: [A History of Morehouse College,' Edward Allen Jones].  You know--
Speaker 1: Could you tell me what that is?
Speaker 2: --that's a name of the, a celebration, you know, Candle in the Dark and I have that book there when he wrote it.  We went to the book signing, and he had signed that book, I got it there and this year the Candle in the Dark must, how did it--how much did it cost Sally [Warner]?  I didn't go.  Last time I went it cost, well I have forgotten, but I haven't been in a long time.  Charlie [ph.] and I went together and they didn't say as much about [Dr. Charles] Butler as she thought they should have and so we didn't try to go anymore (laughter).  So anyway I--this year it must have been a great thing.  I read about it and, but, a lot of things that I have had to cut out, like going to night affairs over there.  Everything's so complicated and because of robberies and so forth you, you got to be so, everything locked up.  We women used to just get out and go, but you don't do that anymore.  Something bad is always happening, so I'm kind of left out of a lot of the things that I did enjoy so much at Morehouse.  I didn't get to go to the [Christmas] Carol Concert at all this year.  We used to get together and go to those, but, and it's a big thing.  As you know, the Morehouse [College] Glee Club is famous all over everywhere.
Story_ID: 202694
Speaker 1: If you don't mind moving forward a little bit in time to--back perhaps to the 1950s and the incident on the bus.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter), yeah, let's see that might have even been after the '50s [1950s].  I was living here [Atlanta, Georgia],  and you see there's a trestle right up the street there, and as far as the buses would go would be at that trestle and we were at that time having trolleys, you know the thing controlled by the trolley up there you had to get out and change that trolley to go back in the other direction, so by the time it got out here I would be the last one on there and usually I'd been sitting, when I got on it was crowded and I'm sitting on that side seat, and but when the old trolley man got off to change his trolley and jumped out the front door and I jumped right out behind him.  And I was always going to town on--a friend and I caught ourselves having a day off, so I think Tuesday was our day off and I'd just go, and we just go 'cause our day off--and we bought, we'd buy things you know. And my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] would always try to kind of keep up with what I'm buying, and by the time we got down here if he beat me home he's down there to see whether I got off, walked up with (laughter), and so I was gonna beat him home that day and I jumped off the trolley right behind the wrong man, though my old man wasn't on there that day, there was a young man on there and so he looked up and said, "Nigger get back on that bus and go out that back door!" (Laughter) See you got on the front, but all black folks had to get out the back door no matter how crowded, you gotta find your way to get out that back door.  I thought, what, I'm down on the ground, feet headed this way.  I thought, you and who else gonna make me get back on (laughter) you get on that--oh no, I got my feet headed this way, I'm, and I'm trying to beat my husband home (laughter).  Anyway, you know any other lady, any lady would have just walked on, but I'm walking on home, now he telling me, "You get!" I thought, I said, "Look, my husband be driving along here in a few minutes."  I said, "He catch you meddling with me he'll beat your head to a pulp." (Laughter) He jumped on that (unclear) (laughter). So you felt better doing something like that than you did walking on home after he done told you twice, "Get back on that bus, go out that back door" (laughter), and the next incident that got me, we had about--they tell me now we weren't paying but a nickel I think.  You get on there and you could ride all the way down to Rich's [Atlanta, Georgia?] from Davison's [Atlanta, Georgia].  I don't remember how much it was, but when I got on, it was all full.  There was that one seat there and the man sitting this way, you know, right behind the driver and there was that seat there.  He's sitting there with his feet up on that seat, that side seat.  So, I'm looking all around everywhere and didn't see any place, so I thought when I sat down he'd just move his feet, but I sat down and he said, "Nigger don't sit down in front of me."  I said, "Oh you great white man," (laughter) and I got up and I said, "you sit there," you know, then he'd be sitting in front of me.  "Oh, baby come on back here you can have my seat," all the colored folks you know sitting all the way back, "you can have my seat."  I said, "No, let him move.  He don't want me sitting in front of--" (laughter), so no he ain't gonna move.
Story_ID: 202695
Speaker 1: And so I sat back down and I said, "And take your feet down!" (laughter), so he wasn't gonna do anything, but I'm gonna sit there and I didn't even know where that man came from he was sitting up there somewhere and he just got up and didn't say anything to anybody.  He just stood right over me and held onto that strap and I thought that was the most beautiful thing that I had ever seen anybody do--
Speaker 2: Was this a black man?
Speaker 1: --as if to say, now you messed with her and I'll show you something.  I'm, we both black, so I just looked up and said thank you so much.  He didn't say a word, but he stood there and that white man who was sitting there with the woman, they both got off the first time the bus stopped, but I thought, those two incidents I don't think I would ever forget because it seems, we had already gone through most of these--all this white and black you know because when you got on that nickel bus you sat anywhere you could, but they ain't never said you go as far up as you can, white people, everybody got on the front, and you could sit so far back, but if black you get on the front you gotta go all the way back to find the back seat you know.  One day we got on that the woman sat her little girl up there and the little, I'm sitting there and the little girl keep looking and looking and I guess she thought, well, she is a nigger, so finally she said, "Momma what are we doing back here with the niggers?"  She's a little bitty thing.  I said poor little thing, her mama, but mama said shh, shh, I guess mama said I'm glad to sit down anywhere (laughter).  So, I thought--I wanted to laugh about it, but I said, now that's pitiful the child just learning to talk and she's looking and she'd didn't know whether we were black or what, but she realized we back there with the niggers, mom what are we doing back here with the niggers, shh, shh, shh (laughter).  I guess she said, "My feet hurt, we sit anywhere we can," but I guess we'd get on there and I didn't have to go very far.  I got off at Auburn [Avenue] because my bus came up Auburn, but it, and when I was young walking from Davison's [Atlanta, Georgia] to Richards [sic. Rich's, Atlanta, Georgia] didn't mean a thing to me, but now that was way up in the '50s [1950s] you know, so (laughter), but I said all the real incidents had been on those buses.  Nobody wanted you to sit in front of them and I didn't think about that.  I really didn't know that, but I guess there was a law you know, but there ain't nothing say you don't sit down in front of a white person.  All that was before the Flor- the, what's her name that wouldn't move 'cause she was tired (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Rosa, Rosa Parks, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Rosa Parks (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now this was after that?
Speaker 1: After that, I don't think I was doing much bus riding, you know.  I, and I didn't drive to town unless I well just wanted to because I could step right over across the street and get on the bus and get off right there in front of my house, so, but I would drive most of the time and had no, no problems 'cause just drive down there wherever I was going and come on back, no problem.  But that bus business was something else.  A lot of people had been insulted on a bus, don't sit down in front of me and all that, so and we just didn't do it.  So, that time I thought well, you know, dang this is the only seat, he gonna have two seats and I'm gonna stand and I never could balance myself on a moving bus, so I was gonna sit down somewhere.  When he said, "Don't sit in front of me," and I said, "Well you sit there," and he'd be sitting in front of me, but no, he ain't gonna move.  He still gonna keep his feet up there.  I sat back down and I said, "And move your feet," (laughter).
Story_ID: 202696
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper, would you tell me about your volunteer activities.  You've over the years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --given a lot of time to organizations. Could you talk about that?
Speaker 2: All right, so I think the best for me to talk about is what I did first.  And I think serving on the board where these ladies had organized this group [Gate City Day Nursery Association, Atlanta, Georgia] that would take care of people's children while they went to work and nobody would get paid really, but anyway the only thing I could see would be somebody to help with those children, do things for them.  And so I organized, well I mentioned having an auxiliary.  Well, all right if we, if I wanted an auxiliary the board organize--said they'd go on and organize it, they picked a committee to do it, a friend who was one of the elementary school teachers in the university system over there.  Well, we got together, and yeah we gonna organize this, and I had found that it was nice for me to go over there and take some of those little children out from time to time you know and they didn't have a lot of playground equipment and stuff.  Well, from that, nobody else was doing that and I thought well if we had a group of younger people to do these things and as the older one, we were out serving, these younger people would come in and be board members, not auxiliary members.  Well, that went on for a time and then I got that going and we did a lot of good I think.  And really it was still going, but as these young women that I would take in. they got married and had children, but that, that organization is still alive, but now they don't, nobody to raise any money, nobody to do anything extra, but I would have those children bring 'em out here to my clubhouse and when my children would come home from boarding school, make cookies and popcorn and we rented movies and show 'em 'The Night Before Christmas' ['A Visit From St. Nicholas'].  All that sort of thing went on, just take--we had three cars.  This one going there, and I'd have thirty children out there at the same time.
Story_ID: 202697
Speaker 1: That [Gate City Day Nursery Association, Atlanta, Georgia] went on and on and did well, and then they asked me to come on the committee to make plans for a black Girls Club.  And the man who was head of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] called us together for that.  So one friend who was on this board of Gate City with me, we answered that call and they--all these projects were getting up, apartments were just getting started, so there was a Grady Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] place over there.  We took on a--the girls, you know, being left at home alone and getting attacked and all that sort of thing, we took on, I took on this auxiliary and we organized and finally got things going. We were into the United Way, not, that what used to be the, what did we call it first, not United Way, but it was--what was the organization that you could get all these help from?  Community Chest, maybe (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Community Chest.
Speaker 1: Well anyway we got in touch with different people and a Mr. [Walter H.] Kessler who ran the Kessler department store [Kessler's, Atlanta, Georgia], was one of our board members.  He gave us the first one thousand, I believe he gave us eleven hundred dollars to qualify to get into the United Way, and then he and his son served, we all would be on that board and we did everything.  I'd bring the little girls out here and have graduation parties for 'em and they went from--first out of elementary school.  We didn't have all of these middle schools and everything then.  And my chapter of The Links [Incorporated] would give me gifts for--and make gifts for them as they graduated.  That went well for the longest, then they decided they'd make us integrate.  White women built a club out there on Donnelly Avenue.  So, when they made us integrate and we went out there, well they took all their white girls away, you know, so (laughter), and they had--the women always said when they got all these things going if it got going and we took in men or white women and all that, they'd take it away from them, they'd lose all the credit, so sure enough they got in there and somebody would have the--a president of a bank or something, president of the Grady Homes [Community] Girls Club [Atlanta, Georgia].  Well, when they made us integrate they fussed, now who gonna be the executive director, should it be white or colored.  We fought and fought and we finally got a lady to come down here from Chicago [Illinois] to be president.  She didn't know anything about what all that was about, so of course they had to let her go on back about her business, so then we had no fight any longer, the white woman would take it and we learned after it was all settled that it was--the woman who took it was the wife of the man who'd been running the Boys Club all the time.  So, you know that was a national thing, Girls and Boys Clubs [sic. Boys & Girls Clubs of America].  It wasn't the Girls Club, a black girls' club.  So, when we knew anything, they had joined.  It's not Boys Club and Girls Club, it's Boys and Girls Club, so of course then they, nobody was using this building out here on Donnelly, they had us going over to a little place over there on Edgewood Avenue, so tight over there, no parking and I thought well--and then we had a white man president of all of it, so I gave that up, but we had put on some wonderful programs for those girls.  But, I gave that up, and the other woman who had worked with me, I had brought her in, she worked for the gas company, Gladys Powell was her name.  I think she's out there, and she came in, you know we taught those girls a lot 'cause we were in one to one with them, and I'd say I'd bring 'em out here, bring 'em out here to Mozley Park [Atlanta, Georgia] and we'd put on carnivals and I, well we did everything to raise a little money.  That's when my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] would fuss about I wouldn't be at home at night.  I'd go have a party and I got to chaperone that and so (laughter), but those are the things that I'd spent my time doing.
Story_ID: 202698
Speaker 1: I had that little eight-year-old boy [Cooper's son, Albert Berry Cooper, III] out here [Atlanta, Georgia] and he had dogs and all he knew to do was ramble all around, it wasn't developed out here then you know a few houses and, but old Reverend E. R. [Edward Randolph] Carter had a grandson who was already in scouting and everything and he would help me with the children, drive me here, there, and yonder and so when I was reading about the little boy's club, the Cub Scouts I asked him if we could have one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well it, anyway, they gave me credit for organizing the Cub Scouts and I was the first black Cub Scout mother den, den mother.  I had everybody's little eight-year-old boys down here in my basement until they grew up to be real scouts and had folks come in here and give 'em lessons and say all kind of things, would do, make nice things that they could show and their craftsmanship, but, and that gave my little boy something to do too.  So, they all stayed here from the time they were eight years old until they got scout at twelve years old.  I'd been all the way to Marietta [Georgia] with my Cub Scouts playing basketball (laughter).  So, let me see what I think those, oh well then, when all of this civil rights stuff started they found so many people who couldn't read, and then I was called on.  Grace, my friend Grace DeLong and I were contacted about that, tutoring the non-readers and I said when my daughter, my oldest daughter [Gwendolyn Cooper Mannings] got sick and had to come home, I'll be driving over to Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] two to three times a week tutoring people to read and I kept that up after my friend who--we went into these programs and were coached as to how to do them, you know.  She decided that she needed to work so she could get Social Security, so she left me and I found myself running these clubs all by myself.  But, I stuck with it and enjoyed doing it and well, it just finally, I think all my little Cub Scouts are dead except my son and he's in poor health now and it made me wonder now why did all these folks die so young.  I'm wondering now what did happen to all those little boys I had.  I believe, I expect my son is the only one still living and I had well as many as my basement would accommodation, but, and the Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] folks I don't remember, I got all those names written down and I can look and see who it is that who may be still living.  But, that way you know, you know, but I don't know, I'm wondering now what--boys didn't do a lot of drinking or anything in those days, but all those young men have died now.  There was one young man you might have known was one of my den chiefs, George Rice, you didn't know--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --George Rice.  George got to be a teacher at [Booker T.] Washington High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] and he moved to Morrow, Georgia, got married during the war, World War II [WWII] I think.  His wife and my older daughter, Gwen [Gwendolyn Cooper Mannings], got to be good friends, but now George is dead, you know, well he would be the same, seventy-nine or eighty years old now, but all those young men have died, so I wonder, it makes you think, you know what, what did they do that they, they weren't drinkers.  I just don't know.
Speaker 2: Maybe it's the pressures of--
Speaker 1: But it makes you think.
Speaker 2: --of life perhaps the pressures--
Speaker 1: I don't know why, because my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] had a--my son had a lot of problems when the--he ran a Gulf [Oil] service station and when Gulf tried to put all the dealers out of business he had a lot of financial losses.  He had to take the Gulf tanks out of the ground and put in, he tried Texaco [Inc.] and nothing worked, you know so I guess this is sort of a nerve thing that he has, it's Parkinson's disease.
Speaker 2: I see, I see.
Story_ID: 202699
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper, you are 102 years old--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and, and--
Speaker 2: Where's my, there's my 102.
Speaker 1: --and looking very good, looking very good.  What, what do you want people to learn from your life?  What are the lessons of your life that you want to pass on to folk?
Speaker 2: I just certainly wouldn't know, somebody wanted to know what I would want people to think about us as a family, my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] and my children and I, and I said I would like for people to think of us as good community people because everybody along here had children.  My husband carried everybody to school every morning, and they'd come home and I'd feed 'em all and so I thought and their mothers and daddies would be working, you know, some, and my chauffeur would be the one picking them up and all that sort of thing, so I thought, well that's what I would like for people to think about us, just say we were good community people because the folks who lived on the other house from me they had two children to go every morning and just get them ready and come on down here and my husband carried them and one or two from across the street up a little further come on down here and he taking them all and stopping by the store and letting them buy little boxes of cookies to take, and things like that and my--when the man that pick up my children bring 'em all, so I thought I don't know that anybody ever really thoroughly appreciated what we were doing, but I'm not--my husband had taken the Harper [ph.] children to school and one day I looked up he was back out here and I said well what are you doing back out here.  He said well Gail [ph.] forget her lunch.  I had to come all the way back and get her lunch (laughter), things like that, Sally [Warner].  And the little Burch boys across the street, their daddy taught in the public school system, and the mother didn't have any time for them.  They stayed here most of the time.  I fed 'em and on Sunday morning I'd have to get up early and read the funny papers to 'em and we, it's cold in the house.  I'd get up and turn on the heat, feed (laughter) Brainard [Burch] and Douglas [Burch], Brainard and Douglas, but I, the parents never thought well thank you, you know.  Nobody ever said anything about what we had done, but they were children.  And my folks from Florida would send up crates of oranges you know, put 'em out there on the back porch and the little children in the neighborhood just come get oranges you know, walk in there and get oranges.  So, and I said when I'm cooking I feed enough, cook enough for this one, that one, the other.  Then, the mother [Vaughncziel Burch] of the little Burch boys had decided she didn't like to cook and she'd come by, "Did you have anything left from dinner?" (Laughter) Feed barn.  So, yeah I've been a neighborhood feeder, nurse.
Story_ID: 202700
Speaker 1: I just have two other questions to ask you today.  Why do you think history is important?  Why do you think it's important for people to know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what went on before--
Speaker 1: --know our history?
Speaker 2: Well, all I can say about that, it's good to know where you came from.  That's what bothered me for the longest.  Where did we get started, and I haven't gone far enough into that, but Sally [Warner] knows that I have had some of it researched and I know more about the aunt who took us in than I know about anybody who was really blood kin to me.  She just happened to have been married to my father's [James Henry Nixon] oldest brother, this aunt, and some of her folks date all the way back to [President] George Washington, the president, because it says Ms. so and so and so and so from Virginia.  Now, my mother [Mollie George Nixon] was, my grandmother was listed as one Harriet [ph.] of Virginia, but Harriet must have been a brown skinned woman because my mother was brown and she, well maybe brown and had freckles, and they thought that was unusual for a brown person, anybody that brown to have freckles and this Irene [ph.] you hear me speak of her mother was the one whose daddy was head of the slaves in one of these Tennessee places where he wanted his children to leave, wanted to leave the plantation so his children could go to school.  My aunt who took me in she is one of the ones of those children who went to school and got a job, but the only job she got then was maid for a rich woman and she ran that place until she died and that set her apart from most folks.  In our neighborhood, we were the only one with a telephone, only place with a piano (laughter), but she worked for white folks and they couldn't get in the best society.  They wouldn't, weren't invited to weddings and things like that.  See, we had everything else.  Folks come and pay a nickel to use our telephone (laughter).  So, so you see I have had a good, all mixed up life, but and it has been a happy life for me.  I lost all of my sisters and everybody, but everybody lived to get grown, oh yeah everybody lived to grown, get grown, even Georgia Ruth [Nixon] got married, but she was very young and she never had any children.  But, you see I've watched that third sister's children.  They've been a little of everything.  Those--(unclear)--brothers went in the [U.S.] Navy I think.  They were studying and they got drafted at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], studying engineering.  Well, they went on and did their duty in the service.  They came back and then they both went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to finish their courses in engineering.
Story_ID: 202701
Speaker 1: My last question today to you, what do you want your legacy to be?  What do you want to pass on?
Speaker 2: Oh, "To thine own self be true" [William Shakespeare] (laughter) and then no man could do any better, so that's all, just to thine own self be true.  That, that's what I would like to pass on and then as you know, as I was saying, treat everybody as you would be treated anyway and do whatever you can to help where you see it needed.  And when I got out of here even after my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] died and other people's husbands were dying and I'm the only person I expect to get in the car and go and see about these folks and I'd pick up and make 'em go to church and drive 'em to church all the time (laughter).  So, I've done some good, but nobody would pay that any attention.  But, I used to say sometimes, wonder who gonna do this for me when I'm old, and I laugh at my friend who does pick me up now.  She's retired, one of the city teachers and she's been out, been on retirement now about twenty-some years and she's just beginning to feel her age and don't wanna drive that, well Sadie [ph.] can't see well enough to drive at night.  See I never reached that point when I was going around here picking up people, taking them around 'cause I'm just now beginning to get old, so I gave up driving when I was ninety, what, was it ninety (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five.
Speaker 2: Somewhere along there (laughter).  So, I don't know.  God has been good to me.  My health's been good.  You hear people talking about knee surgery and I ain't never had no stiff knees and I've never had--well very recent years I've had cataract surgery on both eyes and I go to my doctor now and he say, he doesn't understand, he doesn't have to give me any prescriptions or anything (laughter).  He say, well I don't understand you, but say, you are an inspiration to me.  So, I tease him I say well--he say what do you do?  I said I get up every morning and flush 'em out with a mild solution of salt and water, and he said well I don't know anything better.  I never told you to do that and he gave me a little bottle the last time I was there and said, but if you ever have any trouble said put a drop or two of this in your eyes.  So, I say I thank God for my health.  Most people have had some kind of operation and I've never had any kind of operation, and so I don't know how I came through all that I did, and I remember being when my daddy's [James Henry Nixon] cigars used to come in a wooden box and we'd take those little wooden boxes and put a nail down there and put a string on it and that's our wagon and drive or pull it around and I guess careless, didn't know, nobody's fault, but one of those nails went through my heel down there.  Well I'm out there in the country who's gonna do anything about that.  So, I think they treated it with mud or clay and stuff like that.  I don't even remember them taking me to a doctor, but that became infected you know, so I was crippled for a while, but I didn't have time to worry about that.  It healed up and it's the biggest thing I remember ever happening to me because that infected foot.  Well, I probably didn't have any shoes that would fit nowhere and, well I was real young then.  I don't remember too much about it, but I know what had happened.  I know why my foot was sore for so long.
Story_ID: 202702
Speaker 1: Well, [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Ann] Cooper, you are an inspiration and I thank you for spending so much time with us this afternoon into the evening.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well, I have to thank you for taking your time to come because as I've been telling my friend she's been trying to get me to do this, and I told her well, I have nothing that would interest anybody in reading about, but then I get to talking, and I think well everybody didn't have that to happen to them, and maybe someone would get something out of--well I know one thing everybody should learn is don't, don't take your life in your hand as I did crossing all that high water, and fell in there, and almost got washed away for good.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to that because you alluded to that, but we, we didn't get the details on that story.  This is when you were a child and you were almost swept away.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how old I was, but I know I was still trying to keep up with my mother [Mollie George Nixon] everywhere she went and I knew where she was.  She didn't take me with her that time, but I'm going where mama is and all the others were busy doing whatever they were doing, and I just went on going over there, but I had to cross what we call walking on a foot log.  You'd cross that and it had been a big rain and I fell off and that rushing water and I was being washed on down, down, down, but I'm grabbing at every little sprig I could find, you know, and I must have been mighty young because you must keep in mind that I hadn't been ten years old long when my mother died, so I might have been, what, five or six years old or even younger, but anyway I finally pulled myself out of that and I went to the house where, where my mama was and when I walked in there I was dripping you know and everybody wondered where in the world (laughter), but I said I think if I'd been my mother I would have whipped me right then, but I still don't remember ever getting a whipping about that.  All I remember is she would take us home and when she got, when she did the family wash it was set up out in the yard, a tub to wash in and a tub to rinse in and a tub with blue in.  You had a big tube of blue water.
Speaker 1: To whiten clothes?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: To whiten the clothes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and of course they hang 'em out in the sunshine, and it would, your sheets and everything come out beautifully, but and as we children, we didn't have no bathtub you know, wash us, put 'em in the rinse water, wash 'em (laughter).  An old peddler would come along every once in a while you know, that's where she bought material to make us night gowns and with satin materials to make--and she'd make us outfits, dresses, make anything that she could afford to buy, you know.  She had a good machine, and I remember that's the most expensive thing we had when she died was a sewing machine, and she had made herself this nice dress at Christmas and went out thanking people for the things that they had done, I guess, from Christmas to Christmas and was stricken away.
Story_ID: 202703
Speaker 1: Gwen [Gwendolyn Cooper Mannings] and Joyce [Joyce Cooper Bobo] are twelve, A. B. [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.]--I'm trying to decide how old these children were then I'd know about how old we were (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well just give a guess if you don't know exactly.  But, we're rolling now so if you could tell us who's in the photo, when it was taken and where it was taken--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --if you don't the exact date just say a decade or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --between this year and that year.
Speaker 1: That's right and we're sitting right out there on the front in this house, so, oh I imagine about the, somewhere in the--Ann Marie [Cooper] was born in '32 [1932], say maybe '36 [1936] or something like that.
Speaker 2: Can you name the people in the photo please?
Speaker 1: Well that's Dr. Albert Berry Cooper, Jr., the dentist and that is [HistoryMaker] Ann Nixon Cooper, the mother of the four children.  The first girl next to me is Joyce Nixon Cooper and the next one is Gwendolyn Yvonne Cooper, and then there's my, our son, Albert Berry Cooper, III, and that's Ann Marie Cooper.
Speaker 2: Great, next photo.
Speaker 1: Ann Marie was named for E. Franklin Frazier's wife [Marie Frazier], that Marie is for her.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well, that's Dr. A. B. Cooper and Ann and we're dressed to go to Dr. Rufus Clement's [Rufus Early Clement] sixty-fifth birthday party at Atlanta University [AU; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: About what year was that about?
Speaker 1: Oh, let me see now.  Our husbands died, mine died in '67 [1967].  Dr. Clement died about '68 [1968] or '69 [1969].  I was still grieving for my husband when I went to hold her hand.  They both died suddenly.  Dr. Clement died at a meeting in New York [New York].  My husband died in his office in 19--January 1967.
Speaker 2: Was Clement president when this photo was taken, was he still president at AU?
Speaker 1: Well yes, yes--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --he was president of, of AU.
Speaker 2: It would have been late '50s [1950s].  Right, next photo please.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, now that is Ann Cooper on the beach out from Jacksonville, Florida, Manhattan Beach, and I must have, that must have been in, let me see now, in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Great, next.
Speaker 1: I think.
Speaker 2: Those are the three Nixon girls, three of them.  This would, one is Mary [Nixon Graves], Joyce [Nixon], and Grace [Nixon] in Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay date, '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: Oh date, yes I would think in the '30s [1930s] 'cause I'm not there, I'm here after the '20s [1920s] (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know that one, yeah that's Albert Berry Cooper [Jr.] a student at Meharry Dental College [sic. School of Dentistry, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Ann Nixon.  I'm still Ann Nixon then.  We're not married and that's 19, what 1921 or 19 what.
Speaker 2: Twenty-one [1921].
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-one [1921], and we weren't married until the next year after he finished, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, there we are with our two children.  That's Ann Nixon and Gwendolyn Yvonne, well how come I got that one, well yeah they're both babies aren't they, Joyce and Ann Marie, I mean to say Joyce and Gwendolyn.  Oh, that must have been still way back there when, in the--Gwen was born in '24 [1924], '25 [1925], '26 [1926], '27 [1927], well still in the '20s [1920s] because they weren't much older than six and so forth like that I guess.  I don't quite remember, but they were both still small children.  But, I got one in my arms haven't I?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  Still in the early '20s [1920s] because our first child was born in '24 [1924] and the next one in '25 [1925].
Speaker 1: That would have to be in the '30s [1930s].  That's a picture of my husband's mother and me and a strange man on Lookout Mountain, Tennessee, so that's when you know we were just looking for something to do on a Sunday evening.
Speaker 2: And that is A. B. Cooper, well Albert B. Cooper and Ann Nixon Cooper at a party in the, let's say '50s [1950s], yeah, when we still weren't into the hotels and things.
Speaker 1: Ann Cooper showing off a Persian lamb coat on our home grounds, on what we called the side yard in the year of the, yeah, I expect in the years of '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: But that's a picture of my husband's mother when she was very young.  I wouldn't know what year, but I imagine she still wasn't married at that time, so they were married after she was twenty years old.  I don't have an idea just how old she was.  But the way she's dressed it looks like--
Speaker 1: Oh yes now that is the four Albert Berry Coopers, and that was taken in the, let's see and my baby boy there looked like he was two years old.  He was born, oh, let's see now.  How old is he now, forty.  I expect maybe he's fifty years old.  Yeah, 'cause let's say in the--I can't think what year he was born, but anyway that tells us--
Speaker 2: And tell, talk about this one now.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well I said I can't remember exactly what year, but I know I was forty years old and I hadn't had that dress long when that picture was taken.  That dress is hanging up there now.
Speaker 1: And that was taken because that was our twentieth anniversary picture we had when we celebrated our twentieth year and that must have been in what '42 [1942] because we were married in '22 [1922], and we're celebrating our twentieth anniversary there and that's Dr. Cooper and Ann Cooper and Gwen Cooper, George Cooper, Albert B. Cooper, III.
Speaker 2: There's another one that I can't tell exactly when, but Ann Marie I would think she was born in 1932.  She looks like she's three years old there, three, four, five six, and A. B. was about seven and Joyce four years older and then Gwen a little older and then there's me with my shoulder showing (laughter).  And that was on, that was on exhibit at APEC [Learning Center, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Oh yes, I said every June when the children got out of school we carried them off on an educational trip, so that's one of the big buildings in Washington [D.C.] I expect, yeah Washington.  We start all the way down, you know, and go all the way up.  They've been through every business building in the Washington and New York, and the museums and everything.
Speaker 2: That's a view of my husband's office on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] and that was probably back in the '30s [1930s]; somewhere along in there.
Story_ID: 202704
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Adrian Jackson, observing is Scott Stearns and Sally Warner.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: My name is Ann, A-N-N, Nixon, N-I-X-O-N, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January the 1st 19- [January] 9th, 1902.
Speaker 1: January--
Speaker 2: January the 9th.
Speaker 1: --the 9th, okay.
Speaker 2: 1902.
Speaker 1: Okay and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I'd rather say Bedford County, Tennessee because that was in Bedford County, that was in the little town called Shelbyville [Tennessee], S-H-E-L-B-Y-V-I-L-L-E, Shelbyville.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Between Atlanta [Georgia] and Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: All right.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Homemaker, okay I guess I would call it.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December the 7th, 19- 2005.  Is, is this the 7th or the 8th?
Speaker 1: You know I, I'd have to look.  I think it's the 7th.  I think it is the 7th.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  The 8th.
Speaker 1: It's the 8th, it's the 8th, okay.
Speaker 2: The 8th.
Speaker 1: All day long the 8th, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah all day long (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my residence at 1291 Martin Luther King Junior Drive SW [Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 202705
Speaker 1: I'm somebody who likes beautiful words.  Always beautiful words and my friends realized that, they've given me a lot of beautiful words.  I'm the kind that likes to open up meetings with beautiful words (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now what would you typically open up a meeting with if you, you had to open up a meeting?
Speaker 1: According to what kind of meetings you were in.  For instance, I served on boards of directors and the last time I went to my board meeting, which is celebrating its 100th year and I had always said to them, well I'm always ready, but they been teasing me about using the same pocketbooks and everything.  I got ready to--I said I ain't got no favorite words (laughter).  So, that was just last month I think I had the oldest pocketbook with no favorite words, but I said it's according to the kind of meeting I have.  I've sprung this on my fifty-five-plus group, which is an older group of people in my church and it was organized to help people who, say shut-ins and so forth.  Well, that didn't get off to such a good start, but we went on and on and we found ourselves doing nothing but planning pleasure trips and finally I said to the group I said we aren't doing the things that we're organized to do.  I said we've left church out of it all together.  We just go off and have a good time.  So, I said we ought to bring the church in, so I am here ready to open with some kind of words of inspiration.  All right, nobody wanted to do it, I'll do it every time.  I'm ready all the time.  So, so that didn't--everybody thought it was a good idea, but then I was just gonna have a few favorite phrases to show what we're doing.  Some of them got into it.  They wanted to preach a whole sermon and all that sort of thing, so that hasn't gone too well, but we still have that much of the church into it.  We hadn't said a thing about getting out and helping the shut-ins as it started out to be, but I said we're doing nothing but planning big luncheons and going off.  So, I said sometime, my speeches of inspiration kind of gets out of hand 'cause other people take up all the time with a big sermon or something.  No, that wasn't what I meant, just something to inspire you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, I still love my beautiful words.  I got more beautiful words I bet you than anybody (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 202706
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's [Mollie George Nixon] side of the family and your father's [James Henry Nixon] side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I don't know enough about my mother's family, but my mother's name was Mollie, M-O-L-L-I-E, George.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I said she died January 1913, when I had just turned ten or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, what was her date of birth and where was she born?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --what her date of birth was, but I, and we had no idea how old she was until after I'm grown up and married, went back looking for her grave.  We found it and she had had those eight or nine children, and was just twenty-eight years old when she died in 1913.  That's what we found on her tombstone.  So, that's all we knew about her and I said this grown up me got to wondering why some of my mother's people didn't come to see about us when we were out there in the country and she was having all those children.  I took it upon myself to say, I bet she and my daddy ran off and got married (laughter) and they just disinherited.  Well, I had that looked up and they--I found that my father's oldest brother signed for them to get married, but they didn't tell me how old they were, but I do have that, the date that they got married written down in some of my Bibles I guess.
Speaker 1: When did they get married?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What, what day was it?
Speaker 2: It was in February, but I don't remember what year now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would have to look, but I have it written down.
Speaker 1: Was it in the 1890s, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah well it would have to be.  Well, I don't know what year it had to be because there were eight children and my oldest sister [Bessie Nixon] died young and those things don't tell me very much, but all of the older children we didn't think about it much.  Nobody worried about it but me.  I got curious to know and then I had these things looked up, but most of my sisters they had passed on before I got to the point where I really wondered where we all came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't, you have no idea where she was born, but, do you have a sense that she was from right around Shelbyville [Tennessee] or that county [Bedford County, Tennessee] or--
Speaker 2: I think so.  She must have been 'cause people had no way of commuting from one town or one state to another.  I figured she and my father must have been right in the same maybe little country schools or something like that, but by the time I got curious enough to want to know there was no one to tell me anything.  My sisters wouldn't have known.  I did ask one or two of them, but they didn't know anything about it.
Speaker 1: So, you were ten when your mother died right?  You, you were about ten years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --old or eleven years old and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had just--she died January the 13th and my birthday had been January the 9th.
Speaker 1: Now what do you remember about your mother?  What, what was she like, and--
Speaker 2: Oh well this I do remember mama.  You know, I wondered why I was so spoiled.  Wherever mama went I tried to go too, but now you see you just knew a family that lived up the lane or up the road or somewhere and that's the way families entertained.  You come to our house to dinner this Sunday and we go there, a whole lot of other children, you know.  So, the only place that you would have to go would be each other's homes and no, you didn't go off on a trip or anything.  So, I said they must have been, they must have lived close together, as they must have grown up in the same neighborhood.  So, that's all I would know that would put my mother and father together unless I said some little country schools and I know my--I don't know where all of my father's old six brothers ended up, but all those six girls turned out to be teachers all around the State of Tennessee, I think.
Speaker 1: Now, which six girls.  These are your--
Speaker 2: My sisters.
Speaker 1: Your sisters okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I mean my aunts, my father's sisters.
Speaker 1: Oh, your father's sisters, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Six girls and six boys.
Story_ID: 202707
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Mollie George Nixon] have a chance to go to school herself?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't think so.  I think just well you know maybe she and my father [James Henry Nixon] went to some little country school like we did in, in Bedford County [Tennessee] and the teacher in Bedford County who taught us was one of our first cousins from right there in Shelbyville [Tennessee].  So, that's about all I know that my--as I said I guess when my father's brothers all grew up they, they went away and they went to New York [New York] and everywhere, but, and those women were still around there in Tennessee, some teaching at Tennessee State [Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], some teaching in other small towns.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everybody who had, who taught had to go to Tennessee State, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --get your license renewed.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna get back to them, but I wanted to talk about your mother first and make sure we got everything out about her--
Speaker 2: I, don't know--
Speaker 1: --before I move on to your father.  Did, so did, you never met any of your mother's relatives or anything?
Speaker 2: No, didn't know anything about any of my mother's relatives.  I did ask one sister one time after I married and lived down here, didn't my mother have any people 'cause I, as I told you I wondered why some of 'em didn't come see about us, 'cause those uncles would come, my father's brothers.  Well, no they didn't know anything.  One sister said she knew one brother that my mother had, but that's all.  She didn't get to know him, so it ain't nothing that I can tell you about my family's people, but when I had it looked up they didn't know much about the George family.  There wasn't--they said they could always tell you that the courthouse in some communities had been burned and records were lost 'cause you know they didn't record everybody's babies.  But, I found that we had been recorded not in Shelbyville, in Bedford County.  So, you see I don't know why all that, but I got it all in print.
Story_ID: 202708
Speaker 1: Can you tell us, how did your mother [Mollie George Nixon] pass?
Speaker 2: Well, you know as I said you see she was very young and we were all the happiest family you'd ever heard of, living in the country and my daddy [James Henry Nixon] he just worked on a farm and we would get together, and just sitting around the great big fireplace with a big whole half a tree, there's a back log they called it.  Everybody sitting around that fire and my daddy used to get smoking tobacco.  I don't remember what he smoked.  I think he smoked a pipe, but it would come in little wooden boxes and we make toys out of those you know, make, put strings on them, pull 'em around, but I was saying what a happy family we were all sitting around that big log fireplace and my daddy smoking that smoke would smell so good.  We find ourselves inhaling that smoke (laughter).  Finally, they thought maybe I was so crazy about that smoke, daddy made me a carved pipe and put tobacco in it and the first night I smoked it, sitting there smoking with him and came out all right.  The next night my mama said wonder why I was so quiet I wouldn't, didn't, he said maybe she needed her pipe.  He fixed me a pipe and I'd never been so sick before in my life.  It almost killed me (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you were a little girl smoking a pipe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember smoking with my daddy, but anyway you asked me about this family gathering there and we thought, and me and my relationship with my mother, I didn't realize that until I'm down here married [to Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] and my brother [James Henry Nixon, Jr.] dies and I learn then that I was four years older than my brother.  I'd never thought about that 'cause we'd all been just a happy, happy family and so that showed why my relationship with my mother had been so different from the other children's relationship with mama, 'cause everywhere mama went I wanted to go and Sally [Warner] would remember that and one of these birthdays, one of my granddaughters decided to make a video of me trying to follow my mother.  She went across to visit on the, I told you about all the relatives, not relatives always, but just friends down this country road and you would go up what we called up to the house to visit the cook or something.  My mother went there and they didn't tell anybody else that--now she didn't tell us she was going, but I knew where she was and all the other children was going about their own, just having a good time together and I decided to go where mama was and there a big rain storm had come up and we had to walk across a foot log and the water was very high, but I fell off that foot log and I was almost washed away, but I'm grabbing at every little sprig.  Finally, I was pulled out on the side where my mother was and of course I went dragging up there just all half-drowned.  They wondered where in the world did you come from, but I said I don't remember my mother whipping me or anything.  I said if it had been me and my, I must have been about five years old.  I just don't have any way of knowing, but anyway all she needed to do was get me home and wash me off and put me on dry clothes.  I said if she'd been mine as I thought about it I said I would have been giving myself a good whipping before I got home (laughter).  But, anyway, that was my relationship with my mother and that's why I think and I learned after my brother died that I was four years older and I'd been a baby for four years.  Everybody pampered baby [HistoryMaker] Ann [Cooper], so, but I still went on through life being pampered baby Ann (laughter).  So, you had asked about my relationship with my mother--
Speaker 1: Right, right and, and--
Speaker 2: --and that was it.
Story_ID: 202709
Speaker 1: How did she [Cooper's mother, Mollie George Nixon] pass away?  How did she--what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was gonna tell you that because that makes a real story.  My mama made all of our clothes.  An old peddling man would come by, with a driving an old horse and he'd have materials in his wagon.  Well anyway that's where we got our material and she made all of our clothes.  She made herself a big Christmas outfit and then she went in the neighborhood up to the house to thank the people for our Christmas gifts and everything.  Well, dressed up and went off and we all at home, mama's gone to visit and thank people and so the next thing we knew she was brought home and I can never find out from anybody how she was brought home.  We all in the same area, but first thing we knew that mama had been stricken, had a stroke away from home, and of course as I said I've still been trying to find out all my life how they got her home from the big house where she had gone to visit the servants.  Well, all I remember, we were all back and I don't know how we got the message that mama had been stricken.  Well, we were all down in this kitchen.  My daddy [James Henry Nixon] had gotten us all together and we saw the doctor who was coming out, had to drive out from town with his horse and buggy and we saw him way away, got off, worked on his horse and we want him to hurry up and come on and see how come mama wouldn't say something.  Now, by the time he got there I guess she was dead and because we remember now papa had us all shut up down in the kitchen.  He came stumbling down and said she died.  Who, mama died.  How in the world could mama die she just, well anyway that was January the 13th and so all I remember about that now is seeing put her down in the ground in that fancy black casket with all them silver handles on it and mama putting, being put down there that's when I fell apart.  I remember that, but I don't remember any church service.  I think you had to be buried right away.  I don't know, I, nobody ever explained that to me.  But, that's something that I would never forget.  And so then here comes all them uncles and everybody, so well we got to do something about all these children.  I guess I was ten and my oldest sister [Bessie Nixon] who I told you about, my first sister had died young, but she had left home and been working when she died.  Then, the next sister you know, there were three or four others of us.  Well, my uncle heard that my, my aunt who was my uncle's, oldest uncle's wife was this lady who, her father had asked the old master to let him leave the plantation so his children could go to school.  See she was one of his real white children, and so, but she was a wonderful lady.  You got a picture of her.  Aunt Joyce [Nixon] took us all and as time went by the aunt, the cousin who took the one who was just two years older than I.  We were only eighteen months apart, so Grace [Nixon] was eighteen months older than I.  I was what, ten.  I believe I had turned eleven by the time my uncle and my cousin, really, my uncle's daughter said they would take me.  They carried me to Nashville [Tennessee] from the small town where we lived--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then the cousin who taught in this small town where we had moved to from Bedford County [Tennessee], took the one eighteen months older than me.  Well, she was a teacher.  When she had to come to Tennessee State [Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] to get her license renewed, go to summer school every summer, she brought my sister Grace, and then they found out how close we had been and how much we missed each other and Aunt Joyce said, "Well, let her stay.  We'll just let her stay with [HistoryMaker] Ann [Cooper]," and there we were back together again.
Story_ID: 202710
Speaker 1: How was your father [James Henry Nixon] doing during this period of time?  The--did any of the children stay with him?
Speaker 2: Yes until--see my mother [Mollie George Nixon] died in 1913.  I'm down, I'm in Nashville [Tennessee] with the Lett [ph.] family, my uncle's family, and my daddy is back there where my mother died and with at least three or four of the other children, and in 1915 I get this message that my daddy had died suddenly.  He was a farmer.  He died on the farm.  See he just didn't come home.  The girls had to go look for him and they found him dead in 1915.
Speaker 1: What, what happens, is there a story about it?
Speaker 2: He had a heart attack.
Speaker 1: Heart attack.
Speaker 2: So see, they never said that my mother had a heart attack, just said she had a stroke and she never recovered.  She never ever regained consciousness at that age, not thirty years old.
Story_ID: 202711
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the name change first, 'cause that's the story that involves your mother [Mollie George Nixon], so.
Speaker 2: Well, keep in mind that we had--those uncles had wanted us all closer to them than Bedford County [Tennessee] was and so oh yeah we all packed up and moved to what was a little town thirty-eight miles from Nashville [Tennessee], Gallatin, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Oh, Gallatin, now that's the town that the radio station WLAC [Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 2: Is that right.
Speaker 1: Right, you know that's the one that broadcasts all over the United St[ates], well--
Speaker 2: Yes I do, Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the "Hossman" [Bill Allen] and all that, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 2: But anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's where this family, the Allen family, these are white folks they had built this great Langley Hall [Gallatin, Tennessee], like this place that you just went to in North Carolina [Biltmore Estate, Asheville, North Carolina], so you know they bought all this land and built this great big house, and several families lived in houses like that.  I know--
Speaker 1: It's a single-family house, but it was a great big mansion?
Speaker 2: It was a great place and, they just probably bought up a whole lot of land and they built this great big house because nobody lived out there but this family, and this place was named Langley Hall.  I got pictures of Langley, got postcards of Langley Hall someplace.  Anyway, they had one little, one member of the family had this one little girl, and there was nobody for her to play with, and so then they came to our house, looking for a little girl to come and play with their little girl and so that was my job to go, go and play (laughter) and I don't remember her name, Eleanor I think was her name.  Most white folks had somebody named Eleanor.  But, anyway Eleanor and I, well I just got to be a regular member of the family 'cause I'd get up and go there to play with Eleanor and, but as I started out to tell you that they had named me--well see my mother said when I was born, she told me this herself, that she told the old midwife who she was somebody that lived up the lane or some place I cannot think of a double name for her, can't think of anything, and say, the midwife said well name her after me, and her name was Ms. Annie Lou Mullins, so I never did like it, all right I'm Annie Lou, just left the Mullins off.  So anyway this little girl I'm playing with this pretty little white girl and she had her aunt, Ms. Louise, Ms. Louise Gill [ph.].  Ms. Louise Gill was somebody who hadn't been out in the sunshine like most of the white women we knew who worked on farms.  They are all sunburned and red.  Well, there was Ms. Louise, so pretty and rosy, and I thought, oh, Ms. Louise was the prettiest thing I'd ever seen and I told my mama about Ms. Louise being so pretty, rosy and, and so I thought well my name was Annie Lou, I figured it out if I cut the I-E-S [sic.] off, I mean add that I-E-S I can be Louise, not Lou, all right and so I asked my mama about that.  She said that was all right.  I was gonna tell her to cut the I-E off of Annie, Annie Lou, and I'm not, I'm Ann Louise, 'cause Ms. Louise was so pretty and so all right I'm Ann Louise.  I figured out then all that for myself.  I don't remember how old I was by that time, but I could figure that I'd cut that I-E, add the I-E, I-S-E to L-O-U, Annie Lou and all right now my name is Ann Louise.
Story_ID: 202712
Speaker 1: It had to be interesting being in this big Langley Hall [Gallatin, Tennessee], you know, 'cause you grew up on a little farm--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and so how was it different?  I mean what were the different things?  What was some of the sights and sounds and smells of that place and--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --and how were they different from the farm?
Speaker 2: Oh well, of course, you know, we always when we lived out there in the country had gardens, chickens, and pigs and one cow and one horse.  We had all that, so it wasn't so much different.  I know when I got--we didn't have electricity you know.  We had oil lamps.  On Saturday it would be our--the girls' jobs is to clean the lamp chimneys because they'd be smoky--well anyway, it was just different that way and Langley Hall had its own powerhouse.  And they had electricity then, but now you see I didn't know anything about electricity.  The lady left me in that powerhouse down there one day, and I was so curious, wondering where that light came from.  I climbed up there and stuck my finger up there and it knocked me down (laughter), but I didn't tell anybody about that, but I wanted to know why they didn't have no lamp chimneys to be cleaned.  They had their own powerhouse.  All right 'cause the lady would be down there ironing and everything, but she had a big iron stove with, it had flat irons they called them and you have to have a cloth to hold the handle and I watched her do all those things you know, and you have a big stove, and you set your flat irons on it.  Oh, they do some good ironing.  But, anyway I changed my name because Ms. Louise [Gill (ph.)] was so pretty, and, and I didn't have to be Annie Lou no more, everybody can stop calling me Annie Lou and call me Ann Louise.  So, when I got married and they were going to send out the announcements they had to put, they couldn't just say Ann Louise (laughter) they had to put my full name down there.  Well anyway my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] said he was so surprised you know that my name was so different.  He said you should have let me know.  Well, no I didn't, but my relatives had to take things in hand, you know, by that time, so I ain't no more Annie Lou, I'm now Ann Louise Nixon.  Well anyway that's how my name got changed and I knew while we're talking about this change, the white people that my husband's folks had been accustomed to working with, they were so nice to him, I mean to my husband's father.  His name was Albert Berry Cooper, but the folks that had been kind to him well they named him Albert whatever that family's name was Cooper, that foreign name and when he said when he got about twelve years old he wondered what how come my name just Albert Berry Cooper I didn't know nothing about that man.  So, he asked his parents about dropping that middle name, so he said he was twelve years old by that time you know, so he's going to school, going everywhere and his name, he got a middle name, didn't know anything about the folks, so that's why he asked his parents about that man who he didn't know anything about that man.  Well, this man had been good to his father, that's why they just talked so good to them we had to give him part of their name.
Story_ID: 202713
Speaker 1: Now how old were you when you changed your name?  Were you--
Speaker 2: I must have been, let's see now, I was ten by the time we had to leave there, I had to leave Gallatin [Tennessee].  No, I had gotten to be, I think I was eleven, but all that happened when I was about nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Mollie George Nixon] was still alive then, yeah, right, right, okay, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My mother was still alive, so I imagine I was about nine then and I wanted before I forget to say it by the time, you know, we thought my aunt got to when she went to school the first job she got I think maybe was being somebody's maid, and then I'm sure she had more education than the lady that she was working for because he was president of the First National Bank [First Tennessee Bank; Nashville, Tennessee] and his wife, Aunt Joyce, had to be her maid, but Aunt Joyce got to running everything, so that I said I know she had more education than the lady that she was working for had, because Aunt Joyce got to know everybody by, they knew her by first name.  I could go down to the department stores and everything and just say Joyce Nixon.  She knew the mayor, the governor, and everybody so (laughter), and so that went on and on until I went back up there not too many years ago and all that money ain't that fluent anymore.  My niece carried me to see one woman who had built in the area in Gallatin and I kept listening to different stories and I asked her one day I said did Santa Claus bring you a pony one year and a little girl rode on the back of your pony?  Yes, she went.  I said that was me (laughter).  Oh, we had the biggest time.  She's so rich no more, but she got a nice home and then she's a widow and can't you imagine how we felt.  I told 'em, well I'm that little girl that rode the back of your Christmas pony (laughter).  So, things like that. We learned that money didn't last always you know.  They didn't have much more than the rest of us had.
Story_ID: 202714
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I wanna go back and pick your father's story up, and can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: All right.  His name was James Henry.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: James Henry Nixon.
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Now you know I don't know that and I don't think I ever knew it, because as I think back I don't remember when my mother's [Mollie George Nixon] birthday was and I would not have known that if we hadn't found it on the tombstone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But he died in 1915.
Speaker 1: 1915.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I don't think they ever found his grave, but it was there in the cemetery in Gallatin [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Oh, so he died in Gallatin instead of--
Speaker 1: Yes he did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And he stayed in Gallatin and my older sisters were with him.
Speaker 2: So, you were living in Gallatin actually when your parents died?
Speaker 1: No, see I had been living in Nashville [Tennessee] since my mother died--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in 1913 when my mother died and then when all the uncles and cousins and everybody came to that funeral well then shortly after they decided what they would have to do to help my father with those children.  One took me, one took Grace [Nixon], and one of my father's sisters I think took the boy, Buck [James Henry Nixon, Jr.].  He was born, the only boy--that they wanted the boy so bad that they, when he was born and see, daddy would come in and say, "Well, how is that little Buck today?"
Story_ID: 202715
Speaker 1: Can you name all your brothers and sisters for us?  Just name 'em in the order that they were born?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that's easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now my oldest sister I told you she died young, but her name was Bessie Margaret [Nixon].  Remind you, it seems that everybody had to have a double name in those days.  Bessie Margaret, so Bessie Margaret grew up and left home and, and died away from home after we moved to Gallatin [Tennessee].  All right the next one was Mary Elizabeth [Nixon Graves], Mary, yeah Mary Elizabeth.  And then the next one was Willie Lee [Nixon Harris], I think they got stuck there 'cause it seemed like we, we thought Willie's name was a boy's name.  Willie Lee, I think they were hoping for a boy, but her name was Willie Lee and then after Willie Lee was Joyce [Nixon].  Joyce Etta and now Joyces run through our family like a stream, 'cause everybody was named after that Aunt Joyce, Joyce Etta.  And then came Grace [Nixon], the one just a little, eighteen months older than me and, and she too was named Grace Elizabeth.  There was Mary Elizabeth, and then Grace Elizabeth and then I came next, you see, Annie Lou [HistoryMaker Ann Cooper] (laughter), but and then was my brother James Henry, Jr., and then well, I think my mother [Mollie George Nixon] had that one little girl after, after my brother her name was Georgia Ruth [Nixon] and so there she was, nothing but a baby.  Now my sister Willie who was, what, the third or fourth girl was she, anyway, everybody, the older girls had, one of them had to look after the one right under them, and my sister Joyce was the one who I loved after mother died.  Joyce was my mother.  And then, let me see, somebody had to look after Grace and after Grace there was my brother, but see my aunt and uncle took him back to Shelbyville [Tennessee], my brother grew up in Shelbyville.  And then Georgia Ruth--Willie,--now I had, I had a grandnephew who came here on a job as a reporter and his mother, they live in Miami [Florida] now, they moved out of New York [New York], and David Bowden was my third sister's, let me see well, anyway, I don't think he had any sisters and brothers, but he came here and one of these radio stations had him here.  His parents moved out of New York back to Miami, and I'm still in touch with that niece, and that niece was my third, was Willie's baby child I think, let's see Mary, Mary, Willie, Joyce, yeah, Willie must have been my third sister.  They moved out of New York back down to Miami.  They live there now.  Their son, David Bowden, came here as a reporter at one of the radio stations, television stations here and I'm in close touch with that niece and well, the family is so mixed up now 'cause they--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --lived in New York, he went to white schools and he got and they married white folks.  I got more white folks in my family than I got black.  They all everywhere, all over California, all over (laughter), so I just can't tell you about 'em all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a lot of families all around this country.  I went back to, went to Wisconsin to one, somebody got divorced and stayed divorced for twenty years and remarried.  We all went back to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to that wedding about a few years ago.  Now they are divorced again and some of them are dead, and on and on it goes.
Speaker 1: Right, I just wanted to ask you about your immediate, you know, siblings to make sure I got--
Speaker 2: You got all of those names--
Speaker 1: --the order, yeah I got those, but now--
Speaker 2: -the last one Georgia Ruth.
Story_ID: 202716
Speaker 1: What do you know about your father's [James Henry Nixon] side of the family?  You said they were schoolteachers a lot of them, but how far back can you trace your father's family?  How far back can you go?
Speaker 2: No, I can't trace any of those men's education.  They might have concentrated on women getting educated.  I don't know, but we got to know a number of them who taught at Tennessee State [Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and well, would come out to Aunt Joyce's [Joyce Nixon] house to spend the weekend.
Speaker 1: These are your father's sisters right, that taught?
Speaker 2: Those were my father's people from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from Shelbyville [Tennessee].  I did go through Shelbyville one time.  I asked my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] if we'd stop and look up somebody who was still there, and why I didn't keep up that, I don't know because the first man I saw we didn't know, we had no address or anything, but I asked him we didn't have to go through there going from Atlanta [Georgia] to Nashville [Tennessee], but I asked my husband if we could go through there and find out if this cousin who had taught at out in Bedford County [Tennessee] with, for us and the first man we saw we asked him if he knew this lady.  "I ought to know her, she's my wife." (Laughter)  So, anyway well could you take us to see her.  No, said, she's not here she's in Nashville in Tennessee State, so that was in the summertime.  She had to go to summer school and I don't--and my husband was in there in that car, my children, didn't anybody say well, could you give us the address so we could get in--I don't know what we did.  I don't remember we just drove off and didn't find out anything 'cause I never heard from her.  So, I said they scattered all over this world.  One year one nephew came from, let me see I believe, he came from, they came from everywhere, but I think one came from, what did I tell you that the brother who had the friend with the ponytail, well anyway I said I got folks all over the world, just nephews and nieces and grandnieces.  So, 'cause this one that I'm thinking about now came from Australia.  He got in Australia with, traveling with Eastern Air Lines [Inc.] and so far as I know he still lives in Australia.
Story_ID: 202717
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your Aunt Joyce [Nixon]. Now she worked for this rich family right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we thought being president of the First National Bank [First Tennessee Bank; Nashville, Tennessee], maybe he had more money than anybody, that's who Aunt Joyce worked for, but Aunt Joyce got to know the governor, the mayor, and everybody, when [Albert] Gore [Sr.] died and these folks had townhouse and country house.  Every year when school closed when I was a child, we had to move to Elmwood [Tennessee], which was out in the country, that too was a big place like Sally [Warner] went to in North Carolina and it was called Elmwood.  I saw that [Al] Gore [Jr.] who didn't get to be, didn't get elected the last thing--
Speaker 1: Now this is, this is the current Al Gore's father, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm about to say now Al Gore's father was buried right there at Elmwood [sic. Smith County Memorial Gardens, Carthage, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I cut that out when I saw that he was being buried at Elmwood, and so I said my aunt was friends with all those folks, and they knew her by, and of course I rode in the first car that the white folks had.  I knew the folks who ran the department stores and they had the first Pierce-Arrow, and when school closed--
Speaker 1: This is so, so by, by hanging out with your aunt, hanging around with your aunt you got a chance to experience all these things--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and to meet all these--
Speaker 2: My aunt--
Speaker 1: --well to do--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --influential politicians, the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --powerful people in Tennessee.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I didn't know them personally, but--
Speaker 1: But through your aunt.
Speaker 2: --but Aunt Joyce did.  Everybody knew Joyce Nixon.
Speaker 1: And you would have been like in your, eleven, twelve, thirteen, as a teen, young teenager--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you know a preteen or teenager.
Speaker 2: --I was about elven when my mother [Mollie George Nixon] died in 1913, and well I guess you know I was mixed up with those folks it just like a big family really.  The white people weren't so hard on the black people then in those days.  You got to be real friends, and--because those people would have children and going off leaving them and as my sister got a little older Aunt Joyce would hire them, you, you Ms. so and so's nurse, you Ms.--so on and the children all thought those, my sisters was their mothers, those white men (laughter).  When--I know my, when my oldest--Mary [Nixon Graves] who was my oldest sister living, when she died she had said to her husband, I remember Aunt Joyce having her a nice wedding and her husband had to go off to war, Will Graves.  Well, then Aunt Joyce put Mary out there as a nurse and she had a--you know they built these nice cottages for the folks all on these big plantations, so every Sunday after I left church I would walk all the way out going to my sister's house.  She worked some Sundays and some Sundays she was off, but she was, had her own little house.
Story_ID: 202718
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about school.  Now did you--what was the name of your first school, the first school you went to?
Speaker 2: Oh you went to public school in your neighborhood and there were many of them.  I don't remember--
Speaker 1: There wasn't just one specific school that you started out at?
Speaker 2: Well the high school there was Pearl High [School; Martin Luther King, Jr. Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee], and Irene [ph.] my cousin--
Speaker 1: Now this is in--
Speaker 2: In Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: In Nashville, okay, I was talking about, I want to go back to grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, well I don't remember--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: --no, I can't tell you much about all those grade schools because we went to one wherever we lived.
Speaker 1: Now you said you went to one in the county there in Tennessee near Shelbyville [Tennessee], you said it was the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah that was just a one-room school.
Speaker 1: Bedford County [Tennessee], it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that it had a name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It must have, 'cause everybody went there and--
Speaker 1: It was all the black, black children right?
Speaker 2: Yeah back, yeah black.  There was just one of those little county schools, one room at first, all of us.  My mama [Mollie George Nixon] was--we might go to school with a lunch bucket full of cabbage and potatoes and all that sort of thing.  We must have had to walk a good, good distance.  So, the only teacher that I remember there was this first cousin, Stella [ph.], and they're the one that I told you that my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] stopped through Shelbyville on our way to Nashville once and we saw the first man I asked if he knew her.  Well she's his wife and she was at Tennessee State [Agricultural and Industrial State Normal School; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], so I never heard anything from her.  I don't know whether he told her.
Speaker 1: So, her last name was what Stella what?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Dude Whitman [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She looked like--you know, surely his name wasn't Dude, wasn't Dude, but that's what we called him.  Stella was crazy about Dude and we teased her about Dude, Dude Whitman and so--
Speaker 1: So Stella Whitman, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name was Stella Whitman.  Now that had, of course that's been many years ago.  You got to remember I been down here more than eighty odd years now.
Speaker 1: Did you go to school in Gallatin [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they were all just, yeah city schools you know.
Speaker 1: No, but did you--
Speaker 2: No, my--
Speaker 1: --did you go to school in Gallatin?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Okay you didn't okay.
Speaker 2: --no my sister Grace [Nixon] went, that's where Khananny Randolph [ph.] taught, there in Gallatin.  I'm already in Nashville then and med school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and this school and that school and the other, so that's as far as I could tell you about, just say public school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but when you got to--now did you like school when you were going to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah I was crazy about school, and I wasn't ready to stop school when, when I was--yeah what happened was, they were going to change schools, put me and Grace in this school where we could just stay there and, and pick up those two years after high school, after public school.  It moved away and then that threw us back, we didn't know which way to go, but by that time my husband was about to finish dentistry, and I couldn't get married because I was determined to get them two extra years so I could help him get started (laughter).  "Well, I don't want you to help me."  I finally came to--he said, look, "My parents are educators," and that's the way he got me to give us not going to this school, "my parents are educators.  I will send you to my parents."  I got to school and he was, his parents ran a branch of Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So, all right I'm going to that school.  Soon as we got married, I'm going--he gonna let me go to school.
Story_ID: 202719
Speaker 1: Did you go to Pearl High School [Martin Luther King, Jr. Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee] at all?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay. You didn't go to Pearl, okay.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) it was time to go to Pearl High.
Speaker 1: So what, I guess what we're talking about is that most of your education actually came from hanging out--
Speaker 2: Public school.
Speaker 1: --well public school, but a lot of the things that you know, the social things you know, and the things that you know about how to--'cause you, you have what they call a high social IQ I would say--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --and, I mean, but a lot of what you learned was through being with your aunt I guess and, and being in those situations with those rich people and how they do things and so forth.  Is that true?  Would you say that's true?  I mean, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, well, Aunt Joyce [Nixon] you see--
Speaker 1: --other than a formal education you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you see Aunt Joyce, don't you remember Aunt Joyce's father was the old--no, that must have been--anyway he went to the old master who was his--he was head of the plantation, wanted to leave the plantation, so his children, now this is his own master who, it was his daddy, but he was the old master you know of the plantation.
Speaker 1: This is Aunt Joyce's, Aunt Joyce's father, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Down in Virginia.  This is down in Virginia right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, anyway he loved him because he was his daddy's valet and everything.  He's the one that gave him five hundred dollars and his freedom.  He went to Nashville [Tennessee] and bought a place that took care of his mother and sister and, and that sister had one, Aunt Joyce had one daughter, Irene [ph.].  Aunt Bessie [Nixon] had Jim [ph.], one son.  Jim was a sorry somebody.  He's just a lazy white man, but he was Aunt Joyce's sister's son.  Anyway, when they got to Nashville, what did they do now?  You see nobody had a car or anything.  Finally, my folks, the department store there bought a car and that man had to come, a black man came and taught everybody how to drive those cars.  My folks bought, Aunt Joyce's people bought a Pierce-Arrow all glassed in and a lot of brass and that was what my uncle, Uncle George drove.  Now they say before we had that car, that Pierce-Arrow, they rode in those fine carriages, but I never saw my uncle drive a horse or anything, so I don't know about things like that, but I had been having to live at Elmwood [Tennessee] out in the country since, oh, I guess I was elementary school 'cause that's where Irene taught.  Irene taught in city school system.  When the school closed, uncle would come by and get us and whatever they rode in and take us, we had stayed in the country at Elmwood until time for her to go back to work.  We would, you had to ride the [Nashville-Franklin] Interurban out there.  Irene could have parties out there all grounds every--like the place in North Carolina [Biltmore Estate, Asheville, North Carolina].  You had everything there animals, chickens, peafowls, everything you could imagine, just like a big circus or something.  So, yeah, I was brought up that way with all--my Aunt Joyce was responsible for at least thirty servants, all them black folks.  Big clock out there with the room numbers on 'em and the bell rang you know where to go, so yeah I grew up in that kind of at- well and they would have big parties, I see it all and they let me stay with the children sometime out at a big lawn party or something.  So, I don't know, I didn't know much about colored people.  I didn't know whether I'm black or white (laughter), so I said that, but I--during the war years, see all this was going on when I got to, say, my real teenage years, World War I [WWI], don't you know--
Story_ID: 202720
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --I met my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] in 19--well I guess I met him in 1922, World War [I, WWI] days.
Speaker 1: Well, World War I was 1914--
Speaker 2: To '18 [1918]--
Speaker 1: Yeah right.  It ended 1918.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, when they started, that's when they started drafting young college students.  My--
Speaker 1: So now, so you met, what year did you meet him?
Speaker 2: I met, I must have met him in 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was seventeen, he was already twenty when I met him.  Well it must have, it must have been in 1920-something that I met him, but somebody thought, well now we're taking all these young men out of college, we ought to do something so they could meet somebody and--
Speaker 1: So, was he in the [U.S. military] service when you met him your saying?
Speaker 2: They drafted him out of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute.  Let's go back to, I, I just want--can you tell us the story of how you first met him?
Speaker 2: Well that's what I'm trying--
Speaker 1: Okay all right, all right, I thought I was, okay I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, I said somebody had enough sense to think, now all these young men being taken out of college, we ought to do something for them.  They can start on a profession and be in the [U.S.] Army.  See there, they took him out of college.  Now, if you, I don't think my husband would--at age eighteen, he didn't know what he was gonna, his people had already been teachers.  I'm sure that's all he thought he would ever do, but when he got into the Army you could study a profession, but you got to carry on your Army duties, so that's the way he studied dentistry while he was still serving Uncle Sam. and you know, well, as I started out to tell you somebody had enough real mind to say we ought to do something for, to amuse these young folks.  Somebody organized what we called an elite dancing class on Saturday afternoon.  Somebody, I'm getting to be seventeen years old then, and Irene [ph.], all of her friends they had finished high school, taught school and, but they had opportunities to invite to meet new men, and men get older and older and older, but they passing them all up 'cause they said wait till next year see what comes (laughter).  Well, a group of pretty young women pass and been getting engaged to everybody.  Irene was engaged to this one, that one, and the other and Aunt Joyce [Nixon] would be coming in from Elmwood [Tennessee] fixing all these big dinners and finally they done wore themselves out.  And they, the men were getting younger and younger.  My husband was one of those younger ones you know, but by the time they finally were, we better do something.  Some of them never got married.  Irene married a man six years younger than she is, but you see if you ever had any work for white folks you just like a slave, somebody.  You, you don't qualify for high society.  Irene's friend could get married to the biggest doctor that finished Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], but they didn't get invited.  Irene's mother worked for white folks, so (laughter), so now if you read Vernon Jordan's [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] book ['Vernon Can Read!: A Memoir', Vernon Jordan] he brings all that out, where you lived, if you lived in a housing project and all that sort of thing, and if your folks work for white folks, you know, you don't qualify for high society.  But, anyway I'm already in high society, 'cause Irene in those--my cousin and her gang, we had--Aunt Joyce was working at Elmwood and in town and everywhere.  We in there having parties (laughter).  We dancing and having somebody come beat out--well Irene was the only one that had a p--well we were the only property owners.  See Aunt Joyce's father, mother and father, he built that home where I grew up, and when I saw and I looked into all that and I said, well I grew up right in this place.  I didn't know that until I'd been married a long time, but I got all that to show you that, and I said everybody who had ever known anybody, you know, but I heard folks around here saying, the very last one of our doctors had said he had these great big parties every year here and they say he would take it off his income tax or something like that and he boasts you know, yeah, he can do everything he wanted to do.  He was from Washington, Georgia, and the folks never worked for white folks, but he finally got caught selling, you know, giving folks drugs.
Story_ID: 202721
Speaker 1: --You met your husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] at this dance, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right that's where we were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what happened did, how did you--
Speaker 2: They organized this Saturday afternoon dancing class.  One of the members of that class, of the dental class went all through the country during the summers and learned all the new dances, steps and everything.  You didn't just waltz and do things like that.  They had what they called schottisches, and one young man who grew up there in Nashville [Tennessee], and he was the one that went around and learned about all the new dances and when time for schools to open on Saturday afternoon, I still ain't old enough to go, get up and go to the dance in the afternoon by myself.  A friend carried me to the dance class and then other freshmen was coming in and we, I never had many clothes or anything, but I always had feet and legs (laughter).  So, I had some tan shoes and we had lace-up shoes.  They had tan satin tops, so now you know, shorty like me, that attracted everybody.  I didn't realize that though, but them folks would stand on the side and watch.  So, we were, I was dancing with a little freshman and my husband--you know one of these schottisches, where you aren't holding cheek to cheek you just got a partner.  So, my husband came in there and he's watching.  "Get out the way!"  They called the freshman crabs, "Get out the way crab, you can't dance!"  Took me away from him.  So, all right then, the next dance was a cheek to cheek, then he took me and he asked my name, and if he could all me and all that sort of thing; now that's the way we met.  But, he held me tight and he kissed me on the cheek and so he'd been you know, I think those men normally take anything that they could get from people who already had jobs.  I imagine she'd been feeding him, but he had also been working, they work at hotels, you know, serve parties at hotels, get jobs as waiters.  So, anyway I said they always glad to find somebody who would keep them from going hungry even they, if they couldn't get the job serving a party or something.  Well, it started from then and he wanted to come see me and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] had a lot of parties for the folks who didn't go off for Christmas.  Irene [ph.] would always have all these parties and Meharry would have a lot of parties, so by the time I had asked Irene if I could invite this young man, invite him.  He called and said he had the chance to go home to Georgia, and he couldn't come to the party.  Well, I found that this woman who he'd been, I said she'd probably been feeding him.  She had gotten a job teaching in Kentucky, and I think she maybe called him or something.  Anyway, she was coming home and she was expecting him to carry her around.  He was kind of in a pickle then.  He didn't know whether to tell me what was gonna happen really.  Well, finally he finally decided that maybe he had been keeping me from seeing anybody all that first part of the school year; drove everybody away all my boyfriends.  So, he didn't know whether to keep saying he going home then in the end she gonna be there and be at everything and Irene and the--when he couldn't come and I told her he was going home and it ended up that he wasn't going home and anyway they was going to all these parties.  Irene married that young man and said now you better be at these parties and, but I done started crying, 'cause this man done told me the truth.  This woman was coming.  He had to be responsible for taking her out.  I will send somebody to take you, send one of his best friends to take me to all these parties.  I wasn't going.  Irene the last one, Irene and her husband told me if you don't be at that party we gonna do this, that, and the other and this man say they ain't gonna let him come there no more and blah, blah, blah, so anyway I done cried to my throat was sore 'cause he going with somebody else.  Well, anyway we tried that first time.  I remember we had to go up some steps to get to this dance hall and he, we ran into each other going up them steps, and he was so upset he kept stumbling and stumbling up the steps and anyway, oh well nobody enjoyed that at all.  I didn't, he didn't, so I guess he thought well this other woman she can just do whatever she wanted to do, 'cause the next night Irene done told me I better be there, and what she's gonna do to me if I wasn't there and I finally got my clothes on, and when the bell rang and I opened the door and it wasn't his friend it was him himself (laughter), so I said--we fell into each other's arms and I said we never gotta do this again.
Story_ID: 202722
Speaker 1: So, that was it.  He [Cooper's husband, Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] didn't care what and he didn't let me see nobody else and we gonna get married and oh Lord I still wasn't ready to get married, but then anyway his, well his mother had always complained that my husband's father [Albert Berry Cooper] was always this A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister.  Wherever he went she had to live in the parsonage, you know, so she would complain she never had a home of her own, she lived in a parsonage and he was the oldest child.  When they go off on these new churches, he'd have to stay home and look after the siblings you know, so before he was a grown man he was there looking after this sisters and brothers.  There were five of them and buying groceries and feeding them and cooking, so he's already a man at the age of sixteen, you know.  So, that's the way we got together, and still I got to go to school so I can get educated.  I wanna teach English.  I loved all them beautiful words.  Well, I never got it, so he finally said to me, as I told you, he said well then you just must go to school I will send you to my parents, they'll educate us.  Well, we got here and when can I go?  Oh well--
Speaker 2: So, so you came to, you came to Atlanta [Georgia] and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so he, his, his parents are from Atlanta?  He was, he was from, from Atlanta originally?
Speaker 1: His mother was born in Atlanta and in the First Congregational Church [Atlanta, Georgia] where I go every Sunday now and--
Speaker 2: Now is this when he had the picture of you shot that--I know there's a story about the picture that, that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when he left Tennessee he had you dress up and take--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this picture so he could take it with him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the picture that--he carried me to get my picture made so he could bring it to Georgia with him.  Yeah, well he didn't know, didn't anybody have any money in those days, so his father and mother both, they had taught all over Georgia, taught at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], lived in Morris Brown, and well, they were well known.  So, there was one man, who, I don't remember his name right now, but I had it written down, my husband's father went to him and he stood for a loan for my husband.  Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia] had opened in 1921.  My husband was ready to go to work in 1922, so but where was he gonna get the money to open up an office equipped, but--
Speaker 2: Citizens Trust now--
Speaker 1: Citizens.
Speaker 2: --now this is a black bank?
Speaker 1: That's, that's a black bank.
Speaker 2: Now who opened Citizens Trust?
Speaker 1: Well, there was a man named Perry.  Perry came here and started a lot of businesses for black folks.  His name was Heman [Edward] Perry.
Speaker 2: Heman.
Speaker 1: Heman, not Herman, but Heman Perry.
Speaker 2: Is it H-E--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: H-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Heman Perry I think.  He started everything that black folks were involved with, but I'm trying to think now.  I read not too long ago that a place he had lived out there on Simpson Road was, they were paying tribute to that because that's where Heman Perry had lived.  And Heman stayed around here a good while.  I know he finally--my husband wasn't much of a card player or anything, but he was at Heman Perry's house playing whist those years, and the school near where we had, we had bought our first place was burning and I remember calling him, telling him he had to come home and everything got--(unclear)--was burning, but you know it was now the school is there on--there was an elementary school.  It's still there operating.
Story_ID: 202767
Speaker 1: We were talking about Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia], and you said your husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] was trying to get a loan, right?
Speaker 2: Well yes, I said his father came to see him get his dental degree [at Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and his father being a minister and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate he was well known, so--
Speaker 1: What was his father's name and what was his church before we go further?
Speaker 2: Oh well, his name was Albert Berry Cooper, Sr., and all the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] churches he, you know, if you didn't raise a whole lot of money in one, they send you to another one.  And they always said that their daddy, you know, you the only thing you look forward to in the A.M.E. church was being a bishop, so they would always joke about it, say no, Pa would never get to be a bishop, he was too honest.  You had to be crooked and all that (laughter).  So, Pa never got to be very high in the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of his church?
Speaker 2: All of 'em.  I don't know, A.M.E. African.
Speaker 1: No, what, what church was he the pastor of?  Was he the pastor of a church here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether he ever pastored one here in town or not, but see he'd be sent to all the small towns.  No, I don't think he ever pastored a church here because really his job was teaching as well as preaching and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked with Atlanta youth basically, and didn't have to?
Speaker 2: No, I think when he got his training you know he, as I said, he and his wife, my husband's mother, they taught at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], which was an A.M.E. school.  That was the only thing that we can't understand now, why it is the only thing that black folks ever started and then why they let it die (laughter), don't you know.
Speaker 1: Morris Brown, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was the big school of the African Methodist [Episcopal] church.  But, then they let them lose that, everything. It had--if it's running now it has just a very few students there, but they're graduates all over the country from Morris Brown.  We didn't understand why some big somebody didn't come up with money like Oprah Winfrey, and she has given Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] all kind of money.  Why didn't she help the A.M.E. church, well anyway that's all over and done with, but they will eventually get their standing back because that's the only thing black folks ever started and owned, African Methodist.  So, we were all, you know, kind of disappointed about it, it had to lose their accreditation.  But, they got some crooks in there somewhere.  They had a woman come here, the president, and somehow she got things all messed up.  But, anyway we won't dwell on that.  I don't really know enough about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you--
Speaker 2: But, it was my husband's school and, and after his parents taught there, lived there, and he, he was in--his daddy and mother ran what I call a branch of Morris Brown, but it's not listed that way.  They,--and I told them my husband said, my parents are educators, I will send you to them.  He's got his high school diploma back there where he graduated from and from that you would come to Morris Brown as a college student--
Story_ID: 202768
Speaker 1: So, he [Cooper's husband, Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] was trying to get started and in dentistry, and he wanted a loan from Citizens Trust [Bank, Atlanta, Georgia], your husband?
Speaker 2: Yeah well, when you graduated, where you gonna get the money to equip a business or anything, so, and I say nobody had any money those days, but his daddy [Albert Berry Cooper, Sr.] was influential and he went and got this, the man who was running the newspaper to stand for a loan for my husband and so that loan came from Citizens Trust.  It had just opened the year before, and I don't imagine they had been letting out any whole lot of loans for folks to start businesses.  But, I've never seen anything in writing about that, but that's how my husband called me.  I'm left up there in Nashville [Tennessee] waiting to hear what in the world--he didn't know whether--he liked Cleveland [Ohio] 'cause he was working, he worked on the boats around Detroit [Michigan] and Cleveland and all those places, so he didn't know where he was going, but he did want to come home to practice.  The old man who was the dentist here, Dr. J. R. Porter, was old.  Oh, he had worked on my husband when he was a little boy.  So, anyway after he got his loan he called the first time, and said that I'm practicing dentistry, I got all my equipment and everything.  Next time he called he said, I made five hundred dollars we don't have to wait 'till Christmas to get married (laughter), so I thought, I'm coming and we gonna get, said it would be better for me to be married if all the ladies bringing their daughters down there to meet the new dentist.  So, he said I'd be safer (laughter) if we got, say so I'm coming first chance I get.  We--he came on the train and we got, went to the preacher's house, got married and he got--
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have a big church wedding or anything?
Speaker 2: Oh no, all that was so, done in such a hurry.  My aunt [Joyce Nixon] and our minister's wife [Georgia Gordon Taylor] gave me a shower after he came and married me.  Now, there's something else that was kind of interesting, my minister, Preston Taylor, I wish I knew more about the school because everybody who went to that school, I don't know the name of it, but my minister, Preston Taylor, was minister of Lee Avenue Christian Church [Nashville, Tennessee], that's where I was baptized.  Aunt Joyce had dated this Preston Taylor when they were all in this school, so Preston Taylor owned the cemetery.  His home was in the cemetery.  He was the undertaker.  What else did Preston Taylor--he was undertaker and--
Speaker 1: This is back in Nashville, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah this is Nashville.  He owned the cemetery and I said his home was in the middle of it and that's where the shower that his wife and my Aunt Joyce had.  You see they all went to this school together, but I don't know where Preston Taylor came from.  He looked like a white man.  Well, look like to me everybody who went there at that time looked white because Ms. Taylor, Preston Taylor's wife she was the organist at Lee Avenue Christian Church, and we'd laugh about how, instead of, we said, good soprano voice, we said, Ms. Taylor in there screaming (laughter), but she had in charge of the music, and she and Aunt Joyce had this shower for me.  I got one or two of the pieces still that I got, gifts, shower gifts.  But, all those folks are dead now and I got to find out what goes on at Greenwood Park Cemetery [sic. Greenwood Cemetery, Nashville, Tennessee], but nobody ever says anything about it.  In Nashville now, they seem to have funerals at night and then they get up the next morning and I guess they go to that same cemetery.
Speaker 1: It was called Greenwood Park?
Speaker 2: I think it was Greenwood, but he had his undertaking business, and he was a popular minister.  A lot of folks who wanted him to do their eulogies.
Story_ID: 202769
Speaker 1: And [Greater] Bethel [A.M.E. Church, Nashville, Tennessee] was right--this house that Aunt Joyce's [Joyce Nixon] father had bought was right down the street from Bethel A.M.E. Church and, but we didn't go there.  You see there was this A.M.E. Sunday School Union, that's another place I grew up in, where all the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] material, whether it was hymnals, Sunday school cards, everything that the A.M.E. church used, we made.  I was too young to stay by myself.  Irene [ph.] working at A.M.E. Sunday School Union [AMEC Publishing House, Nashville, Tennessee], instead of going to home, I go to the A.M.E. Sunday School Union.  I'm piddling in everything that goes, typesetting, everything but fold--working in the, in the bindery.  They work by time, flipping, flipping, flipping them papers you know, making hymnals.  You fold them so many ways, and it comes out and then you put it on a press and it's cut into a hymnal.  Oh, everything that the A.M.E. church used, and I'm right in the mix of all that (laughter).  And the folks who ran that who was running the A.M.E. Sunday School Union built a nice building, and then built apartments.  That's where Aunt Joyce had to, she gave up her home, lived in one of those A.M.E. Sunday School Union apartments.  So I said, I got to know a lot of stuff there, but they let me sit in the bookkeeper's desk (laughter).  They let me read to the man who ran the A.M.E. Sunday School Union.  They let me do some of everything 'cause, and they didn't know whether I was an old lady or a child.  The man who ran the A.M.E. Sunday School Union just had a song, "How old is Nan?"  He called me Nan.  They let me read to him, and I worked in the press room.  I read press and I had threatened to go up there and read press for these folks who ran these black newspapers (laughter) 'cause I said I worked at everything in the A.M.E. Sunday School Union anyway and that's where I, when I got married I got married out of the A.M.E. Sunday School Union.
Speaker 2: Okay.  A.M.E. Sunday School Union.  Now, now--
Speaker 1: It's a building that was there on 8th Avenue, right at 8th Avenue and Lee Avenue.
Speaker 2: In Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Yeah and my, where I was baptized is Lee [Avenue] Christian Church [Nashville, Tennessee].  It was right down in that area, see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But then that's--
Speaker 2: Well you got married in 1922 right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Right, okay and--
Speaker 1: July.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your husband's [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] business was started already and--
Speaker 1: It started in 1922.  I'd say he wrote, called and said he was practicing dentistry, and then with the next few weeks he'd made so much money we didn't have to wait 'til Christmas, didn't have to save no money to get married.
Story_ID: 202770
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you now, in 1923 was it, is that when you worked for Atlanta Life Insurance [Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And how did that happen?
Speaker 2: When I wanted to, well you see I wasn't, I didn't consider myself prepared really, but I had finished a business course along as we went to school and so I was, I could be anybody's secretary at that time because I could type and I'd take shorthand and let me see what was that shorthand that we used then, anyway I could take notes in shorthand.  Well, and here I am, my husband [Albert Berry Cooper, Jr.] paying five dollars a week to live in somebody's house.  We were going to live in one of his friend's houses, a man who taught tailoring at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] when he was there in school, but for some reason that man built a new house and we didn't get to live in it right around there on this side of town.  So, this doctor in my husband's office building persuaded him to come and live with them, him, he and his wife, and she was an older woman, and the reason I'm going through all of that, he was a mean man, 'cause she had been one of those who I think fed folks when they were hungry and all of that.  She came there, and she was half white, from Florida, and said she owned orange groves and all that.  So, of course she married him, he married her and then he was a very old mean man.  Every time he came--she taught in the night school and I'm there in that house with just that man and his wife and she was there all day, but she had to go and teach night school.  Well, when she'd come home day or night when he's there he, she was the one buying the cars and all that sort of thing, but he whipped her every time he came in there, just beat her and have a big black eye and everything, so I was scared to death.  And I told my husband about how he would come there and whip her for no reason at all, and I told him, I said, "I'm scared to stay here, so if I had a job to go do every day."  Finally, that, he gave me permission then.  Well, he didn't know how to go about getting me a job, but the folks, the woman who had been our first black librarian had worked with his parents at Morris Brown.  She retired and she was living in one of the AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] buildings, up there where all of AU's building are now.  Well, we lived on what was called, anyway what is it, Northside Drive now, that was just a street that would take us to Nashville [Tennessee].  Anyway, that's where we lived and I thought then, when I said I needed a job, he said, "Well you go up to AU and ask for Ms. [Alice Duggett] Carrie," who was the only black librarian.  She resigned, retired from teaching at Morris Brown with my husband's parents.  All right, she looked at me and I was a little bitty something.  She wanted to know what you could do.  I said, "Well I could be somebody's good secretary."  "All right then you go to Standard Life [Insurance Company], go to Atlanta Life," you go to a Mr. King [ph.], who was a real estate man and so I went--she, my friend that I was rooming with, went me on Sunday to see Mr. King, who was a real estate man.  No, he didn't need anybody.  I went to Standard Life.  All those big men was down here from Washington [D.C.], oh it was a big company.  No, they didn't even have time, they say make an application.  Went to Atlanta Life and there was a nice lady who was a member of some of the families that were popular in the [First] Congregational Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  I can't think of her name right now, but I got it someplace.  So, when I made out that application, filled it out, she looked at it, she said, "Well you have a beautiful handwriting," said, "that might be in your favor," said, "you might hear from us."  And so in a few days, I heard from Atlanta Life, "Come to work"--
Story_ID: 202771
Speaker 1: I went down there [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was just doing beautifully with just being a clerk, with all, everybody who had finished high school that's where they went.  They got a job at Atlanta Life.  Oh, the clerking department was something full of, oh, young women just my age you know.  So, as time went by and they look at me and when they found out I was married to Albert [Berry] Cooper [Jr.] they wondered, well where in the world did he find her.  I was this little bitty somebody, and they said, oh, you mean you married to Albert Cooper?  Well, he's my husband.  Well, say, you know he was going with a pretty girl, long hair, she's, I guess they said yellow skin (laughter) and said she heard he was married, say she was so sick her parents had to take her off on a trip and then they look at me as if to say you ain't got nothing.  I didn't have no hair and I ain't yellow, I ain't (laughter), so finally they teased me so about it, and they didn't know any better, that's just the way they thought about me.  Well, I had nothing to offer, you know and he could have married this girl all white and long hair, so anyway, it kind of got to me 'cause every day they had something else to pick at me.  I thought, I'm saying I'll find out about him, when we got together, I said, daddy you think I'm pretty?  "Pretty?"  That's my husband, "Well I hadn't thought about it."  He said, "Where did that come from, what?"  I said, "Well all the girls at the office tell me that you could have married a pretty white girl and all that sort of thing, long hair" and he said, "oh that, no."  I said, "Well what did you think of me?"  He said, "Well I thought you were the cutest thing I'd ever seen," so all right then I'm cute (laughter).  That's all I needed, but he wondered you know, how come you asking me, we married already and he wondering did I know, did he think I'm pretty.  Well, hadn't thought about it, but anyway I said that kind of gave me a little push, you know, oh yeah, I'm all right, I ain't got no long hair, I ain't real white or nothing but I'm cute, all right, so, everybody, well, I had to be satisfied with being cute and that gave me a little more push, you know.  When they say things to me, I'd say well he ain't so crazy about somebody just because they got long hair.  I ain't got no hair at all, but I'd fix it up and be cute (laughter).  But, then after so long I was doing, you know I could type and I could take shorthand and I could do things like that, but most of them could not do that.  But, after so long all those men, and my husband had said all the time, now you can't work in nobody's office.  You can't work in no man's office.  I knew that, but they all wanted me 'cause I could take shorthand, and I don't remember what it was that we were taking shorthand in those days.  But, anyway no I couldn't take those jobs.
Speaker 2: Now you, you wrote policies right?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah they finally decided--
Speaker 2: You wrote out the policies-- and they used your handwriting--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --for the, explain that?
Speaker 1: Picked up on that handwriting and instead of having the names printed on the policies they paid me extra, two dollars extra a week to put, write the names on the policies.  But by the time I got well into that now I was sick, pregnant and had to come home.  So, that's the only job, the only real paying job I had, but I've done some of everything running these different things (laughter).
Story_ID: 202772
Speaker 1: So did you get to know the Herndons fairly well at all, I mean--
Speaker 2: I knew Ms. [Jessie] Herndon.  See I didn't get to know--'cause the first Ms. Herndon [Adrienne McNeil Herndon] died by the time she got that big Herndon house together.  I think she died maybe about the time my mother [Mollie George Nixon] died or something like that.  She didn't get to live in the house but a little while.
Speaker 1: Tell us something about this house, because--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I've heard that it is something you ought to see, come to Atlanta [Georgia]--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah you ought to see that.  Everybody ought to see it.  It impressed me because black men built it and nobody had any education in those days and that's the finest materials in that house, so everybody, but now you see it's not a place that you go and visit.  I've carried all of my friends there.  Mrs. Herndon and I got to be--the last Mrs. Herndon, you know.  She was a beautician in Chicago [Illinois].  I never learned how Mr. [Alonzo] Herndon met her, but anyway he married her and brought her here.  She was a nice, she was a beautician.  She, and she sat right in front of me in church.  I think that's the way we first got to know each other and then when she have parties she'd invite me to her parties and I invite her to my parties.  I got a bowl in there with all that fruit in it, I won that playing bridge at Mrs. Herndon's.  But, other than that, you know, she would invite younger people in, sometimes she'd--I know through me she had invited some of my neighbors 'cause she'd have company then, and we'd dance at her lovely home.
