Story_ID: 579084
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Kenneth Louis Coleman [HistoryMaker Kenneth L. Coleman], K-E-N-N-E-T-H, Louis, L-O-U-I-S, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December, I was born in December 1st, 1942, in Centralia, Illinois, C-E-N-T-R-A-L-I-A.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is Centralia near, in Illinois is it a?
Speaker 2: Centralia is about three hundred miles for, miles south of Chicago [Illinois], a hundred miles south of Springfield, Illinois, sixty miles north of Carbondale, Illinois where SIU University is, Southern Illinois University, and about seventy miles southeast of St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's pretty exact (laughter).  So and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Today I am chairman of a company called Accelrys [Accelrys, Inc.], A-C-C-E-L-R-Y-S and Accelrys is a leader in software that's used in drug discovery for the pharmaceutical and biotech industry.  As well as used by new material scientists in trying to discover materials, new materials, to be used in all kind of industrial processes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday, the 13th of April 2007.
Story_ID: 579085
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled by management to ask.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I have a favorite food and it would be chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year would be the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Very easy for me my favorite vacation destination is Maui, Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is, leaders lead.
Story_ID: 579086
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history, and I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Louis Coleman] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Katie Owens Coleman, K-A-T-I-E, O-W-E-N-S, Coleman the same as mine obviously.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was Mounds, M-O-U-N-D-S, Illinois, and she was born, well, in 1928 [sic. 1918].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she is deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, or how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Not very, I don't know a lot.  My mother, mother and father died when she was quite young, her father died when she was in grade school and her mother died when she was in high school.  And my mother was born in Mounds and moved, but was raised in Centralia, Illinois, and she had a very small family.  She had no brothers and she had three sisters, but I don't know about where they were before Mounds, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay were they, were they primarily farmers or, or what were they, what was their occupation?
Speaker 2: Yeah they were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay and now is there a tra- tradition that they came from some other place or were they in Illinois, as far back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were, as far as we can understand, they were always in Illinois, we can, we can't trace back further in the South in that side of my family.   Now in, in they're in deep southern Illinois although it's Illinois, this was more south than north okay, in that part of the state, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah it is very southern.
Speaker 2: It's another sixty, hundred, sixty, eighty miles south of Centralia close to the Ohio River, and so this is, this is, this is, even though its Illinois it's more south, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah people tend to think of Chicago [Illinois] when they think of Illinois.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But southern Illinois is a lot like Kentucky or Missouri or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when you get south of Centralia, when you, well if you, many people were on the history of some of the things that went on in Cairo, Illinois.  Which is the southern tip of Illinois and definitely was much more south.  It's on Centralia was started to be the, the transition from South to Midwest.  And many people came there quote to kind of es- escape the South and the Illinois railroad came right there at Centralia, Illinois. And that's a number of blacks came and worked in the railroad in the, the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Now that's the Illinois Central [Illinois Central Railroad]?
Speaker 2: Illinois Central.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a, a stop along the Illinois Central, and it was actually a, an Illinois Central shop, so there were jobs there, they did repair rail cars and stuff.
Story_ID: 579087
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Katie Owens Coleman] talk about growing up, what it was like to grow up in Centralia [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah my mother grew up, she in Centralia quite poor through the Depression [Great Depression] like many people they lost their home during the Depression.  And she did not, because her parents died she did not finish high school, and it was for that era in that time it was a very, you lived on the black part of town.  It was a segregated part of town, but it was viewed, again it was, it was viewed of, when you came to Centralia you were getting out of the South.  So it was a small town like many south towns in the South so it wasn't a big city like Chicago [Illinois], but it was viewed you were escaping the South when you got to Centralia.
Speaker 1: Okay, that--
Speaker 2: Even though it was in it, it was segregated, but it was classified as the Midwest, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a name for the black part of town in Centralia?
Speaker 2: Stickny [ph.], S-T-I-C-K-N-Y.
Speaker 1: Is it named after somebody or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.
Speaker 1: Or, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I'm sure, I'm sure it was, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there, are there, there are physical barrier separated from the town?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I know some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Artificial.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In people's minds (laughter) so it wasn't a railroad track or something, it was just a part of town.
Speaker 1: I know many towns; my hometown there's a bridge, you know--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no.
Speaker 1: --separates you know I mean.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: It was artificial.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very, it was very real (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Very real.
Speaker 1: Now, what is she, now she was in high school, I guess during the war, right, or, or?
Speaker 2: World War I [WWI], not World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Should have been two, right, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah she was born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what two--
Speaker 2: What I told you that, did I say '28 [1928]?
Speaker 1: Yeah you said '28 [1928].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah she was, no she was out of high school, she was married in World War II.
Speaker 1: Okay did she get married during as, as a teenager, she married?
Speaker 2: No, no, she got married in her twenties and so I was, that's why I was struggling a little bit with her age.
Speaker 1: Yeah she would've been twenty in '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: No, no, no, then she was born in, I said twenty. She was '18 [1918] then, born in 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right that's different.  So she was, so she was, yeah she was, yeah the war started after she.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right yeah.
Speaker 1: After those, those the years still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah see I was born in 1942, my mother and my father [Louis Coleman] been married several years before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a maid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was a maid.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Her whole life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she have any, any stories about Centralia in those days and what it was like?
Speaker 2: No I mean when she talked about growing up in Centralia you know it was a small town, she talked a little bit about the difficulty during the Depression.  And but it was a fairly wholesome family life, she had three sisters.  I mean, it was a tragedy she lost both of her parents early, and she would talk about losing her parents, but it wasn't not, it was not a stressful environment to her or negative environment particularly.  It was discrimination and segregation but in those days, that's the way life was.  So to her segregation wasn't a problem, it was an is, and she didn't grow up with any different kind of expectations around that.  But Centralia was not a town that had any racial, a big racial riots and things like that.  There weren't memorable or, or any particular nasty experiences that least she shared with us.
Story_ID: 579088
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Louis Boyd Coleman [Louis Coleman], L-O-U-I-S, Boyd, B-O-Y-D, Coleman.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in, in 1909 in a place called Browns, Tennessee, which is near Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what do you know about his side of the family, how far bar can you trace him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well in that case that's a little more, a little more interesting I guess in that point of view, 'cause my father's father was born a slave in 1865.  And, and they were sharecroppers or they were slaves and then they were sharecroppers in that, in the west Tennessee area.  And the way that side of my family ended up in Centralia [Illinois] was that my grandfather, one of my, my grandfather, one of his daughters had gotten raped by a white property owner. And my grandfather threatened this man and they had to get him out of Browns, Tennessee, otherwise he was gonna be lynched.  And he took the railroad to Centralia, Illinois where, where we had relatives, and that's how my father and his sisters ended up in Centralia.  My father always tells the story the first time he got to Centralia off the train, and he saw the thing, he thought it was snake and it was a water hose.  He had never seen a water hose (laughter) in, in his life.  But, but that was the story about how Thomas Coleman [ph.], my grandfather ended up in Centralia, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, about how old, old was he when he came up to, to Centralia?
Speaker 2: My grandfather?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was in his thirties [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay so that's in 1890s I guess, right, yeah, yeah that.
Speaker 2: Well let's see 1865, 1965, he's '65 [1865]; '05 [1905] was when he, you know it was--
Speaker 1: That's probably about ri- 18--in 1890s, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's, so it's, it just it's, it's amazing how close we are to that, that period of time eight, 1865 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, you--
Speaker 1: It just takes a couple of generations.
Speaker 2: Yeah when you think about my father, my grandfather was born a slave, that's pretty it's just a couple of generations.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's not like hundreds you know, thousands of years ago you know, it really it's a very real time, it wasn't that long that we were slaves.
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I knew my grandfather on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I didn't know my grandparents on moth- they were all deceased by the time I was born.
Speaker 1: Now did he have, well that's a heck of a story there you know to think about you know.  But did he have any other stories about growing up down there during those days of Reconstruction and, and--?
Speaker 2: No and again, no in that part of Tennessee, it was clearly all became; it went from being slaves to sharecroppers.  Very difficult, worked the land, so pretty classic, worked the land, and, and the white people were in charge, clearly.
Story_ID: 579089
Speaker 1: I have one story around that.  I was a little boy about twelve and, I only visit that, where my father [Louis Coleman] grew up one time in my life.  When I was about twelve, and we went into a little store in this little town [Browns, Tennessee], to you know my father to get a newspaper on a Sunday morning, I'll always remember that.  And my father was waiting to pay for the newspaper and he waited and they kept waiting on white people coming in front of us.  So finally he said, "Sir, can I give you money?" And, and the guy behind the counter says, "Boy, you wait."  Again, I said my father's like 6'4" you know he's, he's a man's man and I'm the little kid looking at my father.  And I'd never aseen anybody ever speak to my father with disrespect, and I that's when I realized I was in a different place.  And I felt that place was not for me, I'll always remember that, my, in never before since I haven't seen my father disrespected.  I mean he was a, he was a person of, of imposing figure and he carried himself you know in a way that kind of commanded respect.  But that was my first experience in the South and I knew I was in a different place.  And so that was the kind of community that was at least in those days, and prior to that, and so it was a way, and it was out of the city.  So it's away from Memphis [Tennessee], it was farming; this was a farming community of sharecroppers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tin roofs you know, screen doors, this was the South.
Story_ID: 579090
Speaker 1: Your father [Louis Coleman] was born in 1909, and you're saying that they came to Memphis [Tennessee] when, I mean to Centralia [Illinois], when he, when he was thirty, right?  Was that when he was thirty or, or when?
Speaker 2: No my father would've, my father would've been, came to Centralia when he was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that, okay, it was in, in a I guess in 1910s sometime?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's when he, so that's when he actually, yeah okay, all right.  Oh okay, so did your father have any stories of growing up in?
Speaker 2: Well I don't think he, he didn't talk much about growing up in the South, he talked when he, my father would talk about his life, he talked about when he was a little kid.  He first came to Centralia and that story I told you about the water hose.  Past that, then he talked about also dropping out of high school early and having to work.  He, he always told the story about working and my grandfather [Thomas Coleman (ph.)], when my father would come home with a check, my grandfather would take his check.  And then give back to my father spending money (laughter) and my father didn't like that very much.  But that's the way it was in those days (laughter) and my father ultimately left home, moved to Chicago [Illinois] for a while.  Because he just didn't like the strict rules of my grandfather, but you know in those days, the man of the house was the man of the house, and he ruled the house.  But again, you know but there were not any what I call traumatic, in my family the only traumatic event was the one that happened with my grandfather caused him to move to Centralia.  Past that, was not a particularly eventful childhood that he talked about like had stories of, of difficulty or, or tragedy in the family.
Speaker 1: Well it could be something fun you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No but it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or being part of something, something pro- productive activity not necessarily something tragic.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you know.
Speaker 2: No, no, nothing memorable.
Story_ID: 579091
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did they work for the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad] in Centralia [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Thomas Coleman (ph.)] did, my grandfather worked for the railroad, my father [Louis Coleman] did not, my father was a laborer.  He worked in a, a wrought iron, an iron factory that made iron stoves and iron furniture, and that's where he spent most of his working career.  Although for a while he was a police, policeman in my hometown for a short period of time.
Speaker 1: A policeman?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay now that's, now is there a story, there's gotta be a story behind that.
Speaker 2: Well I think the story was when he came, I was quite young when that was happening but when he came back from the [U.S. military] service, from World War II [WWII], I think he ended up being a policeman.  And I think he did that for a handful of years, not very long, after he came back from the service.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he, you say he was like 6'4", pretty big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was--
Speaker 1: --man.
Speaker 2: --strong man.
Speaker 1: Okay but he was a police officer for a short period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Or was the first black police officer in Centralia?
Speaker 2: Probably, but I can't, I do not know for sure, he probably is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so he was there for a, is there any story about why he, he didn't--
Speaker 2: Stay.
Speaker 1: --stay?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah there are a lot of, there's probably real good story there someplace.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he prob- he may not had told it, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --I mean well not in good stor- I mean not in terms of it being delightful but--
Speaker 2: Story.
Speaker 1: --but very interesting story.  Okay so he would, he would, did, did he go back working with the iron company after that?
Speaker 2: Well he, he, he ended up, I mean when he came out of service, he--the first job he decided to take is become a policeman.  And he was again as a policeman as I was a quite young kid, and for whatever reason, and again I don't know he decided that that was not for him.  And that he ended up being a la- a laborer in this iron factory, and, and sort of he was never a foreman or anything like that.  But he was kind of like a lead there, and he worked in that factory a long time, and I the story, I remember since I grew up in a house that had an outhouse.  And no shower you know, the bathtub was a, a washtub that one of my joys as a kid was to go to his work.  And, and I can take a shower on a Saturday with my father (laughter) in this wrought iron factory.  And I was sort of, that's one of my earliest memories is to be able to take a shower with an overhead shower in this factory with my dad.
Story_ID: 579092
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story as, as to how your parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] met?
Speaker 2: Oh I think they just met in Centralia [Illinois], there's no I don't have the deta- I don't remember the details of that but Centralia was a very small town, fifteen thousand people and probably fifteen hundred black people.  Well everybody knew everybody in that town, so there's nowhere to hide.
Speaker 1: So be hard not to meet, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: It's hard not to meet and everybody knew everybody, including when I grew up.  In that town been fifteen thousand people for a very long time.
Speaker 1: Well do they have courtship story?
Speaker 2: No, it, there was no, I'm sure there's a courtship story and I even may have heard it, but I don't remember, not one that stuck in my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my father was a little older than my mother, and she was a very attractive woman, I remember that.
Story_ID: 579093
Speaker 1: When you think about their personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well let me answer the question in another way 'cause I sometimes when I have, when I give speeches, I kind of explain my parents and the impact they have on me.  And so and the way I explain is, is my father [Louis Coleman] was a chairman of the board of my family, and the CEO, I mean he was in charge he was a very strong man.  And very clear about what he expected from himself and from his kids, and, and he, he was quote, a man's man.  He was the king of the castle, and he believed, he carried, and his personality commanded respect.  And he could be harsh and stern and difficult, and I call my mother was vice chairman and head of human resources okay?  Because she was sensitive you know, nobody disliked Katie Coleman [Katie Owens Coleman] you know she was very sensitive.  She had great listening skills and she had a very pleasing demeanor, she did not create enemies, and it was this balance between my mother and father that made life tolerable, okay?  And but my mother was probably maybe too soft, my father would've been too hard, and there was the bridge of growing up in that, that household was that they tended to balance each other.  And so I think I have a little bit of both in my family, you know, I'm--my father you would always say you know that a man responsibility taking care of his family.  You always walk into a place the, you walk out of a place the way you walk into it, and that you carry yourself in a certain way.  And I feel very sensitive about that, that influenced who I, who I am.  But my mother had this sensitivity for people, what made people to and, and that she always had the same, but they, they had two sayings.  My father saying that impacted me the most was, "Whatever you do, do it well, okay, if it's worth doing, do it well.  If you gonna be a ditch digger, be the best one in the world."  My mother was always saying, "Do what's right; all you can ask of yourself is do what's right, okay."  And so it's those two things you know, do, whatever you do, do well, be driven by what's right, what's fair, what's just.  It's kind of the way I frame who I am.
Story_ID: 579094
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well I've one of my earliest childhood memories was the one with the showers with my father [Louis Coleman], probably that early childhood memory is I remember my fa, the day my father came back from the war [World War II, WWII].  And I can remember this large man that was my father with this big army coat on.  And that joy in the house, okay, and I'm overwhelmed by this big figure, okay, who was my father, and that's probably the earliest memory I have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, and I, and I can just remember him being tall and big in this big army coat and everybody's crying and laughing and happy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would've probably been two.
Story_ID: 579095
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in Stickny [ph.] or to?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember a four room house, four room house, two bedrooms, a living room and a kitchen, me and three sisters.  And we had an outhouse and I remember when we got running water when I was I don't know four or five years old.  We didn't have running, we didn't have running water yet to the house, we had it to the street, but you had to go bring in buckets of water back to the street, before we had running water in the house.  So I was you know getting better a transition time in society, but we, we were quite poor.  We had our own house but it was you know, it was an outhouse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did you have hot water?
Speaker 2: Again we didn't even have running water in the house, and it was definitely not hot, we got hot water later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably by time I got into grade school [Lincoln School, Centralia, Illinois], we probably had hot water before that we had to, we get the water hot on the stove.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's some of probably a lot of young peep, people today don't, can't fathom not having you know having to boil your water to get it heated up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And, and when I was a kid the iceman brought ice by every day you know (laughter) you didn't, have, you didn't have, you didn't have icemakers (laughter) okay.  And so the, the iceman would bring ice and then you put the ice in the refrigerator.
Speaker 1: Well a, a town like Centralia [Illinois] did they, did they, did the iceman come in a, did he have a motorized truck or was he?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: By that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah he, he every now and then when I was a young kid I can remember every now and then seeing a horse but that would be highly unusual.  You, you had automobiles and, in time I re- when I grew up my father [Louis Coleman] had a car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't and you know, again I'm, I'm a product of World War II [WWII], and so I was in that transition in society.  I remember when we fir- we didn't have a TV and I'd go watch TV at a neighbor's house.  And then I remember having black and white TV, really little (laughter), but when I was a little kid, we listen to radio.  And you know, "The Shadow knows" ['The Shadow'] and, and things like that you know and or your hear boxing on, on the radio when I was a little bitty kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you know I, I was, I'm fortunate in, in that I what saw radio, TV, black and white TV, little TV to color TV to digital TV today.  So we've seen a lot in, in these sixty-four years, a lot of changes in society.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Centralia, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well I had a happy childhood, I had three sisters, you know we played a lot together, we were close, my father [Louis Coleman] worked a lot.  My mother [Katie Owens Coleman] worked a lot, we were expected to be responsible kids, you know the neighborhoods were close.  And that and you knew that if your parents weren't home that the people were around the neighborhood were looking at you.  And so you (laughter) you couldn't just ig- you know people cared about each other's kids, so it was a true neighborhood in, in that way.  And school was a very important part of, of the community and, and, and so your sch- in those days, school teachers whooped kids (laughter) okay and so they were, you know disciplinarian and your parents totally supported that.  The worst thing that can happen is the teachers wanted to talk to your parents about something you done wrong in school.  Teachers were considered very important, they had a very important standing in the community.  In, so in the community there were the preachers, teachers and one doctor (laughter) and those were kind of the elite blacks in the community.  And so all those people you looked up to in, in your community.
Story_ID: 579096
Speaker 1: You were talking about the black professionals in town.
Speaker 2: Right, right. But you know as I, when I, as I think about my childhood and some of the memories and images of childhood, I re- you know I remember that because my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] both tended to work at a very early age, we were expected to be responsible children.  Especially me and my older, the sisters next to me, and I always, I remember once my baby sister, my youngest sister falling in a, in a, in a, in a bathtub or you know these, these washtubs that we took baths in.  She was a little girl and she almost drowned, I always remember that, I remember, and I remember once she drank a, a, some fly spray.  You know and got very ill, and I, and, and the reason I remember those two things, I remember how angry my mother was.  Because I and my sister were supposed to be looking out after our baby sister.  And so that since of responsibility at a very early age is something that I can remember being impressed upon me very strongly.  I remember sitting on my porch and right next to my house was this open field, well in those days an open field became a great place for sports.  And that people used to play baseball and softball, and I can remember sitting on my porch, as a very young kid and saying, I wanna be able to play that, okay.  And aching to be out there with those older kids playing and that's an image that I, I remember growing up, as a kid.
Speaker 1: So were you the oldest of the, of the?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of four, and I'm the only boy and had three sisters.
Speaker 1: And so a lot of responsibility on you I would think.
Speaker 2: Me and my, I have a sister who's eighteen months younger than I am, and it was her and I, but was the oldest, and I, and that meant you had certain responsibilities.  It didn't feel weighty so it wasn't you know, but it feel that you were responsible (laughter) and so it wasn't a burdensome.  But I think it re- it had, it ended up affecting today my sense of responsibility.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: No question.  So those are my you know early age images before school, I remember my first image of school [Lincoln School, Centralia, Illinois] is walking the sec- my mother walked me to school on my first day.  But I remember being a young first grader in the wintertime; I had this image in my head walking down the street.  And again this is a little town and that there's water on both sides of the south--the sidewalk.  And the winds blowing very hard and I'm walking by myself, and I can remember this fear of being blown into the water (laughter) and drowning.
Speaker 1: Now you mean the water what, what are we talking about a body of water of just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it, it like a--
Speaker 1: --or, or just a rain collected?
Speaker 2: It's you, rain being collected in a field and sidewalk walking in, in this both sides. And I'm sure the water wasn't very deep but to a little kid (laughter) you know I just had this fear the wind blowing me in the water.  And I had, that's the image I had okay of walking to the school on a cold blistery fall day in Centralia, Illinois.
Story_ID: 579097
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Yeah where did you go to grade school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to grade school called Lincoln School in Centralia, Illinois; it was a one through eight, all black.  All the students were black, all the teachers were black.
Speaker 1: Okay I assume there was a white one, a white grade school too?
Speaker 2: Oh there were a number of white grade schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, how, how many black grade, grade schools were?
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One black school, grade school and you know probably eight or so white grade schools.
Speaker 1: Was the, was your school crowded or?
Speaker 2: No it didn't feel crowded there were probably in, in the classroom there were thirty kids or so, it didn't feel crowded.
Speaker 1: All right, now did, did you have a favorite subject in school or favorite activity?
Speaker 2: Well favorite activity was basketball, I love basketball as a school kid we played basketball every day on the school ground.  And we had a principal, our principal was named Harold Walker [William Harold Walker], he was actually a Tuskegee Airman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had been one previously in the war [World War II, WWII] and I always remember he was the principal of our school and he taught the eighth grade half time.  But he would get out and play basketball with the kids at recess time, and I remember loving basketball.
Speaker 1: Now did you know he was a Tuskegee Air- Airman at the time, was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He talked about it, I, I don't know if I knew when I was in first or second grade, but in time I got out of school, it was very clear he would talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't a, did you have a sense of, in those days was, now they recently were re- just honored here by the president [President George Walker Bush]--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --in the year 2007 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --but in those days did people really I mean where, did you have the sense of the significance of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well I don't know a sense of significance as the way that you would understand today, but we knew it was something special (laughter) you know (background noise).  I knew it was important, something he was proud of, I felt good about and he talked about it with pride, and, and, and he was probably an early hero of mine.  'Cause it was this double image one of this principal who had been successful pilot in, in the, in the Army Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force].  And two is but he was willing to get on the basketball court and play basketball with a fourth grader.  And so he was a, he was a clearly an image that I admired and respected, and I knew this Tuskegee Airman thing was a big thing.  But I had no way of understanding the significance really of it, of this something I felt good of and proud of.  And he talked about it with pride.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that, it, it sound like a very special kind of situation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --having a, him for a principal.
Speaker 2: And, and, as a, as a kid back to my, my school experience 'cause I think its import- I, I was not up through the fifth, fourth grade, going into fifth, I was not, I was a pretty average student, I believe.  And I didn't excel particularly in and the fifth grade changed me, the academics, well the importance, 'cause I remember in the fifth grade we had to do long division.  And there's nothing, and long division required time, effort, work, it wasn't hard other than you had to put time in to get it.
Story_ID: 579098
Speaker 1: And I remember not getting, doing the work and going in to Mr. Walker's [William Harold Walker] office more than once laying across the chair and getting my hiney whipped.
Speaker 2: Oh they would, you can get corporal punishment for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not doing your homework.
Speaker 2: --bad academic perfor- okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not doing your homework.
Speaker 1: Not doing your homework.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I remember after about three times that this made no sense to me (laughter) okay, and I said, and I started doing the work, okay?  And getting the positive feedback from doing the work and it was that, so that was my transition year academically.  And by time I've gone from the fifth grade to the seventh, to the ei- well in by time I got after, the eighth grade [at the Lincoln School, Centralia, Illinois], I had decided that excelling academically was as a competitive of a sport as playing baseball or basketball.  So when I went in the eighth grade we had a, a, a teacher in the, that taught half of the eighth grade, no, some, no seventh grade not eighth grade.  In the seventh grade we had a teacher named Mr. Poke [ph.] and Mr. Poke if you missed a word in spelling you get one lick for every word you missed.  And I said, I challenged myself, said I am never gonna miss a word; I'm not gonna get one lick.  So I went from getting my backside whipped in the fifth to saying, "I'm no (unclear) and I ain't so," I had a perfect spelling year that year.  And it was only me and one, one girl classmate that did that all year and that was a great sense of pride.  And so what had happened to me in a, in a two year period of time, going from not doing the work to viewing, excelling academically as a competitive challenge.  And the rest is history, at least what I did academically, but that's an interesting transformation over twenty-four months.  And literally it was getting my hiney whipped on the backside saying, "That doesn't make sense, it's gotta be a better way, okay?"  To start doing the work, start getting positive feedback for doing the work to changing my view of economic, I mean of academics.
Speaker 2: Okay, you look back at that now I mean it seems kind of drastic you know in some ways around homework but do you think that maybe schools are too easy on students today in terms of?
Speaker 1: You know I, you know I again I wouldn't believe in corporal punishment today, but I think trying to create a sense of you know the question is how do you treat a sense of excellence, competition, success, reward with academic?  And how do you--so the challenge I think in society is how, for me it became a lifelong activity from that to be as competitive in academically if I wasn't in anything else, including sports.  And once those competitive achievement juices get flowing, then people do what it takes to achieve.
Speaker 2: Now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the question is, how do you create that environment that--it got created one way in that time for me.  I'm not saying that you could do it that way today, but the challenge is the same, how do you take a young you know ten year old boy and get that person excited about achieving and competing academically. That's the challenge.
Speaker 2: Now I'm sure it must've been some discussion now accompany these, wha- whippings in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was very clear, "Do the work," (laughter), very clear, "Do the work," and it was about the work.  It wasn't about ability; it was about being lazy and not doing the work.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then when you do the work and you get the pos- clearly, as first it was a negative motivator, right, that's that.  But once you start doing the work and you got the positive feedback, it became you know one of achievement.  And, and then what happen when one achieves, gets positive feedback, want to achieve more, increasing your confidence, set higher standards for yourself.  I decided the stuff I created, I didn't want to miss a word, nobody else, I made that decision on my own.  That I could do that and I challenged myself because I wanted to be the best in the class by then.  Okay so how do you create that, that motivation in human being is a challenge that we have as parents or as educators or a society.
Story_ID: 579099
Speaker 1: When you went to high school you went to Centralia [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois], right, that that's the one, the one high school.  Is that the one high school for the whole town?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how did, I mean that, now, now this is integrated now the first time, right?
Speaker 2: No it didn't, the high school had always been integrated 'cause it was only one high school.  So it was integrated way back in my parents' [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so but this is your first integrated experience (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah okay as I say it's very important so, so, so again so I, when you graduated from eighth grade [at the Lincoln School, Centralia, Illinois] you're going to a high school, it's an integrated setting.  Now I had never, before I got to high school, my only interaction with white kids were through sports.  And there were two situations one is you know you play Little League in the summer, now you'd play all on a black team but you play against white kids, on the white teams, okay?  So the Little League, league was integrated in that team, black teams the white teams played each other.  But the teams themselves weren't integrated, with one black team and a bunch of white teams just like the schools were.  And then the seventh and eighth basketball team was an all-star team that played other towns, and, and they came from different schools.  And I was on the seventh and eighth grade basketball team and track team and softball team.   There was an integrated team that came from all the kids, best kids in this town, we played other towns.  So that was by time I got to high school that was my only interaction with white kids.  'Cause everything else was completely segregated in the town.  So you go to a white integrated high school in 1955, and my first memory is, is and I hadn't been in school a week.  Standing around and talking to some black kids and seeing a sign saying, "Run for student council."  And not knowing any better I said, "I'm gonna run," (laughter), and I ran and became secretary-treasurer of the freshman class.  And I think was the first black kid to be on the student council in my high school.  But I didn't know any better, I didn't, I didn't view myself breaking ground, being the first of anything or that it was some big deal.  I just said, "That sounds like an interesting thing to do."  And, and I thought about this a lot, what caused me to be, do it and I, I felt that by that time, I was confident I could compete, okay.  And competed in an all black environment but I hadn't put racial constraints on my ability to compete.  And so I ran 'cause I had thought about it and knew what I knew then I may not of, have run.  I may have said, "How could you win?" But, but this so this whole sense of confidence and of competing had me run and I won.  And that was a very important happening in my life because then I became an acam- a leader in my high school and was on the student council for several years as a kid.
Speaker 1: Had there been a any type of black predecessor to you in term, terms of doing that kind, kind of thing or were you the, as far as you know the first black person to you know obtain a leadership position in at, at that school?
Speaker 2: Yeah the all, all the blacks as far as I know I was the first black person to obtain a true leadership position in the school.  Lot of great black athletes had come through the school; including Bobby Joe Mason who played for Bradley [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois].  And played for the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] and Bill Norwood [William R. Norwood] who became the first black airline pilot [for United Airlines] who would, went from Centralia.  He played actually quarterback in high school in Centralia and played quarterback at SIU [Southern Illinois University] down in Carbondale [Illinois].  But as far as I know there were not really blacks involved in, in government, student government.  Remember I was a product, so I'm '55 [1955] so that was just when black power and integration was on the lips of everybody.  And so I was, came along at a period of, of transition and where things started getting challenged about.
Story_ID: 579100
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-five [1955] yeah, we, we were like it was pre-Montgomery Bus Boycott and just about you know we were.
Speaker 2: People just starting to talk about those issues now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: And so my hometown, the pool was not integrated yet, you couldn't go, you couldn't go to the bowling alley.  There were things you couldn't do, but people at least starting to question whether that was right, before that segregation was a way of life and people didn't question, you know in, in 1950.  People didn't question whether it was right or not, it was; it was what it was, but people were just starting to question.  You started to see images on TV and you know, so things were starting to, to change around, around those issues.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember the Emmett Till situation?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: I remember all those situations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again we didn't have, so again we were far enough away that that, an Emmett Till situation was something that's not something you worried about in Centralia [Illinois].  You know you didn't worry about lynchings and things like that.  Again, there're taboos, things you didn't do, okay.
Speaker 1: Wa- was it, what were the downtown facilities segregated in terms if you went downtown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The facilities weren't segregated, but the jobs were okay, so you could go and sit at the counter.  But as a kid in high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois], good student, good athlete, I could work in the summer in the factories, but I couldn't work at J.C. Penney's [J.C. Penney Company] downtown.  Those jobs were not for black kids, the white collar jobs were for the white kids, the black kids did manual labor jobs.  And that was again very clear.
Speaker 1: So you could be a say a stockman at J.C. Penney, but you couldn't be on the floor?
Speaker 2: You couldn't be on the floor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You couldn't be on the floor that was not, there were no black people working on the floor, adults or kids.  And so you had these artificial lines and, or rules that everybody knew and in, in when I was growing up nobody questioned.  You know you went, you sit in the balcony in the movie, you couldn't go to the swimming pool you know you couldn't go to the bowling all- alley.  There were things you didn't do, okay, and just when I was in high school, those things started being challenged around the country.  And, therefore, people start whispering that into town, that weren't people weren't challenging the town, but people whispering you know.  "Well is this right, is that right?"
Speaker 1: Okay now do, do you remember there was a, I think it's a, about two years ago a man from Chicago [Illinois] wrote a book called 'Sundown Town' ['Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism,' James W. Loewen] so I don't know you heard of this.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They talk about on National Public Radio [NPR] and got, got some other play on television, on public television that about and he studied these towns in Illinois.  And they're all over the country where blacks were, had to be out of town by sundown.  They could go there and work and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was not true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Centralia that was not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why I know it wasn't Centralia but--
Speaker 2: And, and I don't remember that, anybody ever talking about that in any towns around that.  There were clearly and I don't think it would've been true because the jobs, blacks ended up in the towns in southern Illinois that had jobs.  So Centralia, Carbondale [Illinois], Mt. Vernon [Illinois], East St. Louis [Illinois], those places had jobs.  And the little towns that were purely farming towns that didn't have jobs didn't tend to have black people, okay?  And so, so people came to Centralia blacks did because the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad] and there were jobs or went to Mt. Vernon because there were jobs.  And so but the other little and maybe tend to be the bigger towns, 'cause they had some industrial jobs not just farming communities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't even remember anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no.
Story_ID: 579101
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned before we started the interview that [HistoryMaker] Roland Burris was from that area?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This, was he, did was he, he, you're younger than, than Roland (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Roland was out of high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois], he's about five years older than I am, so we were not in high school the same time.  His fa- Roland's fam- Roland Burris' family owned a grocery store in my hometown in the black part of town.  And I used to work in that grocery store on the weekends.  And so I knew Roland was a good student and I think he went to law sch- sent to college and then to law school.  And so it was, he was one of those kids that you knew that parents would say you know he's a good kid, he's gonna do well.  But I didn't share high school experience with Roland.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he seem, did, did he you see him as some kind of role model or to aspire to be like in those days?
Speaker 2: Well Ro- he was considered a good kid, but I don't think anybody in those days, nobody had, would have those kinds of expectations.  If you were a good kid, it meant you're gonna go to school and be a school teacher, that was, that was about as much aspiration that anybody would have.  I mean I don't think anybody in Centralia [Illinois] thought a kid might go and be a doctor. We had one black doctor, no black lawyers.  And so, so the model for success for a kid, a black kid when I grew up, was to go off to college, graduate and become a school teacher.  'Cause the, the school teachers was the only thing in my hometown that had numbers of all that created a success model.  You know there were nine, ten school teachers in the whole town, so that was the biggest community of successful black people in the town.  And so that was the model of success, so yeah you could envision Roland being a good enough kid to go and be a school teacher.  You know I, my, I had a vision I'd be very fortunate I went to college and became a school teacher, that was my ambition.  I mean I was a, and I was, my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] would've been thrilled with that, my desire to do that if I had done that.
Story_ID: 579102
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely very important part of my growing up, my sister and I were baptized on the same day.  At New Bethel Baptist Church [New Bethel Missionary Baptist Church] in Centralia, Illinois, we, we were baptized on her birthday, April 9th.  And I think we were twelve, so that would've been fifty--it was '52 [1952], '53 [1953], '54 [1954] not--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '54 [1954] right.
Speaker 2: About that time of my life and I was a junior deacon in the church and which was my, again a, a position of leadership for youth in my, my little church.  I was in the choir and junior usher but, but I wasn't a, I wasn't a very good singer so (laughter) so being in the choir was not (laughter) not some highlight of my youth okay (laughter) since I didn't carry a tune.  But, but yeah, my, I was even as a little kid a Sunday school teacher.  And, and so growing up in the church was a very important part of my life, and it's something that my sister and I shared together.  Give, given we were, we always talk about being baptized on the same Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And again early being it, having been a junior, being a junior deacon was probably my first, or one of my earliest memory of a leadership position as a kid.  And that was before I was in high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay the average so age wo- would you say was a very important (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, no question.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As this is Southern Baptist this is pretty classical Baptist church, okay, but all the images you would have about you know good choir, fiery speaker.  You know we could walk to church, my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] weren't overly religious so you, they went what I call overly religious.  They didn't go to church every Sunday, so my sister and I actually went to church more often than my parents.  Now my grandfather [Thomas Coleman (ph.)] on the other hand, was very involved in church, and my parents got more involved later in their lives.  But my sister and I really got involved in, in the church youth group and became a very important part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you think it was like the social aspect of it that was kind of a, a lure to, to be, be involved with other kids doing things and?
Speaker 2: No I wouldn't say, I, I think that would be an overstatement, I don't think it was just we, we got touched by God.  We got, we enjoyed church and I got touched, we both got touched, and so we enjoyed the experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it wasn't any more socially attractive than other things we did with kids in our neighborhood.
Story_ID: 579103
Speaker 1: What was the popular culture like when, in 1955 when you started Centralia [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: High school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was like the, you're right on the cusp of the beginning of rock and roll and all that, I mean in those days and?
Speaker 2: Yeah in fact so when I first started going out and dancing it was pretty much prior rock and roll is was you know.  So it's the music of the early '50s [1950s] and then as pretty you know honkytonk kind of stuff, in the early part of my--but then as I got in high school and older you know you start having Motown [Motown Records] started right, so I lived through that, that, that transition.  Motown, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson all that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did you have a favorite musicians, you know in those days?
Speaker 2: Well clearly I, I'm a Motown favor- you know Smokey Robinson probably would be my earlier favorites that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know when, earlier when I was younger I was a blues, all the blues guys you know, and we had one little joint that the kids all went down and danced.  And you know, so with that was you know a very typical teenage small community.  One black joint, juke joint you went to (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Lonnie's [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a little juke joint in the you know and you, you beg your parents to let you go and then you go and get sweaty and dance and have a good time.  And, but you, you didn't have a problem you have today with kids and it was no, no drugs or anything like that.  And the worst thing a kid do is smoke a cigarette you know about as bad as you get in trouble.  You didn't even have to worry about liquor; kids weren't drinking liquor in these clubs in this little club when I was growing up, or very few kids were.  So it was again a small town environment, so it was pretty safe in that, compared to what kids here exposed to today.  And so, so your parents got, you had to be home at a certain time, but your parents weren't worried about you getting shot or cut or in drugs.  None of those you never had conversations about you know, the worst case you know, don't smoke cigarettes and don't be caught drinking anything, you know. That's about as bad as it got.
Story_ID: 579104
Speaker 1: You were doing some reflecting as we were changing the tape about--
Speaker 2: Yeah I was reflecting a little bit on some of the questions you had asked.  And that normally when I think about my childhood and growing up, I think typically about the things that I think more directly affect who I am today, and of my success in my life.  Versus just some of the images and, I was just thinking and reflecting on a couple images and things that I don't ended up, and bra- I didn't embrace.  So it, and so as a man, my father would take me small game hunting he was a hunter.  And we hunted rabbits and squirrels and opossums and coon and things like that, small game, down in, southern Illinois.  And I'd go with him, but I never really enjoyed it (laughter) you know it was not my thing.  And I shot only moderately well and didn't like cleaning the animals, I loved eating some game even today, but it wasn't my thing.  So I, I've never owned a weapon, a gun in, in my life 'cause it just wasn't my thing.  So I don't normally think about that part of myself, but it was time I would spend with my father.  And closeness and walking in fields with him, I remember those images, but it didn't, they're not as close as some of the things that affect who I am.  Another thing that I didn't embrace since then is we had, we always had a garden in my backyard [in Centralia, Illinois] and, and we raised you know corn and tomatoes and beets and many different vegetables.  And that was part of what you know today be out here in California a lot of people do that that's kind of ecofriendly et cetera.  And eating fresh vegetables we did that out of necessity.  When I grew up, but again I don't have a green thumb so it's not something I've embraced as an adult, but that was an experience that I had.  We even raised, after war [World War II, WWII], the most special meal you had which we tended to have on Sunday was chicken.  Which is my, still my favorite food today.  And after war you could buy through mail order, chickens, and my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] would buy through mail order, chickens.  So we raised chickens in my backyard, and we would kill those chickens and cook them on Sunday and that was our special meal on Sundays quite often.  Those are images of you know postwar America and poor black kids and again chicken today is my favorite meal, 'cause that's what we used to have on Sundays.
Story_ID: 579105
Speaker 1: You played basketball for the high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in high school I played basketball, football, I ran track for two years, played baseball for two years.  And I was, I went from a town that's famous for basketball in Illinois, and it's historically has had, at least when I was.  Prior to me and post me, had very good basketball teams, and I played four years of basketball and was captain my senior year in basketball.  Our teams were, were, were not great teams.  My junior year we had a good basketball team, but not great.  The only other, the time I played, our football teams in Centralia [Illinois] the time I played were, were exceptional.  When I was a junior we were ranked sixth in the nation as a high school football team by Parade magazine.
Speaker 1: Really, that's, that's, pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were only one score, we're undefeated and the one score I think, in four years in high school football I only played in one losing football game.  And so we had very good football, I was a guard in basketball, and I was a point guard in basketball, and I was a wide receiver in football.  The year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were on point guard on, on the basketball team, which is interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was point guard in basketball.
Speaker 1: In an integrated basketball team.
Speaker 2: Yes, integrated basketball team, integrated football.
Speaker 1: So they must've really respected you, to--
Speaker 2: Yeah so it's really interesting I thought about this 'cause you see the reason people talk about it and, and I kind of knew this.  In, in basketball there was this unwritten rule that now I understand that people kind of talked about it, but you didn't, it wasn't again, it wasn't, this image that was right here in your face.  But you kind of knew it, and that was you know on a basketball team on the floor you tend to never have no more than three blacks at any one time.  It was just kind of unwritten thing, but you, but you had blacks, but you couldn't win and winning mattered, okay.  In football we just didn't have the numbers, so you would never you know have a chance of having more blacks than white on a football team at one time.  We just didn't have enough numbers, it's a numbers game, but, but athletics was a very important part of my growing up.  The ability to compete, the ability of teamwork, you know operating a team, the relationship with hard work and results really kept you out of trouble.  So there were lots of good things happened for me as a kid being, being an athlete.
Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Highly, I highly recommend that young men and women be involved in sports.  There are many lessons in life that are really important in being in--part of a sport and the things you might learn from that experience.
Speaker 1: Now were you close with your coach?
Speaker 2: Well we, it's a, was pretty much impossible in that environment to be close to coach where there was a feeling that coach was like God (laughter) okay.  And so, so, so I was not what I consider, or I think any of the kids white or black, would be close to the coach.  Now because I was quote, a good kid, that is I worked ca- I mean I was a successful athlete through hard work and through dedication and through a reasonably intelligent athlete, versus super skills, okay.  And so I think coaches respect people who work hard, are coachable okay. They, you know they liked great athletes okay, but they respect I think people who kind of approach sports the way I became a good athlete through that.  And when--so like I said I was captain of the basketball team and so I was a good athlete, very coachable and coaches liked and respected and would listen to you.  But I wasn't close to them when I was in high school, closer after I became an adult actually with some of them.  But again it was a very positive experience for me and my, and who I've become, no question.
Story_ID: 579106
Speaker 1: When it came time for the prom and all that was there a social situation or was it, was, did everything work out all right?
Speaker 2: Well things like, so we talked about athletes, talked about student council, so as far as things like the prom and things like they're you know they were integrated proms.  But you didn't have integrated dates, okay, and clearly once I had this, this white girl who's now a woman who's a friend of mine.  Her and I used to talk on the phone and one day I got called into the principal's office who says, "You shouldn't be talking on the phone with that white girl."
Speaker 1: The principal?
Speaker 2: Yeah, called me into the office and says, "You do not do that," and I said, "Yes, sir," you know, white guy.  I didn't realize I'd violated some, again unwritten rule for talking to some girl on the phone. We weren't even courting.  And so again I think when my growing up there were all these unwritten rules, in fact it's fascinating today.  I'm on emails with a bunch of kids from my high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois], white kids, or white people; we're all in our sixties now, and, and I think their view of the rules and experiences and my view are totally different, it's fascinating to me, okay.  They were viewed that we're much closer as kids than we were; I didn't get invited to their house, okay or to their parties.  Where if I'm in town and I'm invited to everybody's house and parties today, and they kind of remember it the way it is.  Not the way it was, and to me I just find it interesting that their view of history, because they didn't experience it on my side of the tracks.  It's just quite different in my view of history, not that it was bad, it was just different, and I, I think that's, I find that interesting, and, and intriguing.  And a little bit humorous actually when I think about it, and I laugh at them sometimes I say, "Are you--you just don't remember how it really was, okay."  But yeah, so we had integrated prom, I was, I was in the math club and the Ger- I was president of the math club, president of the German club in my high school.  And so I was, I was a leader, people considered me a leader and I was respected by my peers in school and I had friends but wo- but I didn't have any white kids who were really, really close at that period of time.  I've become close to some of my classmates, much closer since then.
Story_ID: 579107
Speaker 1: I do have one story that, that-to share with you that, that's, that's important, and I often tell this story when I give speeches.  So I was as I mentioned I was a freshman, I was the secretary-treasurer of my class, a sophomore in high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois] I was the vice president of my class.  And I was destined to be president of the junior class, it was kind of like the way it happened in this school, and that was kind of like on that path.  And I was a, and I was a good student and I graduated like out of 222 kids, I graduated you know like five, number five in my class something like that.  And history was one of my favorite subjects and I was really good in history and I even considered being a history major in college, I chose not to.  But I considered it seriously.  Well one day prior to elections for the, the junior class elections, my history teacher, Miss McCullough [ph.], I always remember this woman, asked me to stay in after class.  And I was curious as she had, it was a big deal for a young kid for the teacher to ask you, you know. So she says, and I'm a good student so I thought it was something about school or I mean 'cause I was doing very well in class.  She says, "Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth L. Coleman], are you gonna run for the junior class president?" And I said, "Yes ma'am." She says, "Well I don't think that's a good idea."  And I said, "Why?" She says, "You're gonna play sports again aren't you?" "Yes." She says, "Well the junior class runs all the concessions for sports to pay for the junior, senior prom.  Since you're an athlete you cannot properly discharge your responsibility of managing that if you were president of the class.  So I don't think you should run." I didn't run.  Now in hindsight it's very clear to me why that woman had that conversation with me.  As a young kid I always wanna do the right thing, so I missed the opportunity to be president of my class because the teacher took and manipulated the young black kid who wanted to do the right thing.  And you know that's, that's an insidious view of racism that I got manipulated by a person who would have devious motives.  And that's what possibly happened. Not that I didn't get an okay with all of that.  And I didn't even know what happened; you know what I mean, at that time.  But it's clear since then that's the only motivation for this woman to have this conversation for me, with me.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's interesting though when you, at the time when you're a kid you don't, you think, well maybe but--you don't really you say, "No, well ma- nobody would do that."  But now at this age you can really (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You can see it, and see it as clear as day, or I tell people the story people can see it as clear as day.  But you know for me I was being manipulated and I just wanna do the right thing you know; I wanted to be a good kid, okay.  But you can see how somebody can manipulate a young person into doing something that's not to their best interest.  I tell that story you know 'cause it's pretty dramatic but, and I will--you know I realized a year later that that had happened.  It took me only a year to figure out that, that I had gotten manipulated.
Story_ID: 579108
Speaker 1: What was your aspiration in, in high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois]?  Now when you, when you were in high school on the verge of graduation, did you still see yourself as well if I can become a teacher or something I really have?
Speaker 2: Yeah so my aspiration when I, so you, you, my situation I'm a good student, my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] don't, my parents thinking, knowing that college is a good thing.  But not knowing what that meant, they just know it was a good thing.  Teachers and counselors view that the best thing that a black kid can aspire to is be a school teacher, so I aspired to be a math teacher.  I was good in math, I aspired to be a math teacher, and in trying to figure out where to go to college, I was a little bit dis- of this dilemma of, do I go to a really small place and try to play sports?  Or do I go to a little bigger place and not worry about playing sports 'cause I wasn't, I was good enough to play sports at a small place.  And but I could go to a bigger place, probably a better academic environment and, but not be good enough to play sports.
Speaker 1: Now, now were you offered scholarships in sports by any of the?
Speaker 2: I was not offered full ride scholarships but in some small schools I was off, offered granted aid, kinds of scholarships.  And so I ended up going my freshman year at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and played 'cause I had granted aid scholarship, partial scholarship and I can play basketball.  Which I did but I figured out that I wasn't gonna play on the varsity, that I would make the team do a lot of work, but sat on the bench.  And I said there's a better way, and ended up at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] where I knew I couldn't play but I could, great academics.  And I had changed what I thought my major was gonna be and the, the thing that my freshman year in college said I knew I was good in math.  But I really, there were more thing in life than teaching school, okay.  And, and so and I had worked in a factory so, I had worked in a factory and I was good in math.  And the correction was, could I have a major that where quantitative things matter?  But it was much more dealing with people and that and that brought you in the factory in being maybe a foreman or plant manager.  So I start saying maybe that can inspire, I can at least aspire to being a foreman, and so I ended up majoring in what's called industrial management.  And industrial management is, at Ohio State was a, a very quantitative program by where I had to have statistics minor.  It's in the business school [The Ohio State University College of Commerce and Administration; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] but you took half of your courses in industrial engineering, so my, my, my, my academic training really is you know industrial engineering, statistics, with a business orientation.  And you were being trained to be a plant manager, and I thought that was a huge change you know an aspiration.  But it was driven by my experience in working in a factory and I thought that if I can do that it would be cool, okay.  And so that's how I up choosing my major.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I had to figure the, the thing that you, that I, I was a relatively resourceful kid, I had to figure this out.  I mean nobody was there, weren't counselors who would help you figure this out and then people tended to keep aspirations for black kids quite down.  So I had to figure this out myself by watching other people and listening--
Story_ID: 579109
Speaker 1: What did your counselors tell you in high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: That you may be able to be a school teacher, maybe if you were lucky, seriously. I think, and the things like, well my high school, nobody ever said, "Have you thought about medical school or the legal profession or engineering?"  That was never, ever approached to me to think about you know.
Speaker 1: And, and yet the, I suppose now you graduated number five.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Wha- what were they telling number one, two and three?
Speaker 2: Oh they could've been in school and do everything, I mean no question--
Speaker 1: They probably tell sixth and seven the sa- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh twenty (laughter) now if it was clearly and, and again my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] didn't know that I mean so the, but you got to understand and my environment where the biggest set of role models were teachers.  I mean it was considered for me and my family a big deal if I could aspire to be a school teacher.  But you can see how the limitations are put on people, I was smart enough, I mean my grades were good enough.  And I was academically as well prepared to anybody that was gonna come out of my town.  There, there was no, there should've been no constraints on what I might aspire to.  But there were very much constraints on what I aspire to, what I should aspire and what I was counseled to aspire to.  So, so it's really you know it's a really interesting concept.  I was once interviewed on CNN they came and visit here give this and, ended being on TV.  And I had asked this question, well, "Has being black held me back in my career, has it affected me negatively?"  It's really an interesting question because on one hand you can say, "Look at this, look at my success, look what I've achieved."  And you, you'd, say, "Of course not, you know; this person has achieved a lot."  But 'cause in some absolute way I have achieved past my wildest dreams.  If you compare that to what might be poss- had been possible okay or compare that with people equally smart as me who are my white counterparts, you'd say, of course.  I can give you eight examples how you know things might've been different if in fact I had aspired to be something else when I came out of high school.  So on one hand there is no complaints (laughter) but, but I do think the reality of it is when society puts constraints on people's aspirations or people do it themselves, it affects what, it affects the outcome.  And I think it's very important that we encourage our youth to have their eyes opened about what's possible.  And that remove the fear of failure, okay, because if you remove the fear of failure, then you'll try, okay.  Then you, you'll develop what Price Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs] call--is healthy sense of entitlement.  I'm entitled to try at whatever I think I should aspire to when it's a, where I'm gonna do the work, okay.  And so I think it's very important but for me and I think for most kids, at least in my kind of environment, you know there were very clear limitations on what your aspirations should be. And--but it's worked out okay.
Story_ID: 579110
Speaker 1: Now it's pretty clear you know tha- that you would end up going to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] on some level, I mean the state school is right down in southern Illinois.  And, but how once at SIU how did you how, how did Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] come into the picture?
Speaker 2: I had a chance through the, to achieve an [U.S.] Air Force scholarship and I had a chance to go to several schools.  Air Force had a program where you could; they would sponsor you to go to a school.
Speaker 1: Okay so now you didn't, you had, you hadn't gone in the Air Force (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --at this point--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but they had a like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 1: --ROTC?
Speaker 2: Like a ROTC.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: And I ended up, and I had an option, I took some test and ended up an option in to go to several schools.  And, and three were Big Ten schools [Big Ten Conference], Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Ohio State, and I always wanted to go to the Big Ten school.  'Cause I grew up in Illinois you know and you know Big Ten thing so the chance to go to a Big Ten school was like a dream for me.  And so I had a chance to go and I couldn't afford to visit any of the three schools, and I wanted to leave home.  I'd been to Michigan it was cold and Ohio State was kind of a nice complement.  Now today I love Ohio State, talk about it forever and very involved with the school today, but it was pure serendipity you know that I ended up at Ohio State.  And, and it's not like I had visited there or had roots there. It was all on, on the process of elimination.
Speaker 1: Okay now you graduated from high school [Centralia High School, Centralia, Illinois] in six, was it--
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: In '60 [1960], okay so you started SIU in the fall of '60 [1960].
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: And then when did you end up going to Ohio State then?
Speaker 2: In sixty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '61 [1961] or?
Speaker 2: In sixty--I graduated in '65 [1965]. I was there three years, '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you went there in '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 579111
Speaker 1: Well, how did you like Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Loved it, loved it, you know I always say I grew up at Ohio State, I always remember the first day on campus.  When I arrived at Columbus [Ohio] and I looked, went past the Ohio Stadium [Columbus, Ohio] and I realized you can put my whole hometown [Centralia, Illinois] in the end zone, okay?  That was my first image of Ohio State how big it is, okay, and, but, but I loved it, you know I was, why did I love it, why did it impact me so much?  Because one is I could survive, in fact I've talked with a number of, I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and so a number of my Kappa fraternity brothers have done very well from the school.  It was a place where, in those days, Ohio State had an open admission policy for kids from Ohio.  Which meant basically any kid who graduated from high school in Ohio could get into Ohio State, and so the system was designed to weed people out, okay.  So it was a very challenging place to survive and so it got my competitive juices flowing, Ohio State, to survive.  You know, I'm gonna make it (laughter) I'm gonna get through this place and so that was one part of the experience.  The second part was you know I just knew it was the first time I was around a large number of black kids who were all smart and want to achieve you know.  And that was a very nice supportive black community in the, so it's such a big place even though the blacks the percentage wasn't big.  There were a lot, there was still several thousand black kids at Ohio State, and so that was a very nice community to have met a lot of people who have been my friends for a very long time, from across the country.  So it's a very eye opening experience meeting young black people from around the country in this place was my second thing.  The, the third thing is I, I took typing in high school, and I made a decision to take typing in high school for I think my junior, my senior year.  'Cause I had this aspiration to go to college and I said, if I can learn to type I can type my term papers.  So that was my reasoning there, again I made that decision on my own.  Well they had an ad in the newspaper when I was a, my first year at Ohio State.  That it needed sa- a job for somebody to type, who could type to be a keypunch operator in the research center, in a computer center, in research.  So that introduced me to computers because I was a keypunch operator became a computer operator in the research center.  And that, that's why I'm in the computer business today, okay, so that happened.  And then the fourth thing, there was a professor in the business school [The Ohio State University College of Commerce and Administration; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] named McCullough and Dr. McCullough [ph.] took a liking to me.  And he introduced me to a, a gentleman in Columbus, a black gentleman who ran a factory 'cause--in Columbus and that opened my eyes to what was possible.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: I can't even remember the gentleman's name, but it was a ball bearing company in Columbus, Ohio, and so it's that so you can see a set of things coalesce for me, you know.  You know a broader spectrum what's possible for black people in a black community, I was academically challenged in a place I thought I could compete to a professor who took an interest in me and kind of mentored me.  And introduced me to a, a, black person who, who could be a role model for me, and it all kind of came together. So my, who I become came together at Ohio State, and, and had a profound effect on me through that my academic--I achieved there was a pretty good student.  And I made lifelong friends, and like we all of the black people I went to school with, graduated said if you can survive here you can survive anywhere, okay.  If you can compete you, that's one thing you knew, you can compete, if you compete you--and get out through the Ohio State system, you could compete.  And so when you, if you can graduate from college with some skills and with the belief that you can compete, you're prepared to take on life.
Story_ID: 579112
Speaker 1: Those are the days, you know, that the Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] sports team were real successful with Woody Hayes and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they were in those days well see, I got there right after the great, the basket- we'd won the national championship in basketball.  And so it wasn't great basketball post that. It was good but not great.
Speaker 1: Well they went to the finals twice.
Speaker 2: But that was before, that was in '60 [1960] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you came in '62 [1962] right after--
Speaker 2: I came in '62 [1962] right after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They won in '60 [1960] and lost--
Speaker 1: So you came the fall '62 [1962] I guess?
Speaker 2: I came yeah in, in fall of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: And then the football team was the last part of Woody Hayes' career, the football was just average, it's when I got out of school that they went through, went back being good again.  And so it was, so the sports were good but not great, okay, and, but it was the, but it'll, was, for me the business school environment was a very positive one.  Me and another kid, for example, were the first members in that, there's something called Alpha Kappa Psi.  Alpha Kappa Psi is the business school society, you know fraternity for business school kids across the country.  I was the one and there were two of us in the business school of Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Commerce and Administration; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] and we became the first two members of that geography, of that region whatever that region was called members of that society.  So again we're still in (laughter) remember this is early '60s [1960s] so we're, this is riots and you know, it's a very turbulent time in the U.S.  But, but the business school was a supportive place for me personally and the bus- the black community at Ohio State was a very supportive community to be in at that time.
Story_ID: 579113
Speaker 1: So my years in Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] were you know, I was a product of the '60s [1960s] and so there are many things were going on.  Not just on campus but around us in the March on Washington. I remember debating with myself whether I was gonna go on that bus trip or not.  Decided not to but watched it all on TV.  I remember the day that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated and I had just taken a test.  And finished the test, walked to my car, and turned the car on, the radio on and hear president had been assassinated.  I remember being in a barbershop one day getting a haircut and in comes, at that day he was called Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali].  You know self-promoting himself around Columbus [Ohio] 'cause he was gonna be in a fight.  I remember being down, going downtown Columbus in the middle of a race riot and getting sucked up in this into that feverous feeling of a riot you know.   So, so I'm really a product of the '60s [1960s] and many a things were happening, it was very--on one hand it was tumultuous times.  But on the other hand it was a time with greater, awakening of, of anger and insight and aspirations and changing.  And confrontation of what it meant to be black in America, and it was a very important time, in the, in the country, but in my development.  But for, so who I am today all kind of came together in college, which is what I think you would, would hope would happen for a young person.  And I love Ohio State for that and I value it for that and stayed connected with the university because it meant so much to my life.
Story_ID: 579114
Speaker 1: Who are your mentors at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], was there, were there any, any particular individuals that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well again--
Speaker 1: --stand out?
Speaker 2: In the business school [The Ohio State University College of Commerce and Administration; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] there was this, this Dr. McCullough [ph.] and he was a, he was my advisor and he clearly was a very important mentor.  And in fact, the most important mentor in the, in the school.  And then the other people I think that influenced me most were just a couple of friends that, you know that were very important.  And still very close friends of mine today.
Speaker 1: Oh, who are they?
Speaker 2: One is Gary Fleming who, who we were roommates and, and fraternity brothers [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and Gary became a helicopter pilot in Vietnam.  Shot down twice, he's a in the investment business today in New York [New York], and another one is Ben Espy who just ran for supreme court for the State of Ohio [Ohio Supreme Court], lost, barely lost but who was a, a very prominent politician.  Who led the Democratic majority or minority in the Ohio House [Ohio House of Representatives] for a very long time and a prominent politician in Ohio.  Went to Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], so those are two people that you know we survived the system together and supported each other and fraternity brothers.  And so those are probably my key, key supporters during those period of times.  But the environment itself was one, you know, we I've taught--thought about it a lot even though it was rigorous and difficult--again if you could survive it for the people who were able to get through Ohio State, the black people during that time.  Have by and far done very well in their lives, in their careers, so it was a, in some ways a, a test of survival.  And an environment where the black community was quite supportive to each other in that community.
Story_ID: 579115
Speaker 1: What was the black community in Columbus [Ohio] like then, do you have a--?
Speaker 2: What Columbus the town?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Again it was, it had a part of town called the East Side, Mount Vernon Street [sic. Mount Vernon Avenue, Columbus, Ohio] like most communities had a very particular area of the, of a black community.  And other than going down to the barbershop or maybe to a church and there were a club or two, it wasn't, it was a really--you know Ohio State's a very big campus [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  So the campus was pretty separate from the town, a good distance away and again you had several thousand black kids on campus.  And so you did most of your socializing around campus, and black parties and black fraternity stuff, rather than going downtown and mixing with the town.
Story_ID: 579116
Speaker 1: You went on to graduate school at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And directly right from?
Speaker 2: No I worked for a year.
Speaker 1: Oh you, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah so it was a year later I came back to grad school, and I chose to come back to grad school for a very simple reason.  All the whites, smart white kids that I knew had figured out going back to business school was a good idea.  And I, and my, and I was driven pretty simply since the people I respected and were smart, smart white kids were going back to graduate business school.  And when I went to graduate business school, there were only, in undergraduate business school there were only two of us, okay?  In the graduate business school there were only three of us in the M.B.A. program at Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Administrative Science; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] in that time.  And I can't remember one other name, I don't even remember his name but the other one became a Ph.D. professor fairly well known named Dr. Bill Bradley, Bradford, Bill Bradford [HistoryMaker William Bradford].  Bill was a I think a professor now at Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] but he was, taught at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and then at, was dean of the business school for the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].  Famous finance professor now, but, but so again I was a pioneer in that way, but I didn't feel like a pioneer.  I mean I didn't, I didn't make a decision to go to bad--grad school because I wanted to be a pioneer.  And you know, and I, I was aware that I was the only, only three of us in graduate business school.  But it wasn't, I, was, by that time, I would, used to living in a, in a world where just a few of us, and that's the way it was.  You know a little bit like the way my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman] dealt with discrimination, I dealt with the fact there were only three of us, 'cause that's the way it is.  It's not like I, I didn't make, it wasn't no judgment about it, just the way it was.  The graduate school experience, I'll always remember the first paper I did in graduate school.  The professor wrote on it, "You write like an undergraduate student," okay, and, and I remember talking to that professor about it which he said you basically are regurgitating the answer rather than thinking through the answer.  And so what graduate business school did taught me to problem solve and the very different way to think about problems in a different way.  To deal with uncertainty and to better analyze problems and articulating answers to which problems, and that's what I got from graduate business school.  And it, again I think it had a, it was a very good decision I made in my career, and it did, and it did what I think what graduate business school should do for people.  Which is take, teach you to think, problem solve and to communicate, and it clearly did that for me.  I was very fortunate for that experience; that was a very good decision for me personally.
Story_ID: 579117
Speaker 1: You said early on that, that the, that Internet data end and stuff got you involved in the computer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --field.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know and, did, did it carryover through graduate school too, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well what I did in graduate school is I, at Ohio State [The Ohio State University College of Administrative Science; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio], you could write a thesis when you got a master's [degree], and M.B.A. or you could take what's called a non-thesis option.  Which is a two course specialty and then you wrote, and you did a piece of research.  And so I took my two course specialty in computers and then I wrote a program, a Fortran program [Formula Translation], that would automate a college, a, a school registration and grading system before they were popular and I did it with punch cards, and so that was kind of a follow up on my interest in computers and you know and I did that.  And it was successful, and I enjoyed it and, labor- laborious doing the punch cards so that, but yeah so I did follow up naturally in grad school in my computer interest.
Story_ID: 579118
Speaker 1: What happened after grad school [The Ohio State University College of Administrative Science; Max M. Fisher College of Business, Columbus, Ohio] what did you, what did you, where did you go?
Speaker 2: Well Vietnam time so the [U.S.] Air Force here I come okay (laughter) and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were, were you dra- well you were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]--
Speaker 2: I had an--
Speaker 1: --and all that so you--
Speaker 2: --obligation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had an obligation and so I went to, I was stationed, let's see I was stationed at Scott [Scott Air Force Base] in Illinois and then I went to--well instead of Vietnam I went to Korea post Pueblo [USS Pueblo].  You know if people don't remember Pueblo was a time; Pueblo was a boat, a small boat that was captured by the North Koreans off of the coast.  A guy named Bucher [Lloyd M. Bucher] was the captain and they were captured and then incarcerated and also was this standoff between the North Koreans and the U.S.  The North Koreans said we were in their waters, we simply weren't and you've seen many of those things happen in the war at the, including what just happened in with the British guys that they captured in Iran, very similar situation.  So at that point, it was, and it was middle of Vietnam War and I think the North Koreans were testing us and the Russians.  Given we were distracted by the Vietnam War, so a bunch of guys like me got shipped over rather than Korea, there to Vietnam shipped to Korea.  And it was a very tense situation, I was a, a security officer there and so it was a very tense situations between us and the, the North Koreans and the Russians.  And I spent a year of my life in, in Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, now, okay now, you, you weren't on the Pueb- you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no we--
Speaker 1: --you just--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay you were, you were--
Speaker 2: I got sent over--
Speaker 1: Okay to deal with the situation.
Speaker 2: The situation and a lot of others.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Military went over, but it was a, it was a much more tense situation on the ground and in the air there than you heard about in the U.S. press.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it was like, but again it was a fascinating time in life, we had a riot on base military people, black military people rioted because you couldn't get black products.  You couldn't get you know black hair products or even things toiletries and we had a big riot and I helped, I had to, so I was a captain at that time.  I helped mediate a riot on base [Osan Air Base, Pyeongtaek, South Korea], I had developed there on, or a handful of black officers on the base became really good friends of mine.  So it was another part of who I am today and it was the first time I had, I had two, there were like five black officers on base.  And we created a little relationship within the five of us and two of them were doctors, the first time I had known doctors.  Both had gone to med school at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] I think or maybe one had gone to Meharry and one went to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  But it was fascinating that, to watch them debate and compete about their knowledge of medicine.  And, and how talented they were and how proud they were of being physicians and, again it was a chance to be up and close and personal with two very smart talented committed black professionals.  Again I, you know I think this is important as you for kids as you, as you meet other blacks, people of your color who are doing great things, it allows you to aspire for greater things yourself.  Because I think that all people, not just blacks, people have this natural--the mind does this, this natural constraint you want to put on yourself.  And as this ability to open possibilities that causes humans to aspire for greater things.  And so exposing you know young black people to greater possibilities will I think help cause greater things to happen.
Story_ID: 579119
Speaker 1: Anything else out of the Kor- now you were in Kor- Korea for a, a year (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Korea.
Speaker 1: And then you, you were in until '72 [1972] right in?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is like '68 [1968], '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah out, outside the gate of Osan Air Base K-55 [Pyeongtaek, South Korea], Osan Air Base, there was a left side of street was the white side of the street.  And then right side of the street was the black side of the street, isn't that amazing, okay?
Speaker 1: This is in Korea?
Speaker 2: This is in Korea, and they're, the Koreans who entered, who socialized with the white people on the left side okay, did not socialize with the black airmen on the right side.  And so we transposed discrimination, the segregation in the Koreans and then the Koreans bought into it (laughter) okay, all right?  Okay and so, and so it's just fascinating in hindsight, it wasn't fascinating when you were there.  That how you could, how we transpose segregation discrimination in the minds of culture that the Koreans didn't know before the Americans one way or the other.  But clearly the Koreans who were aligned with the whites thought blacks were terrible (laughter), and the Koreans who were aligned with the blacks thought whites were terrible okay, okay.  And it was very much trans- transposed to the environment when you walked out the gate you know you went to the right side, you didn't go to the, you didn't go to the clubs or the shops on the left side of the street.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, that's in 19--this is 19- ?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], but again we had a riot on base in '68 [1968] so this is again, this the height of Black Power movement you know.
Speaker 1: Now this is like marks about twenty years of riots then in, in Korea from '40s [1940s] from the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: From, from the Korean War I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: From '50 [1950] I guess '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: Right '50 [1950], '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: All the way to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968] is still rioting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there a riots when they first starting integration experiment there.  And so the integration of the U.S. military has been a rough road.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hard to--
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause again in those days you could not get black supplies in the, in the, in the PX [post exchange] you know, the only way you would get black hair products unless you, your relative sent it to you.  You couldn't buy them. That was the big complaint in those days on the base, as well just racism, it was, it existed, it existed.  You know it was no way, and I think what the military's done was a leading entity in helping to integrate our society, no question.  But it's not immune from all the discrimination, prejudices that existed in society.
Speaker 1: Right I think the military, many would, would argue that it's largely southern in it's with the off, in, in terms of the officers and culture.
Speaker 2: Yeah but it, yeah well I, but I again think it's done better than anywhere else inside and you know and there are a couple things around that does, at least one is when people gonna die (laughter) you know it forces, forces you to think differently.  But two is what the military does, the fascinating thing about the military experience for me and I think in general is that the military tends to strip you down and put you in a common adverse situation.  When you strip away everything and put everybody in a common adverse situ- situation, you develop a common bond through that experience.  And that tends to, transist [ph.] race, so it, you know, if we in, all get undressed, we all go put out in the cold water and stay in for an hour okay (laughter) you know it's survival (laughter) and this shared experience will overcome anything else that we might've viewed.  And it has to be that way in the military 'cause in fact we gonna go and die together then you know and you and I got to count on each other. It doesn't matter what race is, the enemy is out there.  And so you end up with a bond, a special bond with people in the military with, and so it doesn't eliminate discrimination and prejudice.  But it helps minimize it in relationship to a person in general society.  And so and so in the nature of killing and dying on one hand and the way military discipline on the other hand works it has done a better job than most places in society.  There have been more generals than there are corporate CEOs you know; I'm not saying there are enough generals okay.  But on relative to the number of generals versus corporate CEOs you know you, there's a lot the military's done a better job.  And so I enjoyed the military, respected the gen- military and clearly if you were a military officer I was, the white soldiers, whether they liked it or not they saluted you.  They had to salute you, if they didn't they were gonna get in trouble, it was no you know, 'cause you saluted those bars rather than the color of the skin.
Story_ID: 579120
Speaker 1: So there was some things about the [U.S.] military experience were important you know, including one about leadership.  In the military you, you acquire command, you don't select your people you get them, and that you learn very quickly that even though you're an officer you have to earn the right to command.  And so at a very young age in your twenties and you end up having fifty people work for you, that's a big responsibility.  Early in one's career that you wouldn't normally get in civilian life, that you learn to command.  You learn how important NCOs [non-commissioned officer] are how to manage them, and how to res- you know how, how to develop relationship with people who been around much longer than you.  Be, without their sus- without their help you can't be successful, so I learned a lot about leadership with the military and that was very, very important.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll always remember and you know again where blacks could be very supportive I always remember being in second lieutenant going to a, a technical training school.  And this technical training school there were both officers than non-commissioned officers, and I remember, I'm a young, in my twenties, right.  So I stayed up much too late the night before you get to class early and I'm at my desk waiting for the class to start and I had my head down.  And a black NCO came up to me and tapped me on the shoulder he said, "Lieutenant." I said, "Yes?" He said, "Sir, officers don't put their head on the table, okay."  I'll always remember that and be thankful for that, okay, now that's, that was a black NCO been in the service a long time, and he wanted to make sure that I understood he had certain expectations of my behavior.  That was a very important lesson for me, and I appreciate that forever because it was a, he, he, he viewed me with pride.  I hadn't, and I had a responsibility, he wanted to make sure I had a responsibility to him to make him proud.  And that's just a little vignette he had something I remember and I'll always remember that, that happening.
Speaker 2: Now that's something, that's something, that's quite a story.
Story_ID: 579121
Speaker 1: When you came out in '72 [1972], wha- what did you wha- what did you have lined up for yourself?
Speaker 2: So well there's a story there so when I, when I came from Korea I was, I got an assignment to go to California.  And I didn't want to come to California, I'd never been to California, I was a midwestern boy, and I'd grown up in Illinois.  Been stationed in Illinois [at Scott Air Force Base] before I went to Korea and went to school in Ohio [at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], I wanted to be in the Midwest.  I fought like hell (laughter) not to end up in California anyway I ended up in California and I'm a I don't know captain at that time, second lieutenant, captain.  I mean first lieutenant or a captain, so I ended up in Marin County, north San Francisco [California], thirty minutes north of the Golden Gate Bridge, God's country okay.  I got an assignment that when it was an important assignment, the assignment was to be the social action officer at Hamilton Nat- Air, Air Force Base [Hamilton Air Force Base, California].  Social action was a combination of two programs the [U.S.] Air Force had put together, one was affirmative action and the other was, because of people coming back from Vietnam they had developed a real drug problem.  And so it was drug rehabilitation and so I had an office.  I created a new program, so I created an office to support our affirmative action program and our helping troops coming back from the mili- from Vietnam with drug dependency problems.  And I did that for my last two years in the Air Force that was a great experience for a number of reasons.  One is I created something from new, so that chance to create and build an office you know recruit people under my function.  Build a set of programs was very good, and two is you know I had a chance to give back; it was the first assignment I ever had that was really to give back, to make an impact on something that was socially meaningful I felt, and so that was a very good two years of my career here at--and then I got to know the Bay Area in California [San Francisco Bay Area, California], when I and I was a regular officer okay, so regular officer means that versus a reserve officer which is a, a thing in the [U.S.] military that has meaning.  And I, and the reason I was a regular officer 'cause I graduated top of my, my officer training school class.  So when I decided I was gonna get out of the Air Force, somebody from the Air Force headquarters called me and says, "But you're a regular officer how can you get out of the Air Force?"  And by the way, when I called my father [Louis Coleman] and told him I was getting out, he said the same thing 'cause I'm a captain. Now to my father I had reached a pinnacle of success and how could I ever consider walking away (laughter) from the pinnacle of success?  If I'd never gotten promoted with my father being a captain in the Air Force was like that's success, stay there forever.  And, and so I got out of the Air- the reason I got out is really important, I, and I told, I didn't tell this to my father he wouldn't quite understood this.  But I said this to the, the person in the head- headquarter Air Force.  I said, "Look, you know I love the Air Force it's been good to me and enjoy it, however, you have a system that for me to go to major I'm gonna be, I'm gonna become a major with like five thousand other people on the same day, at the same time, okay.  And I believe that some of those people should become major before me and some after me, but I don't wanna be one of five thousand, that's not me, okay?"  And so a system that kind of swoops people in, in large groups is just not the way I made and I aspire to being a more competitive more directly.  I, my behavior, my results and what the outcome of that will be what it will be.  So I got out of the Air Force because I didn't want to be in such a big monolithic system.  It's not a bad system it was good to me just not to where I want to spend the rest of my career, so it was a very, it was a very conscious decision.  'Cause the Air Force was not bad, just not for me long term.
Story_ID: 579122
Speaker 1: How did I decide what I was gonna do next? Well I, I did a classical job search but one of the important things is I had met someone at Monsanto Company in St. Louis [Missouri].  From time I was at Scott Air Force Base [Illinois] who was their VP of human resources, and I had promised him when I got out of service that I would interview with Monsanto.  And so the first interview I did with Monsanto because they were based in St. Louis, they had a facility in Ohio and I'd be home.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I think they're right Miamisburg [Ohio] right outside of Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Exactly that's where I went, I went, we must always remember that this is March, I they fly me to Miamisburg.  So I fly to Dayton, drive to Miamisburg, so I remember going to my room and said well I'm going to have a quick bite to eat and a drink and then go to bed, 'cause I got an interview tomorrow morning.  I go to the restaurant they say I have to have a tie. Now I been in California for two years, right?  On a Thursday in Miamisburg, I had to have a tie on. I say, "Oh this is different," (laughter) it's also snowing.  So it's snowing in March, snow in March, I got to put a tie on, okay (laughter) and then I'm sitting there talking to somebody who lives in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And he say, you know, "Why you're here?" Why I'm here, "I'm here to interview." And he says, "Why are you out here from California interviewing for a job in Miamisburg, Ohio," (laughter)? On that night I decide the same thing to myself, I should not be aspiring to come back to Miamisburg. I, I live in Marin County [California] thirty minutes north of the Golden Gate Bridge, why?  The only reason why 'cause I thought I wanted to come back to the Midwest.  At that point I decided I gonna stay in  California, I had, on our Air Force base [Hamilton Air Force Base, California] there was another black captain who had gotten out of the [U.S.] Air Force and worked for a bank in Palo Alto [California].  And he introduced me to a gentleman, a very prominent gentleman here at that time and still today named Roy Clay [Roy L. Clay, Sr.].  Roy Clay was the first black executive at HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] and he had left HP and ran a search firm.  I, this guy gave Roy Clay my resume, I met Roy Clay and he introduced me to Hewlett-Packard and ultimately was hired by HP.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Another very important sequence of my life, so when I got out of the Air Force in 1972 and I joined Hewlett-Packard here in Silicon Valley, before people called it Silicon Valley at a time that very few people knew who Hewlett-Packard was.
Story_ID: 579123
Speaker 1: Tell us some more about Roy Clay [Roy L. Clay, Sr.], now, how did he get involved with Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Roy Clay, well he, he's, he's the, the high technology person that preceded me, Roy had worked--Roy's from St. Louis [Missouri] had worked for CDC, Control Data Corporation in the Midwest.  And got transferred out here, because Control Data Corporation used to be out here and from that he ended up at Hewlett-Packard.  And he was responsible helping to develop the first Hewlett-Packard computer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and he's clearly a pioneer.
Speaker 1: I think a lot of peop- people--I certainly didn't know it so I'm sure a lot of (laughter) people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah a lot of people out here would know it, but yeah, Roy Clay was a, Roy Clay is really the father of blacks in technology, in, in, in Silicon Valley and clearly got me my first job here.
Story_ID: 579124
Speaker 1: Yeah we were talking about Roy Clay [Roy L. Clay, Sr.] and, and how important he was to your getting involved in this business.
Speaker 2: Yeah so Roy introduced me to Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] and that was a very important introduction, and Roy's been a friend for all these years.  He's a great person and he after HP in his search firm he was the first mayor in Palo Alto, California.  And one of the first black mayors in an integrated city in California, and he started his own firm called Roy L. Clay, ROD-L [ROD-L Electronics, Inc.], Cur-, Clay.  Which is a small technology firm that's today run by his sons; Roy is a true pioneer in technology.
Speaker 1: Okay, Palo Alto is that's where Sta- Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] is right?
Speaker 2: Palo Alto is where Stanford is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well you start with Hewlett-Packard this is 1970?
Speaker 2: Two [1972].
Speaker 1: Two [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah I worked at, at Hewlett-Packard in '72 [1972] I spent two years in HP in Cupertino [California] helping build its early entry into the, the computer industry.  And then I was asked in '74 [1974] to go to Europe for HP where I was asked to be responsible for human resources for northern Europe which was Belgium, Holland [the Netherlands], Norway, Finland, Denmark and Sweden.  And that was, again a life changing experience to be working in Europe out of the country to have a, a multi-country responsibility.  To be on a management team where I was an American and we had a Brit and a Italian and a German and a Frenchman, we all worked for a Scottish guy. So that was a very eye opening experience, I was with, in northern--it was sales company so I was involved with sales people and that was an experience.  I was an American living in Europe viewing what it meant to be an American outside of living in America.  So it was a different experience. I'll always remember one of those life changing experiences of sitting around with the, with cocktails with this integrated management team.  Integrated means a multiple countries, and we were talking about; I was talking about what it meant to be a black American.  And they kept saying, "No, you're an American," and I says, "You don't understand I'm a black American," we were having this debate.  So finally one of them said, "Look, Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth L. Coleman] you talk like an American, you wear those striped pants like an American, okay.  You hold your nor- knife and fork like an American. To us you're an American."  It was the first time I had realized that I was an American first, and I was more American than anything else.  And that through the eyes of another culture I was American, and, and that a, the black wasn't an ad- a modifier to being an American but I was American first.  That was a very powerful experience to understand that, and to view how people looked at me.
Story_ID: 579125
Speaker 1: And in fact, and to even to reinforce that when I, I lived my first year in Europe in Geneva [Switzerland], and then I kept the same job [with the Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] but I moved to live in Amsterdam [the Netherlands].  So this is 1975, at that time in Amsterdam, in Holland [the Netherlands] what been called Dutch Guiana, okay which is now called Surinam was being freed as a colony as an independent country.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's just below Brazil I'm thinking yeah.
Speaker 1: Right it's called Sur- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Above Brazil.
Speaker 1: Okay, called Surinam today, well for a period of time any Surinamese could immigrat, immigrate to Holland and be a Dutch citizen, okay.  That's part of this transition period, so a number of people for Surinam had made a decision to do this, and they all, these are ex-blacks slaves they're just like you and me.  And so that'll, it was an influx of people from Surinam and clearly it was a lot of racial tension, therefore, in Holland.  But the most fascinating thing is I would go into a Dutch establishment, they would speak to me in Dutch with obvious hostility.  And then I would say, "No, I'm not Dutch, I'm an American," and their attitude would change dramatically, like amazing okay?  Because now I was an American not a black Dutch person, okay.  What, so you take those two experiences and it taught me a very important lesson about, as well as some other experiences about prejudice and discrimination and race.  People's view of differences is heavily--it is not unique through race; it's unique to race, color, origin, history and religion and people clearly in Europe will dis- will, will differentiate a black American, an African and a black European.  And those are three different people in the minds of a European, okay, and I had never experienced it.  I had thought of us all the same, I would've thought it--assume it was all the same. It is very different, and the Europeans view you, me as a black, as an American first who happens to be black.
Speaker 2: Now isn't it all seems kind of crazy doesn't it, in some ways?
Speaker 1: It's all kind of crazy.
Speaker 2: That that they discriminate against the blacks that come up under their system but not against you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, but that relates to culture history and a whole set of things so race is only a component of discrimination prejudice, okay.  And in America it has, in each country has its unique view of that, okay, and so, and so, and so, and so it, it manifest itself and in the cause, the root cause in America is by slavery and set of things that are real.  But in France it will be a different set of things or the UK [United Kingdom] a different set of things or in Japan a different set of things, okay?  But in my traveling around the world, every, every culture, every country has this, its, its discriminated set of people who for historical, religion or cultural reasons are viewed as less valued than the majority of that society.  And, and as an Afro-American living outside the country experience that environment and, and being treated a certain way.  And looking back at America you come back with a much clear appreciation of who you are and how you fit into that society, and that really impacted me dramatically.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Very much a growing experience. I recommend to people first if, if nothing else you should travel outside the country.  You'll have a better appreciation of who you are and how you fit in the world, and if you can live outside the country, you'll get a much better understanding of that.
Story_ID: 579126
Speaker 1: So how long did you live in Europe?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay, all right.  Now, what, what brought you back?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was scheduled to live there another couple years but HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] decided to create a business around the commercial computing business.  And the person who became the general manager called me and said, "Would you come back and be on my management team?"  And we help build HP first big billion dollar business the HP 3000 commercial computing business.  And it was a, a great opportunity I was the third employee in that division and we built a business from zero to a billion dollars over, over five, six years.  And so it, it was very important meaningful opportunity for me and a chance to do something important, and I was involved in that, and enjoyed it a lot.
Speaker 1: Now these are the days before personal computers and small computers and you, you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These, this--
Speaker 1: --people.
Speaker 2: So yes, yes these are the days of the, we were a leader in the mini computer business.  And so until that time the computing world had been dominated by two kinds of technology.  One was well basically one technology, the mainframe computer, the big computers.  And, and people connected terminals to big computers to do work, but all the processing was done in big computers and called mainframe.  HP was a leader along with Digital Equipment Corporation and Data General [Data General Corporation] a few other companies were a leader in what was called midsize computers.  In those days they were called mini computers, and they were smaller computers that could be used by departments rather than by the corporate headquarters or smaller companies who couldn't afford the big computers.  And so the HP 3000 was a, a leader in that sort of computing and we help build that business for HP.
Story_ID: 579127
Speaker 1: What size were these computers [HP 3000]?
Speaker 2: Well in those days it was pretty big, but in cost no rather than a big computer cost a million dollars these computers maybe cost a half that cost, you know half a million dollars.  And rather than, than the computer had to be in a data center at the corporate offices, they could be at the data center at a plant.  At a factory and they could support a factory, where the big idea in computers--were just too expensive and too big for a factory, okay.  And so and HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] grew that business because they were also smaller computers like that used for software control and, and, and technical tasks but not for business tasks.  And so the mini computer revolution was to have midsize computers because they would do the work for, for in smaller companies and, and factories and plants of big companies.  So we built that business. It was a great management team the chance to build a business and participate in that build an organization.  And it was a five years of growth and challenges and also it was, it was a chance. I had enough power and influence that I could truly leave my imprint on something.  And so I was able to, we were considered sometimes even in Silicon Valley, I was able to convince my organization to hire lots of talented black people.  And I was in position to influence that and to challenge the conventional thinking about which I felt was a deficit model.  That is everybody felt--unsaid--that hiring a black person was more risky than hiring a white person.  And the way to minimize that risk, black people had to have more, be more qualified; now that was unsaid, not said.  But I was in powerful enough in position you could see it, and that people would just felt it was a bigger risk.  Therefore, I need to minimize that risk, I want higher standards.  And I was able to challenge that, and we, we were able to more level the hiring and, and, therefore, we were able to attract more talented black people who've done very well in their career.  And that was the first chance I had to impact that in that way, and so we had by HP standards and by most companies in Silicon Valley, by all companies in the Silicon Valley standards, we had more than our fair share of black talent just because we had a more level playing field in the selection process.
Story_ID: 579128
Speaker 1: What did your father [Louis Coleman] think about this level of operation, I mean you being in Europe and then this, I mean you, your, you, you gone pretty far for a young man who is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: --have seen.
Speaker 2: --yeah well my, so my mother [Katie Owens Coleman] passed away, let's see when I, see she passed away the year before I left HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California].  And my father passed away the year I left HP, so they were alive my ten years there.  So during that period of time they knew I was successful but they didn't understand what it meant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They knew I was successful and they were proud of it, they didn't understand technology, they didn't understand kind of what I did.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like being a captain in the, in the [U.S.] Army, in the, in the [U.S.] Air Force.  I mean he, that, that's something that he, he knows what that is.
Speaker 2: He, he 'cause he's been in the [U.S.] military so he that he knew, and so he knew I was successful, okay no question.  And they were proud of me but they didn't understand what I did or what that really meant.
Story_ID: 579129
Speaker 1: Take us through you know you were at HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] for ten, ten years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you were there through the development of the PCs [personal computer] and so forth, right?
Speaker 2: So my again if I walk you through my HP experience I spent from--I joined in '72 [1972]. From '72 [1972] to '74 [1974], I was in a, the early computer division then I went to Europe '74 [1974], '75 [1975] and I came back in late '75 [1975].  So '76 [1976] through '81 [1981] and through yeah, early '81 [1981] I help build this computer business [HP 3000] for HP.  Then I went to corporate in '81 [1981] and worked for two years, '81 [1981] and '82 [1982], in corporate and I was global staffing manager for HP, director global staffing.  And I did that for two years, about my last three to four years at HP, I start getting phone calls about being VP of HR [human resources] for differing companies.  So in this period of time so, and so, so Apple [Apple Inc.] gets started, so I leave HP in '82 [1982]. Apple gets started in say '78 [1978], '79 [1979], okay.  So you get this sense of history.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And a little, those little--
Speaker 2: The Apple II--
Speaker 1: Mac.
Speaker 2: No the Apple II is before the Macintosh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the Apple II.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Apple II.  We looked at the Apple II at HP when, when Wozniak [Steve Wozniak] and Jobs [Steve Jobs] created it HP looked at that.  They, HP calculator, it was created in like '78 [1978]; we supported them in our building when it was first, the first pocket calculator was created.  And so that was a time in, in technical history of what's going on it's a very exciting time in technology, robust time.  Computers becoming more accessible more understandable, and I was fortunate, I was early in the business.  And I help build that business for HP and, and when people that are famous now, get to know 'cause they weren't famous.  Like Bill Gates I've met in a number of times in those days, I met Jobs and Wozniak in those days.  And so I was in the business in the mix of that in those early, early days where people were just trying things.  And I had a chance to help create a, a business in a day when billion business were unheard of.  So I always say from a professional point of view my, ground--my ten years at HP was my grounding.  And you know and Dave Packard [David Packard] and Bill Hewlett [William R. Hewlett] were two great men, no question, and they were pioneers.  Not only in driving technology but their management philosophies what, what I ground my current management philosophies in you know, the integrity of the individual was a very important concept participated management, open communication, first name basis.  The lack of private offices, the lack of a tie and formality, all that were things that I learned at Hewlett-Packard, and was the base of about which I built a company.  I was also influenced by Packard and Hewlett in addition to being great industrialists and building a great company; themselves were very involved in the community, okay.  And I looked at that and then I, and I, and I thought that and I learned that that you had a responsibility to a greater community other than just what you did.  And that if you're involved in a greater community you gain perception, which made you a better executive.  And so I got involved with HP and the United Way [United Way Worldwide] and ran a corporate campaign for United Way, ended up on the United Way board.  I also, HP was big on college recruiting and so when I joined HP and when I became a division head of, of personnel firm, I said you know HP doesn't recruit very much in the Midwest.  I want us to start--us to start recruiting at my alma mater, Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], so that got me back in touch with my campus, my school.  And I started--HP recruited--Ohio State got me involved in the university and that reconnected me with Ohio State.  Which is I followed up in many number of ways today.  So again HP was this, this learning ground and training ground and development ground for a number of values that I've practiced since then.  So again it was a very important part of my career you know, how to grow a business, what an international means, how to deal with universities, diversity.  You know the value and integrity of people, open communications, participative management, all those kinds of things I learned and grew up in Hewlett-Packard was very important foundation for my work career.  It's a great company.
Story_ID: 579130
Speaker 1: Now you left Hew- Hewlett-Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] in what, what year was it then?
Speaker 2: So in 1982, ten years later so ten years later, so it's '82 [1982] I got, I was being, 'cause I, I turned down Apple [Apple Inc.] (laughter). I turned down a company called Roam [ph.]. I turned down any number of companies, I was committed to HP.  But I had an opportunity, there was a company just starting called Activision, A-C-T-I-V-I-S-I-O-N [Activision Publishing, Inc.].  Activision was founded by four game designers from Atari.  And they were the first independent software publisher of games software for the video game industry.  Before that, all the games were done by the hardware manufacturer so Atari only did the games for Atari nobody else could.  In fact they had said in fact they sued Activision and said it was infringement of patent to produce games on my machine.  Now that's totally different today, it's a whole industry of EA [Electronic Arts Inc.] et cetera, but in that we were the first company to do that.  So I was not a founder but I was a very early employee in that business I had convinced to get in that business.  And so I spent five years in Activision and ultimately ended up running, managing the game designers and being responsible for product development for Activision.  And I was there five years I spent three years head of product development, and so I managed video games designers producing games that people probably heard of.  If you're in your forties now and fifties, things like 'Kaboom!' and any number of, of, of early video games.
Speaker 1: 'Kaboom!' Wha- what else, 'cause I know a lot of people were around then.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember the, and I, I can't remember the, the most famous game was 'Pitfall!'
Speaker 1: 'Pitfall!'
Speaker 2: 'Pitfall!'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Pitfall!' was the first million, million unit seller video game called 'Pitfall!' and that was a, a wild ride okay (laughter).  It was managing game designers and managing people that are one half computer scientists and one half rock stars, okay (laughter).  But it was a, again a chance to help create a new industry, a chance to marry technology and entertainment.  It's the first time I had managed an engineering and technical and creative process.  And we were, first time I'd taken a company public so I went through the process of going public.  In the early days we were the fastest growing company in the history of the vid- of Silicon Valley.  We went from zero to $177 million in eighteen months.
Speaker 1: That's, that's fast.
Speaker 2: That was very fast its un- in those days it was unheard of.  So again it was a very great opportunity, it's a great oppor- I worked for a great guy, it's a great opportunity.  It was a lot of fun, it was challenging but I ultimately decided that, well two things, I thought that the video game business went through its first machine transition.  And I tho- and the common wisdom was that it would, it was gonna be replaced, the video game machine would be replaced by the computer, the home computer.  Well that was wrong, okay; big lesson there is common wisdom is seldom, seldom right in the technology business, okay (laughter).  So I said the common wisdom was it's gonna happen, and so I, so that was one issue for me, and I thought I might wanna get out of the business.  The second thing was I'm a, I'm a technology person, not a creative person.  I'm not an artist, and I'm not particularly suited for the hit driven business, and so I said in the long run, this is not me.  It was a fun experience and I've had a good ride and I, I learned a lot, but I'm not a, I, I want something a little more predictable than the hit driven business.  And I don't have good--in my fingertips, taste, I mean and the video game business as it turned out to be a big entertainment business.  It's like the movie business, or record business and that's not me for--in the long haul.
Story_ID: 579131
Speaker 1: So I said, I wanna get out of that business, and so I made a decision I wanna get out and then, in the sum- in the, in deciding what I was gonna do next, I talked to three people I'd worked with, that I knew very well.  And one person felt I should run go run a software company at that time, and I looked at a few software companies that I might run.  All startups, run by the PCs [personal computer], and what I found is I could run a software company but the ones that I would be allowed to run would be I call third tier opportunities.  High risk, not great ideas, but I could run them; I would be having a chance to run it.  Another company called 3Com [3Com Corporation] a small company at that time, and their CEO somebody I knew quite well and he asked would I might be interesting in running international for this company.  And the reason was I had developed a reputation of because of my time at HP [Hewlett-Packard Company, Palo Alto, California] really understanding international business.  As technology people know and I built that since continued to be and considered an internationalist.  And, but I had a young son and kind of where I was in life this didn't feel right, to travel around the world and try to be an international VP where you spend half the time outside the country.  But, and then the CEO at SGI, Silicon Graphics [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] named Ed McCracken [Edward R. McCracken] had been trying to recruit me for a while to come and work again for him.  Because we had worked together building the HP 3000 business at HP, so he allowed me to help structure a job that I, that made sense for me at SGI.  And that job was a job that pulled together all of the corporate functions other than finance.  For this, at that time very small $10 million company, and that was HR [human resources] facilities, purchasing, legal, IT [information technology], marketing, so all those functions.  I'll be, consolidated under me, and I was responsible for administration for the company.  People called it chief administrative officer today.  And we from, sa- and I did that job from '70 [1970]--from '82 [1982]--I mean from '87 [1987] to basically '97 [1997].  And during that period of time SGI was a very fast growing computer company, it led in the, in fast workstations, 3D graphics.  Enabled you know virtual reality all that stuff is what we did, and I was you know and, we were on Fortune magazine.  And I was interviewed from Fortune and we were a very successful company for that ten years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were saying off camera that you worked with George Lucas and Steve Spielberg and--
Speaker 1: Yeah George Lucas, Steven Spielberg--
Speaker 2: --the movie special effects.
Speaker 1: --were very important customers of ours, special effects so I got to know George Lucas and Steven Spielberg and any number of people in the movie business. That was the high profile business, but we help enable 3D design for automobiles, 3D for over all of discovery, 3D design in molecular modeling for the pharmaceutical industry discovering new drugs.  By understanding how proteins--model proteins interaction, so it was really enabling technology with a very fun business, fast growing.  And I managed a global organization over time, so we went from we went in ten years from 10 million to $3.3 billion in ten years.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And that was a heck of a ride and then in, in '97 [1997] I was asked by the CEO, my boss, would I run the service business.  And give up admin and because at that point it was about a $500 million business and we needed to how to figure how to make it more important and more profitable.
Story_ID: 579132
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I spent my first ten years with SGI [Silicon Graphics, Inc.], then I got asked to run service business and so I took and help build a service business from a 500 to a $700 million business over about a year and a half.  And then I was asked to pick, take in addition to service would I pick up sales and marketing for the company.  And so my last three years at SGI I was number two person in the company I was virtually the COO, not called that.  Where I ran sales, service and marketing for the company, I had, I had seven thousand people in the company out of the nine thousand that worked in the company.  And, and it was a global organization, so I had people in Pacific, in Europe in Latin America as well as in America.  And I had responsibility for all the revenue and the profits of the company.  And I did that for three years and that was a wonderful experience you know, I, and, and I brought together my technology experience and my global experience.  You know on my management team I had a person based in Singapore that ran the Pacific end of Japan and a person who, who reported to me who lived in Japan who ran Japan.  I had a person in London [England] who ran Europe and a person in California who ran the U.S. commercial business. I had a guy in Washington, D.C. who ran the government business.  On the sale side then I had some marketing people and it was a guy who ran my service business.  And it was a wonderful way to culminate my corporate career of running the, you know that business for SGI.  And I ultimately I was there for almost fifteen years; I decided that I'd been there for fifteen years almost that I had been successful.  I had treated some financial independence and I was not gonna be soon the top guy in the company, I was gonna be number two.  And I felt it was time for me to do something different and what I decided to do is retire and then contemplate what I might do next, if anything.  I was fortunate enough I wasn't forced to do, to rush to do anything or to do anything in general.  And what I thought I would do would be a private investor and do some board work.
Story_ID: 579133
Speaker 1: So you, you were like fifty-nine years old then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so and I took off [from Silicon Graphics, Inc.] and contemplated what I might do less--next if anything and it was a very important set of learnings I had that I think are relevant.  One is that at fifty-nine years old, I wasn't ready to retire, and, and there is an afterlife you know for the, us first generation corporate Afro-Americans you know there's a, a temptation be, once you receive your cer- a certain status in corporation, then you're done, okay.  You've achieved that and you're done, well it turns out things that other cultures have learned that you're not done necessarily you know.  You may take another corporate job or do something else, so I wasn't done, I wasn't finished my contribution to society.  I hadn't demonstrated all the things that I like to demonstrate and take the skills I acquired.  The second thing is pretty much everything I had done, I had been recruited to do, so- somebody else recruited me and convinced me to do it.  I had an opportunity to decide what I wanted to do, okay.  So I had more control over what I do in the future than I had previously had.  Hadn't thought about it that way, but it turned out to be true.  I had an idea you know people asked me, "Well what have you learned, what have you, do in your work," you know, "what had been the hard thing you've done?"  And the hardest job I ever had was running the IT function in a large company; I think that's one of the most difficult jobs in America.
Speaker 1: That's information tech- technology?
Speaker 2: Right information technology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had some ideas about why it was so hard and I had some ideas about how to develop the software to make it easier.  And here comes ITM Software [ITM Software Corporation], so I had the idea that's a problem that deserves to be solved.  I knew some people that I thought can help me solve the problem, and I knew some venture capitalists who were willing to invest money in me to solve that problem.  And so out of my head came the idea to solve the problem of business management for IT and created ITM Software to do that.  And that was in the year 2000, late in the year 2000, so I started ITM Software in late 2000.  Over five years was able to convince investors to invest $22 million in the company.  Develop a software company that went from zero to $10 million a year over about three and a half year period of time, just selling product.  And I decided five years later which was a year and a half ago that I was now sixty-three and a half, almost sixty-four that I had built something of value.   But I felt I did not wanted to spend the next five years running the company on a day to day basis, and decided again to retire for the second time.
Story_ID: 579134
Speaker 1: Although that time I was smart enough to know it wasn't retirement it was to decide on my, the last phase of my career, of my, at least from a career point of view.  Not of life hopefully (laughter) but of career, and, and, and I have been coming to that conclusion what that was.  And that was I, I, I really had started doing and wanted to focus on board work.  Being on the board of directors of a company, which is to me, is the pinnacle of the governance of American companies.  And, and at the same time that being a board member was becoming a more demanding challenge according to (unclear).  And so I today serve on the board of four public companies. I'm a non-employee chairman of one of those companies.  And that is my main activity is to be a good board person of these public companies.  As a board member you advise operating people, the CEO and his staff, on how better to run the company. You're not responsible for operating the company, you just advise people.  And you help put in governance rules and help make sure we do things in the right way.  I, in addition to serving on the board of public companies, I advise a couple of individuals in three or four companies as a, as an advisor rather than a board member.  The big difference is when you're a board member you have fiduciary responsibilities, okay to shareholders.  When I advise a company, I only have a responsibility to the operating people to the company.  So it's a difference in the level of accountability and responsibility for the two.  And so I spend about half of my time advising be it individual companies or doing board work.  And I spend half of my time doing non-profit work and personal activities today.
Story_ID: 579135
Speaker 1: Was it hard to raise money for ITM [ITM Software Corporation] back in the--
Speaker 2: That's a really im- interesting question.  I started raising money in year, early 2001. Now you realize in early 2001 was about the worst time in the last fifty years to raise money.  It was post-Internet bust, okay?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --I thought--
Speaker 1: --Enron [Enron Corporation] had just, just messed--
Speaker 2: So I thought--a lot of people said it would be impossible to raise money, and I used to ask myself the question, will VCs [venture capitalist] give an old black guy money (laughter), okay.  We raised our first round of $3.5 million in sixty days, so it, it was relatively easy for us to raise money, for me to raise money.  The reason I believe that end up being true even though it's a difficult time to raise money was it was a good idea.  And I did have a track record. In other words, I had nowhere to hide so either people thought I was a good guy or not (laughter).  They didn't have to guess about it. They could very quickly come to an opinion and I think I was able to convince a few people that in fact I was a good guy.  It was a good idea and we were able to raise money relatively easily.  So people would often ask will--blacks have often asked me well, or wanna say, "Well that's 'cause it's you. It's hard for black person to raise money."  So first thing raising money is hard so I want, the first thing the activity of raising money is a very hard thing.  'Cause you're trying to sell somebody on you and your idea to put money on you and your company, so that's hard process, it's very draining.  What, what I think is important for an entrepreneur, especially one of color but any entrepreneur, is you got to remember that your ability to raise money will be this, this track record you have over your career.  And depends on what you've done and what people say about you will directly impact your ability to raise money, okay.  And 'cause people really are betting on you first and the idea second, and so early in one's career, you need to make sure (laughter) that you're building the ca- case for whatever you want in the future.  And the ultimate case will somebody invest money in you on an idea.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever reach a point where you thought you, it wasn't gonna work, or, or you, you weren't gonna get enough to, to do it?
Speaker 2: No I never, I never, this is that confidence thing, I never, I never got caught into believing I couldn't raise the money, you know.  I felt, I, I felt that, if I couldn't raise the money, it was my problem, okay.  Was my, was if the idea was right which I believed in, then it's my ability to articulate that in a way that somebody would invest in me.  You know, I, I have this, you, you, my, the favor, my favorite scene from a movie is from a movie call, with Jackie Gleason and Paul Newman and it's called 'The Hustler.'  In that movie Paul Newman can never beat Jack Gleason, who is, Jackie Gleason who is Minnesota Fats [Rudolf Wanderone] in pool.  And Jackie Gleason says to Paul Newman one night, "You know you'll never beat me, and, I bet you don't know why?" And he says, "Why?"  Did the, "The reason is that I feel totally accountable and responsible of whether or not I beat you or not.  Because of that, I'm gonna do what it takes to win. You will make excuses for losing, and you can let yourself off the hook."  That's what I believe about life. I, I, feel that I'm totally accountable for raising money or not.  So if I didn't raise money wasn't anybody's fault but mine, and so it's coming on me to do what it took to convince people to raise money.  That accountability and responsibility will make you do that, next phone call, knock on that next door, do whatever it takes to achieve some objective.  Because there's nobody's fault but mine if I fail.  And when people take on that responsibility for failure, they tend to do things and not cause failure, okay?  And so that's what I took about fundraising and it was off, it was a training process, but I never believed I would feel that raising the money.  And I was able to raise the money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't wanna claim anybody that raising money is easy, (laughter) okay, or and it's not guaranteed, and the most important thing is, is your track record.  I mean you are building, you, you know at the end of the day, your reputation is your job security.  Your reputation is your ability to raise money, to get into the next opportunity and it, you gotta remember everything you do today plants the seed of what might be possible for you to do tomorrow.
Story_ID: 579136
Speaker 1: So you retired again and this is in 19--what's it 2000?
Speaker 2: Well this is, this was in, in the end, in the beginning of 2006.
Speaker 1: Semi-retired, well so.
Speaker 2: And I called I'm semi-active.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what is Accelrys [Accelrys, Inc.] or, or?
Speaker 2: Accelrys is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about Accelrys.
Speaker 2: --an, an $85 million public software company it has about five hundred employees, primary locations are San Diego, California and Cambridge, England.  And what Accelrys does is have software that able--enables the research process in the pharmaceutical and biotech industry to help people figure out how to develop new interaction between chemical compounds that interact with the body to solve disease problems, okay?  And so pretty much all of the top hundred pharmaceutical companies in the world are customers of Accelrys.  Additionally Accelrys customers are material scientists.  So in the automobile industry we have companies that are using our technology to discover new fuel cell technology that may help you, other than carbons, to power automobiles.  Or technology to make it more efficient in using pe- petroleum products, or in the aerospace industry, discover a new material that'll be lighter and stronger for airplane wings, okay?  So but what we're specializing in, in the manipulating of molecules okay in typically chemical substances that, that allows you to predict if you put these together this is the outcome.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're, you're chairman of the board?
Speaker 2: I'm chairman of the board you know five hundred people, two hundred Ph.D.'s in this company, very technical.
Story_ID: 579137
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and, and now do, do you have anything else on the burner, I mean (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and you do a lot of volunteer you, you still volunteer for United Way [United Way Worldwide] and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah so my wife [Caretha Coleman] and I were--both have been very involved in the community a lot.  Our latest project is we raise $17 million to build a new YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in underserved area called East Palo Alto, California.  And that Y just opened in January, and we spent the last five years raising that money getting that building built into this, this community that is heavily a minority of Pacific Islanders, Afro-Americans and Hispanics.  It's a little town here. The town didn't have a community center, it didn't have a Y and we saw contributions and my wife and I wanted to make.  And so we both are very involved in the community and do, and committed, my wife is almost 100 percent committed.  And I spent about a quarter of my time on community kinds of things.
Story_ID: 579138
Speaker 1: We always ask this, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh my biggest concern is the Afro-American male you know I think that the number of young men that are incarcerated is absolutely a tragedy. The high school dropout rate is scary.  And you can't have a vibrant community without a vibrant male figure, fathers and husbands and I think that's a real concern.  And, and some of that's owned by the black community and much of it's owned by society.  Now we were involved in a case in this community where a young Afro-American was, two Afro-Americans were involved, caught in a building.  They had gone in and it was an empty building, and actually gone in and to charge a ba- they shouldn't of done it.  But they went in to charge a battery of a cell phone and fell asleep, and police, somebody, a neighbor called and they got arrested.  The, the public defender had tried to convince these two young men to plead guilty to burglary and entry, okay?   Well through some people they'd gotten a lawyer and it turns out in California, what they got caught doing.  It's not by definition in California burglary, okay, burglary and entrance is a felony.
Speaker 1: Breaking and entering.
Speaker 2: Breaking, breaking and entering is a felony, this was trespassing, a misdemeanor.  Now the difference between pleading guilty to a felony and give--of misdemeanor is life changing for two black men.  So that's one example of if you don't know what, you don't know, if you don't have access to the system, you can change somebody's life.  And one is a misdemeanor, no big deal you know a stupid thing to do, but it doesn't change your life.  One is a felony on your record which changes your life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so the system okay, can cr- lead people down the wrong way if you're not diligent about the system.  So it's a lot of work needs to be done on the system to make sure our young black men don't end up in the sys- in the prison system unnecessarily.  On the other hand I think there are a number of things we need to do in the black community to try to give our young men hope and the vision and support.  To ensure they do achieve what's possible out here in society.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my biggest concern, I mean by a quarter of a magnitude.
Story_ID: 579139
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No, there are not major things that I would do differently, you know on hindsight I probably would've started my, a company [ITM Software Corporation] ten years earlier. I could have.  I didn't understand that, you know I, I was too thankful for what I had rather than talk about what might be possible.  And so I might've started, not would have, started in hindsight a company ten years sooner. I could've done that and I could've been successful at that.  You know if, when I was younger I might've spent more time in smelling the roses, but, not along the way, but not really.  I've been very fortunate you know I, I have a great relationship with my children and so I never sacrificed that along the way.  And so I'm very close with my kids and when they were younger and today, we're a quite close family.  So I'm proud of that, and I'm very proud, when I think about my legacy what I'm most proud of and feel best about is I think I've infect- impacted a large number of people's lives and careers in positive manner.  And that's all one can hope for did you, did you leave the world a better place 'cause you were here?  I believe I can say that, and I'm proud of that, and feel good about that.
Story_ID: 579140
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family, now you mentioned your kids and?
Speaker 2: Yeah my wife [Caretha Coleman] and I been married for almost thirty years and we have a blended family.  We have one son [Kenneth L. Coleman, Jr.] together who's twenty-six and I had three kids before, she had two kids.  They're not stepchildren, they are all sisters and brothers all six of them.  We are a very close family, and I'm very proud of all my children.  Two of my kids are in education, three are in, in technology and so and that's kind of you know I'm the technology.  My wife and are the technologist side of my family. I have two sisters. One is deceased but both, her and the one that's still alive are, were educators.  And so my children kind of represents both sides of my family, educators and technology people.  And that's, that's kind of a pedigree of, of my family and my children.   And I'm equally proud of my kids that are in education and the ones that are in technology.
Story_ID: 579141
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked and I, I know there's probably a lot of stuff we can talk about, but, but is there any major thing we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well no, I, I would say what you're doing is important. I, you know I, I would hope that these interviews and what I had to say will inspire young Afro-American kids to aspire to do great things and achieve things.  And for the non Afro-Americans here to have a better appreciation of this experience, what it means to grow up in America, an Afro-American.  And the importance of support and opportunity and vision at an early age how that can build upon itself, either a positive way or negative way.  And clearly for me I didn't get here by myself you know as I tried to explain my parents [Katie Owens Coleman and Louis Coleman], my siblings, my fraternity brothers [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  Or professor at Ohio State or high sch- grade school principal [William Harold Walker] in Illinois or you know or Roy Clay [Roy L. Clay, Sr.] here in locally.  That people had enormous impact on me and supported me in my efforts along the way.  And it's not all Ken Coleman [HistoryMaker Kenneth L. Coleman] by Ken Coleman so it's not relevant that way, you know, I don't think life's that way.  On the other hand, there's no substitute for hard work okay? There's no way to get around it, you know life is--there is a direct relationship with how hard you work and what might be the outcome.
Story_ID: 579142
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you liked to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well for me it's pretty similar to legacy. I wanna be remembered as a person who left the world a better place, because I existed.  But along the way as I progressed through life I did positive things for people, for human beings, and that I touched them in a positive way.  And if I can say that, then I think it's a life world, worth living and I've made a contribution.  As my mother [Katie Owens Coleman] says, always said, "Ken [HistoryMaker Kenneth L. Coleman] do what you think's right and that right can have a positive impact on people."  I'll be very proud.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 579143
Speaker 1: My wife and I own a home in Maui [Hawaii] and we, we believe in family as you, you know.  And we, as on our twentieth wedding anniversary which is almost nine years ago, we paid for all our children and their spouses or significant others and their children to come to Maui, and we had a, a family gathering for a week.  And this is all the children, all our children and their children or significant others on a picture we had taken.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my, starts my son Kenny [Kenneth L. Coleman, Jr.] on the left, on the left is my son Kenny.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then his nephew and my daughter's son name Kyle [ph.] and then that's my daughter Kennetha [Kennetha Coleman] and her husband Ernest [ph.].  My son's--Chris' wife and then Chris [ph.] is, but next to her, and then there's Karen [Karen Coleman] in front of Chris.  And that's Katyra [ph.] and Karen's daughter, and that's Kristen [Kristen Coleman] our youngest daughter, and Christopher who is--Kimberly [Kimberly Coleman] next to him, mother and then in Kimberly's arm the baby there is Kaylin [ph.].  And then that's my wife Caretha [Caretha Coleman] and myself.
Speaker 2: This is a picture when I retired from Silicon Graphics [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] and the picture's me and Eduardo [ph.] who was head of the Hispanic employee networking group.  And I was a big supporter of that group, and he was just congratulating me and wishing me well.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and that's me and a couple other student leaders and some other friends, from, from the high school days [at Centralia High School] in Centralia, Illinois.
Speaker 2: About 1960?
Speaker 1: Oh no, it'd be 1956, '57 [1957] timeframe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.  Okay can you tell me about this one sir?
Speaker 2: This is me and my wife at a party in shortly after we were married, so this is probably 1980, '81 [1981], '82 [1982] timeframe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay ready.
Speaker 2: It's a picture from the late '80s [1980s] of me in kind of the, the waning years of the Afro days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a high school picture from the, this person and I, Jim Stevenson, and I with our coach.  Where I was the, we were the captains of the basketball team.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This, this is a picture from year 1960 and I was president, this is the math club and I was president of the math club.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in when I was at Silicon Graphics for an article was written about me in a local newspaper.  Tell me when you're ready.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This picture when I received the award as one of the top ten Afro-Americans in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: So this is a montage of pictures taken from my fiftieth birthday from originals.  One is a basketball picture when I was a senior in high school, that's the left one.  The, the top right one is my senior year class picture it was in the yearbook, and then the lower left one was when I was on the student council and those are my fellow class officers.  And I was vice president, of, of my sophomore class in high school.
Speaker 2: That's a picture that was taken on April Fools' Day one day where I came to my office, and my office was in the men's bathroom (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture was in Black Enterprise magazine when I was selected as one of the top twenty-five most influential Afro-Americans in technology.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This person, this is a picture of me and my wife and Kenny G. Kenny G is one of my favorite musicians.  And he, we invited him to play at our, our winter festival at SGI once, and on my birthday it turns out that he played 'Happy Birthday' to me.
