Story_ID: 24669
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Eugenia Collier.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Emmett William Chappelle.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: The last or the first?
Speaker 1: You can start with the first name and--
Speaker 2: E-M-M-E-T-T, Emmett, C-H-A-P-P-E-L-L-E, Chappelle.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on the 24th of October, 1925 in Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now.  My last position was with NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.  I, I consider myself a biochemist, primarily, even though most of my recent work was in photobiology.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah, it's August 30th, right?
Speaker 2: August 30.
Speaker 1: And we're in 2012, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my home at 2502 Allendale Road, in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask that are just sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite what?
Speaker 1: Color.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Assateague, Maryland.
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 24670
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So I'm gonna ask about your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side, but we'll keep 'em separate until we get 'em both straight.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Viola White Chappelle, V-I-O-L-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, and White, W-H-I-T-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, could you guess in terms of, what would you think?  Do you think she was born around the, around 1900 or?
Speaker 2: I would say about then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm thinking, was she in her twenties when she had you or, you think?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and where were they living and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I can't go too far back on my mother's side.  She had a family of all girls.  Her mother died and she had a stepmother.  She, and she went two years to Alabama State Normal [University in Montgomery, Alabama].  Then she married my dad, my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, so then did she complete the course at Alabama State, 'cause I think a Normal degree is only two years?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if she finished.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she become a teacher?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, are there any stories about her parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did her people live in Montgomery in town?  Did they have some occupation in town?
Speaker 2: No, they lived in, outside of Montgomery in a place called Hope Hull.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's called Hope.
Speaker 2: Hope, H-O-P-E-, H-U-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, Hope Hull.  So were they farming there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that are passed down through your mother's side of the family about Emancipation or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I recall.
Story_ID: 24671
Speaker 1: And what did your--did your mother [Viola White] ever discuss what life was like in Montgomery when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a highly segregated town.  She, and she worked in service for a while in Birmingham [Alabama], and I recall her talking about the long trolley ride from Montgomery [Alabama] to Birmingham.
Speaker 1: And by highly segregated, you mean, what did she mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of things you couldn't do, places you couldn't go and places where you had to sit on the trolley cars.
Speaker 1: Okay, if you were a certain race, right, if you were black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she discuss Alabama State [University] much, I mean the Normal school?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  She, I recall her doing a little writing, sending things in to magazines which weren't published.
Speaker 1: Did you say they were published or--
Speaker 2: Were not published.
Speaker 1: Were not, okay.  But she would write to magazines and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was she sending stories or just letters?
Speaker 2: True stories, '"True Confessions" magazines like that.
Story_ID: 24672
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family.  And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Isom, I-S-O-M, Isom Chappelle.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I know he was, he was eligible for the draft when my oldest brother was born which would have been around 1918.
Speaker 1: So he was born around 1900 as well, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I forgot to ask, now, Isom is spelled I-S-O-M?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I can trace back to, to my grandmother.  He used to talk a lot about her.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Mary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he say about her?
Speaker 2: He said a lot about her, that she was a good woman, a good mother.  She had several children, about ten, two of them died.  My father was the fourth child.
Speaker 1: Now, what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Grandpa Isom?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: He talked a little bit about him.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: So your father was a junior?  Was he a junior?
Speaker 2: I think he was the third Isom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Grandpa Isom was the, was junior then, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, so you've got a great grandfather named Isom Chappelle too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that, that would take, I mean under normal circumstances, that would take us back to the Civil War [1861-1865], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So are there any stories about the Civil War or Reconstruction [1863-1877] in your, on that side of the family that are passed down?
Speaker 2: I know that my, either my great grandfather or my grandfather, when slavery ended [1865], they were given the land on which they were slaves.  I've seen that property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were given land by their former master.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, by any--do you know if they were related to their former master?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now, I ask because it's often the case.
Speaker 2: It's possible they were.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, so were they owned by Chappelle's, by people named Chappelle?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, about how much land did they have?
Speaker 2: About a hundred acres which was divided up among the--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay the family was on this land then from before the end of slavery, all the way through Reconstruction through the, I guess the time your father [Isom Chappelle]moved the family, I guess from, you know, from Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24673
Speaker 1: Okay, and so is there a, is a story about why your father [Isom Chappelle] moved, since he had land and everything?  I mean was the segregation too much or what?
Speaker 2: He had some trouble with a white man and had to pack up and leave.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there a story that you can tell us about what happened?
Speaker 2: I really never found out exactly what happened.
Speaker 1: Well, as we know in those days a black man in trouble with a white man--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --was probably gonna get the short end of justice, whatever happened.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so, probably a good idea to get out of town, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was about--when did your father move the family?
Speaker 2: I imagine that was around nineteen--around 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he moved the family to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father serve in the War [World War I: 1914-1918]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was eligible for the draft then?
Speaker 2: He was eligible.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, at any rate, so all right.  So you were telling me before we started the interview that your father moved first to Oklahoma, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, did he move the family via railroad train?  Did he take the family on a train from Alabama to Oklahoma or how did you move?
Speaker 2: With the family on a train.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what part of Oklahoma did he settle in?
Speaker 2: Guthrie.
Speaker 1: Oh, Guthrie, oh, yeah.  Now, Guthrie, now, I can't remember.  Is Guthrie a black town?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was another town in Oklahoma.  There was a black town, but I can't remember the name.
Speaker 1: Well, there's several of 'em.  I think Langley, Boley, it was Langley and Boley and there were about thirty at one time, but Guthrie.  There's something about Guthrie though is ringing in my head, and I can't think of what--I know Woody Guthrie is from Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And, he's from Okemah, Oklahoma.  So I don't know.  So Guthrie, Oklahoma, okay.  Okay, so what happened in Guthrie?
Speaker 2: He stayed there in Guthrie about three years.  And he wasn't satisfied with the, with the way things were going, money wise.  So he packed the family up and moved to Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have any idea why he moved to Phoenix?  Was there, did he know somebody there or had he heard something special about Phoenix?
Speaker 2: He had a brother there in Phoenix already.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so he had a brother in Phoenix already.  Okay, so this is about 1921, I guess?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Nineteen twenty-one [1921], he's in Phoenix.  Now, I wanna, so, now, did he buy land in Phoenix?  Was he able to buy land or did he--
Speaker 2: He didn't buy land right off.  He sharecropped for a while.  And then about the time I was born in 1925, he brought a farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you dad grew, you were telling me he grew cotton--
Speaker 2: Cotton.
Speaker 1: --and what else?  Cotton and, I guess vegetables and things, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then, but cotton was a--
Speaker 2: He had milk cows too.
Story_ID: 24674
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  So, cotton, he had milk cows and grew vegetables and stuff to eat.  Okay, I'm gonna stop right here and just ask you how your parents met?  Is there a story about how your parents got together?
Speaker 2: They were neighbors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Isom married Viola.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they go to school together?
Speaker 2: No, my father only went to the fourth grade, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they meet after they were grown?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, did they tell stories, is there a story about how they, you know, noticed each other or--
Speaker 2: The stories I can recall is my mother had several sisters.  And apparently there was some competition among the sisters for my father (laughter).  And Viola won out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, he was in a position to choose?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their dispositions and the way they looked, and the way they walked and talked and their attitudes, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother [Viola White].
Speaker 1: Okay, why?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  She used to, mother and I talked a lot, and she stimulated my imagination.  My father [Isom Chappelle] was rather quiet.  He was a hardworking man.  He lost the farm about three or four years after he bought it.  And after that we, he rented land for about five or six years till he saved up enough money to buy another farm.
Speaker 1: Now, these were tough times when he was--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: This is 1930's basically, we're talking about--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --early 1930s.  This is the Great Depression.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And it's also what they called the Dust Bowl [severe dust storms that were caused by extreme drought] too, wasn't it, when everything dried up?
Speaker 2: Well, not in Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It was always a dust bowl (laughter).
Story_ID: 24675
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I see, that's what I was thinking.  Yes.  Okay, so he--how, well, one question that comes to mind is how did they manage to have milk cows in Arizona?  I guess there's enough grass, I guess enough grass--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was enough grass for them.  And what I did when I was a kid, it was my job to, to--I'd take the cows out, out to the irrigation ditches where a lot of grass grew on the banks and mind them all day.
Speaker 1: How many cows did you have to keep track of?
Speaker 2: About six, six jersey's.
Speaker 1: So he was able to sell the milk and cheese and other products from the cows?
Speaker 2: He sold milk.
Speaker 1: Did he make anything else other than milk?
Speaker 2: No.  Around the house, we made butter.  I can still recall churning butter.
Speaker 1: So it was a lot of work involved in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --having a dairy.  Okay.  So, now, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and one sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had one sister who died.  And she died in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was young, before--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So can you name them all and tell us where you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: The oldest was Willie, the next one was LeRoi, and then I came along, and after me there was Helen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, all right.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory, the first thing that you remember remembering?
Speaker 2: [Pause] The first thing I can really remember is my sister and I crawling through a irrigation ditch to go to play with some Mexican kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were most of your neighbors Mexican?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you describe the house you grew up in?  Or was it several different places?
Speaker 2: I recall the first farm that my father owned, I recall the house there.  It was a rather large house, big lawn.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is a good time for us to pause.  We're gonna pause here.  It's a half hour.
Story_ID: 24676
Speaker 1: All right, now, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I can remember one bad smell, and that was my mother [Viola White] cooking chitterlings (laughter).  I hated that smell.  The good smells I'd say were freshly cut watermelon and chili beans.
Speaker 1: Any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: The sights that I recall vividly was when looking on both sides and seeing mountains.  On one said was Camelback Mountain and the other side was South Mountain.  I lived closest to South Mountain.  Where we lived was really originally a riverbed.  We children used to take long walks in the rain, down the--
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: [Pause] There weren't any sounds.  We didn't live in the city so we didn't hear anything.
Speaker 1: No train track nearby or anything?
Speaker 2: There was the train.
Speaker 1: Could you hear the whistle certain times of day?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And one of the farms we lived on was right next to the railroad track, and I recall one of my uncles used to visit us.  He'd, he'd be on the train and jump off the train right, right in back of our farm, coming to visit us.
Speaker 1: While it was still moving?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't moving very fast by the time it got to this area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Uncle Buddy was quite a character.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was my brother's, he was my mother's little brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he came out there too, so he came all the way out to Arizona too?
Speaker 2: He didn't come out there to stay.  He just came out there to visit.  He was a real hobo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Traveled all over, tell you all kinds of stories about his travel.  I don't know what happened to him.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of his stories?
Speaker 2: I recall him telling, describing some of the cities he had been in, Cincinnati [Ohio], Tampa [Florida].  One story he used to tell was having his picture taken in the moon.  That was, and that was the setting of one of the pictures he had taken.  I never saw the picture though.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But that's the only thing I can recall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that wasn't unusual in those days, right, for someone to be a hobo, to be a real hobo?
Speaker 2: Right, there were a bunch of them around.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So just for the record, as Ms. Colyer reminded me, we're talking about the Great Migration [between 1910-1970, the Great Migration was the movement of around 6million African Americans from the South to parts of the North, West, and Eastern United States] here, and (laughter), so just to make sure the people know that you're included in this migration of black people from the South to other parts of the country, North, West, and other places.  So, let me--now, I know one thing too that I've been advised about is that you had a very special relationship with your mother.  And I know you alluded to it before.  And you were, you were--when you were born, they weren't sure you were going to make it, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And what was wrong?
Speaker 2: The doctor just said I was too small to make it, threw me over to one side and said, let me take care of this woman (laughter).  And after that, for years, my family considered me as being sickly.  "Don't have that boy doing this, he's sickly."
Speaker 1: So as a result of that, did you get a chance to--now, you alluded to conversations you would have with your mother where she would inspire your imagination.  Well, can you remember the kind of things that you all talked about?
Speaker 2: We talked about the bible a lot, and one of the things that sticks in my memory is after she told me about Judgment Day, a big thunder and lightning storm would come along, and I asked her, "Is this Judgment Day?" (laughter)  I was taking it literally.
Speaker 1: Right, well, that's--did you have discussions about any other literature in the house?  Did you have access to newspapers and books, growing up when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: Not too many.  I didn't start having access to a lot of books until I started going to the library.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: When I started going to the library I guess I was around ten or eleven.
Story_ID: 24677
Speaker 1: Okay, and were you living in Guthrie [Oklahoma] then?
Speaker 2: No, we were in Phoenix [Arizona].
Speaker 1: Phoenix by then, okay.  All right, so when did your family actually move to--no, Guthrie is Oklahoma.  That's right.  So, so you were actually in Phoenix, but you were the suburbs or something Phoenix, rural?
Speaker 2: And we were out in the rural area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: South Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's called South Phoenix.  Okay, now, did you have any black neighbors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had some.  There was, there was a community a little distance from us called Okemah, where they had a lot of black people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of Okemah.  Now, that's where Woody Guthrie is from.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okemah, Oklahoma, yeah.
Speaker 2: This was Okemah, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, Okemah, oh, Arizona, that's right.  That's different from--you're right, right 'cause I'm getting Oklahoma's and Arizona's mixed up.  Yeah, but he's from actually Okemah, Oklahoma, right.  And so you're, so blacks lived in Okemah, Arizona, close by.  Was there a, well, was your family part of a black community with the church and all that or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what--
Speaker 2: We had black neighbors.  They weren't too close, but they were neighbors, nevertheless.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the names of some of the other families?
Speaker 2: The Poole's, the White's, the Coleman's, the Hall's.  That's about all I can remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many black churches were in the area?
Speaker 2: Only one.  It was a Holiness church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we didn't go to that church.  We went to a church in Phoenix, in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a predominantly white church?
Speaker 2: It was it was a black church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, I can't recall the name, but it was a Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it regular Methodist or AME or--
Speaker 2: AME.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were race relations like in Phoenix?
Speaker 2: They weren't bad.  They were, they were pretty good.  I know, to tell you how good they were, one morning, the family was on a wagon going to church.  And a short distance down the road, a white man hailed my father [Isom Chappelle] down and told him that my brother had abused one of his daughters (laughter).  And my father didn't believe it and they got in an argument, and my father got down off that wagon and (laughter) beat him up.  And there were white people cheering my father.
Speaker 1: So this character, I guess, had, didn't have a lot of friends, I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, he didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Character transcended race in that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --in that encounter, I guess.  Yeah, that's a little bit different because there're so many scenarios that you read about in those days where it's, you know, it doesn't turn out that way.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it your father was a person that didn't take a lot of stuff?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's probably--though you don't know the story about Alabama, I guess we could suspect that's why he had to leave?
Speaker 2: I really don't know that story.
Story_ID: 24678
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: When?
Speaker 1: No, where?  Now, did you go to school from first grade on or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My first school was Booker T. Washington [Elementary school].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I only went there four years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they, the county decided that it was spending too much money on buses for these kids.  So and they built a one-room schoolhouse out in the country.  And that's where I finished the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where was Booker T. Washington?  Was that in Phoenix?
Speaker 2: That was in Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, this is--they had school segregation in Arizona, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So all the black students around there went to Booker T. Washington?  Was that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did Booker T. Washington--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no there was one other black grade school, Dunbar [Paul Dunbar Lawrence School in Phoenix, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these were both strictly grade schools or did they take high school too?
Speaker 2: Grade schools.
Speaker 1: Grade, okay.
Speaker 2: The high school was also black.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Phoenix Colored High [formerly Phoenix Union Colored High School and George Washington Carver High School].
Speaker 1: Okay, and these are public schools, all of them?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started out at Booker T. Washington, but they didn't wanna bus you that far away, and so they built a one-room school house closer to where you lived?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, did they have a name for that?
Speaker 2: Wilson Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was the ward of a white school in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, wait a minute.  So Wilson Ward is the name of a, it's--was Wilson Ward a person that--
Speaker 2: No, Wilson was a person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ward wasn't.  The school was a ward of Wilson School.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know you said that, but it just took a while for it to sink in.  That's all.  It took a while for me to get it.  But, okay, so the school was considered a ward of the big Wilson School, which was a white school?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I guess this is Woodrow Wilson School?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so, Wilson's ward was the little school.  All right, and, okay, so a one-room schoolhouse.
Speaker 2: And sort of interesting, in Tucson, which is about a hundred and twenty miles from Phoenix, the schools weren't segregated.
Speaker 1: That is interesting.
Speaker 2: It's been said the reason they were segregated was to provide jobs for, for black teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who told that story?  I mean who was who told--was that just general feeling about--
Speaker 2: General knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay, that the segregated schools to give black teachers jobs.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, so you had--at Book [er] T. Washington, you had all black teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you remember your principal's name?
Speaker 2: Landry.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it Mr. Landry or?
Speaker 2: Mr. Landry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, did you, so did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: In grade school?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: No, I hated school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That sounds terrible (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And especially, here you grew up to be scientist and to find out you hated school.  Why did you hate school?
Speaker 2: I wanted freedom.  And to be cooped up in a school room all day long.
Story_ID: 24679
Speaker 1: Now, what would you do if you weren't in school?  I mean if you didn't have to go to school, what would you be doing?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd be walking around the desert.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the attraction of walking around in the desert?  I mean what did you see in the desert that was attractive and interesting?
Speaker 2: I liked it.  There were so many things to see.
Speaker 1: Well, for instance, can you describe some of them for us?  What would a desert walk be like?  What would you see on a desert walk?
Speaker 2: Coyotes, rattlesnakes [pause], I just liked it out there.
Speaker 1: Okay, would you go out by yourself?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you do any systematic observation out there?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) There were observations.  I don't know how systematic they were.
Speaker 1: What was the most fascinating aspect of the desert for you?
Speaker 2: There was a place out there called Joint Head and there was a fish hatchery where they grew fish.  And our greatest joy was to go fishing in the fish hatchery (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  That doesn't sound fair--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, weren't you guaranteed to catch a fish?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).  That's what made it fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, deserts can be dangerous, I know.  Did you have, did anyone ever teach you about the desert in terms of what you could do and not do out there, 'cause I know if you go out too far without water, you could get dehydrated or if you came across a rattlesnake, you could get bitten if you didn't know what to do, scorpions.
Speaker 2: I knew about the dangers.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have discussions about those things in the family, about what's dangerous out there and what--
Speaker 2: No, you know, my mother [Viola White] was seriously bitten once by a scorpion.  They thought she was gonna die from it.
Speaker 1: Was she rushed to a doctor or was the doctor too far away or what?
Speaker 2: No, the only thing my father [Isom Chappelle] did was, was use home remedies.  I don't know what they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kerosene and things like that.
Speaker 1: Do you recall what he did for her?
Speaker 2: I can't recall.  I wasn't old enough.  I just, I just heard about this.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know, were there certain kinds of scorpions that would kill you and certain ones that would not?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't make any distinction between a good scorpion and a bad one (laughter).  They were all bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: You didn't wanna get stung by any of 'em?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Well, about the snakes.  Now, you knew what a rattlesnake was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew what a rattlesnake was.
Speaker 1: So, did you--I mean did they give you plenty warning when you came up, close to one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they rattled.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's convenient.
Speaker 2: I remember the fellow out there who had a pet of rattlesnakes.  And I was out there one day, and we had a dog that jumped down in to the rattlesnake pit (laughter).
Speaker 1: That doesn't sound like a very smart dog?
Speaker 2: No, he was dumb (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did he survive it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I didn't think so.  Now, you must have had quite a few dogs, I would imagine?
Speaker 2: No, I only had one dog.
Speaker 1: You only had one, okay.  Is that the one that jumped into the pit?
Speaker 2: No, that was, was a dog that belonged to a friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he got on a ladder and went down and brought the dog up.  And there were rattlesnakes snapping all around him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds like a horrific story.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And so he didn't get bitten, did he?
Speaker 2: No.  Harold White, he was a good buddy of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the name of your dog?
Speaker 2: Mickey.
Speaker 1: Mickey, okay.  What was he?
Speaker 2: A mongrel.
Speaker 1: Okay, those are often the best kind.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Those are often the best kind to have.
Speaker 2: I loved that dog.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And unfortunately, she got poisoned and died.
Speaker 1: What do you think she ate?  Did she eat something that was intended for some other animal?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Were there any really dangerous animals in the desert?
Speaker 2: I never ran across any.  Coyotes could be dangerous, but they were afraid of people.
Speaker 1: Okay, there weren't any panthers or anything--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 24680
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, did you--when did you first become or when would you consider that you first became aware of scientific curiosity?
Speaker 2: I, I guess when I was around the seventh grade, and that's when I started enjoying school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened?  Was there an incident that or a teacher that came along or what happened?
Speaker 2: Not, not then.  I didn't really get a teacher that inspired me until I entered high school.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened in the seventh grade that--
Speaker 2: I just started reading a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Going to the library frequently, getting dozens of books.
Speaker 1: Did they start formally teaching science in the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you have your first science course in school?
Speaker 2: When I was in high school, had a biology course when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: Now, what library--was there a--could you use the regular public library in Phoenix or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't have a colored library?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed going to the library.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you reading when you started going?
Speaker 2: I first started reading fiction, and then I started looking at other, other kinds of books.  I wanted to know how to build things.  I recall one of my big projects one summer was building an adobe house, and you know what abode is, don't you?
Speaker 1: I do, but tell those listening, who are going to be listening the future, not just Ms. Colyer, but what an adobe house is?
Speaker 2: Adobe house, they're houses that the Indians lived in out in the Southwest.  Adobe is a mixture of mud and straw that stick together very tightly, and you shape them in the shape of bricks and build a house.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it a durable house?
Speaker 2: A durable house.
Speaker 1: And what happens if it rains on it?
Speaker 2: Well, if it rains too hard, of course, they'll disappear (laughter).  A friend of mine and myself spent a whole summer building this house.  That was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.
Story_ID: 24681
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about, you were talking about the inside of an adobe house.  What's it like?
Speaker 2: Very cool.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You were saying more before, I don't know if I short circuited you or what, you know, on this. But, okay, so they're cool, and comfortable even in all that heat, huh?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Because, you know, I would think, you know, it might bake you, you know, if you're out in the hot sun in an adobe house, but they don't, right?
Speaker 2: Un-un.  And that mud is in an insulator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is it hard to, I imagine it is hard.  How do you find water in that desert situation?  When you went for your walks, did you have to carry water with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But they have wells out there.  They have irrigation ditches where water is constantly running.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is a taste I'll never forget, is the taste of the irrigation water, beautiful.
Speaker 1: Really?  It tastes good?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: It is because it's constantly running?
Speaker 2: It's been running through a lot of grass and everything.  Tasted good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were in grade school, before we get you to high school, was there any particular teacher that helped you like school better?
Speaker 2: Well, after I started going to this one-room schoolhouse, we had a teacher by the name of Mrs. Scott, who I didn't like very much, never did like her (laughter) till the day I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) were there any ones that you liked?
Speaker 2: Well, there was only one teacher then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a bad experience (laughter) with school teachers.  Okay, now, Phoenix Colored High School [Phoenix, Arizona]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --this is, now, you start high school, about what year is this?  This is, about what year is this?  You're like fourteen years old, I guess?  So this would be--
Speaker 2: How old was I when I started high school?
Speaker 1: Nineteen-thirty eight [1938] or something or--
Speaker 2: I guess I was about thirteen or fourteen.
Speaker 1: So this is about 1938, I guess, right, about right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was, I was eighteen when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Right, and that's 1942.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's about 1938 when you start school [high school].
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 24682
Speaker 1: Now, did your family have a radio when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: They had a radio.  We got a radio so we could listen to the Joe Louis [professional boxer] fights.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did, was that a big--I guess that was a big deal, the Joe Louis fights?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any particular fight that he had that was big, was bigger than another?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, the biggest fight was when he took the championship, when he beat Jerry Braddock. And there were a lot of neighbors there.  People who didn't have radios came over to listen to ours.  It was quite an occasion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how many people do you think were there?
Speaker 2: Probably a dozen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, I was asking you before, did your family get the newspapers and stuff, the black newspapers like the "Chicago Defender" or the "Pittsburgh Courier" or any of those papers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we bought the "Chicago Defender".
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a kid in the neighborhood who would come around every Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like reading the paper?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 24683
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any other special talents growing up?  Could you draw or did you play an instrument or any of those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: No, I was a very untalented boy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, you didn't like school--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, I thought I'd ask.  Now, did you like sports?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what kind of sports did you like?
Speaker 2: I was a distance runner.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So what distances did you run?
Speaker 2: The mile.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you run in high school, high school track?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The desert produces good distance runners.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: They say (laughter).  Okay, did you win any prizes as a runner.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I won the mile, two years running at the state meet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the whole state of Arizona.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it just the black schools or--
Speaker 2: No, it was all the schools..
Speaker 1: All the schools, okay.  You know, in some states, they only let the black teams play other black schools.  And, but, you know, it varies how segregation tumbles down in different places.
Speaker 2: And there was only one black high school in the state, and that was in Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Phoenix Colored High School was the only black high school in the State of Arizona.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, 1938, you started high school and you had biology--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --for the first time.  Do you remember your biology teacher?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you like him or her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I liked him from the start.  He was not only my biology teacher.  He was my math teacher too.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Omphie Coleman.
Speaker 1: Omphie?  How do you spell--
Speaker 2: Omphie.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-M-P-H-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he taught biology and math.  Now, were you a good mathematician?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 24684
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, who else, who were some of the other personalities at Phoenix Colored High School besides Mr. Coleman?  Who were some of the other teachers and students that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, there was Myrtle Rogers.  She was my English teacher, Tom Brown, physical education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Roy Lee who was the principal.
Speaker 1: Now, were most of the--is there anybody else you wanted to mention before I ask another question?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Is there anyone else you wanted to mention from Phoenix Colored High School?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to ask you if most of the black people in Phoenix were from Phoenix or were they all from someplace else or most of 'em from some other place?
Speaker 2: Just about all of the, all of them were from someplace else.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's what I would guess, but I just thought I'd ask.  And so, had they arrived as recently as your father for the most part?
Speaker 2: Some of them, but not many.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what other activities were you involved in, in high school?  Were you involved in clubs or the debate team or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you run for student body president or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was said here in the room, someone said that you were shy growing up.  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 24685
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As you'll probably notice, I stammer.  And that was one of the reasons I was so shy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you speak fairly clearly now, I mean, as a lot of people do once they get older and master it.  I'm a stutterer too.  So, but so how did you, you know, control it?
Speaker 2: I just started controlling it.
Speaker 1: Did you get any advice from anyone?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do to control it?
Speaker 2: I don't know what I did.  I just stopped stammering for the most part.  I still stammer some.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just have to slow yourself down a little bit?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't feel quite as self-conscious.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student.  I was Valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty good.  I think that's what that means (laughter), Valedictorian (laughter).  So, did you have to make a speech for graduation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember what you talked about?
Speaker 2: I, (laughter) oh, it was something asinine.  I wrote it myself, and I thought it was pretty good when I wrote it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is, you graduated in 1942, and, now, did you have any counseling at Phoenix Colored High School about going to college?
Speaker 2: No, even though when I graduated I was, I was given a scholarship to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 24686
Speaker 1: So did you take advantage of it?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I graduated from high school, I took a test for the Army Specialized Training Program, and I passed that and they sent me to Howard [University] for one quarter before I was going into the Army.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually went to Howard for a quarter then, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, out of graduation, okay.  All right, so I suppose in the beginning of, what, 1943, you're in the Army then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I went into the Army when I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was this specialized training program and what did you do as a result?
Speaker 2: Well, what it was supposed to be, it was after I finished basic training, they were going to send me to college for four years.  But the Army Specialized Program closed up before I finished my basic training.  And I was shipped to the 92nd Division.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is during World War II [1939-1945], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you're in high school during the beginning of World War II and 1943 is when you're in this program.  It's right in the middle of World War II.  So two more years to go in the War, and so they sent you to the 92nd Division.  Now, that's the, is that the Harlem Hell Fighters, the 92nd?
Speaker 2: The Buffalo Division.
Speaker 1: Buffalo Soldiers, okay.  All right, so you're in the Buffalo Soldiers, and you're going to Italy, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us about that.  What happened?
Speaker 2: What do you wanna know?
Speaker 1: Well, what it was like, you know, being in a Buffalo Soldier division in 1943 and what you saw in Italy, and what was going on in the War, and I wanna know all of it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --at least some of it, at least the highlights, anyway.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  We were up on the (unclear) line just after we crossed the Arnold.  And that's when the fighting became a little fierce.  The only thing I can recall is going out on patrols several times.  One of those times when I was out patrol, got wounded, artillery got me right here.  I made it through that.  And then we crossed over, we crossed through Florence [Italy] on the way to the Poe River, and that's where I got wounded a second time, shell shocked.  But in between I had a good time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So sandwiched between being wounded (laughter), you actually had a good time in the Army?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did the good time consist of?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it at length, especially the wine (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a lot of free time, I mean to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was in a mortar squad, and we would put our mortars in one position, and we might be there a week or so at a time.  So all we'd do is explore the countryside, play cards, and, fortunately, I wasn't in a rifle company.  It would have been a great deal different.
Speaker 1: Would it have been more dangerous?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only weapon I had on me was a 45 [pistol].
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And the only time I fired it, I fired it accidentally while I was cleaning, and I almost hit a man with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, guns are dangerous.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, or people with 'em are dangerous.  Now, tell me, now.  Now, this is a segregated Army, right, World War II.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You're in an all-black unit, right?
Speaker 2: All black, except for the officers.
Speaker 1: So you had black sergeants and, but when it came to the lieutenant level, the officer level, they were white?
Speaker 2: We had black lieutenants, some of them were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But after that, they were all white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean how were the black soldiers, well, you were already segregated and with the white officers, so I mean, to ask you how you were treated--did, I mean was it, I mean how did you deal with that, with the segregation of the Army?
Speaker 2: I just ignored it, accepted it.
Story_ID: 24687
Speaker 1: Now, did you encounter any of the, or hear about any of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Did you hear about or encounter or meet any of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I knew they were there.  And they were also stationed in Italy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were--I don't know if I'm pronouncing it right, but I know it's Ramitelli or something like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Ramitelli, Italy.  So, but you knew they were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you find out?  Did you find out through word-of-mouth or through the paper or what?
Speaker 2: I think I found out through the "Star and Stripes", which was an army newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so you were wounded twice.  Now, did you go back after the second wounding?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, the second time you were wounded, was it as bad as the first time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did the Italian people treat you?
Speaker 2: Oh, they treated us very well.  Most of the time we, after we set our mortars up next to somebody's house, and we'd live in their house.  No, they were very nice.  They, they had already surrendered by the time I got over there.
Speaker 1: So they were just trying to get through the, to the end of the War, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything happen there that was really memorable that you, that you'll never forget?
Speaker 2: Not anything more than I've already told you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: One, one memorable thing I can recall is at the same time as, as the Battle of the Bulge was taking place in Northern Europe, the Germans counteracted in Italy.  And I recall having to walk all night long carrying a mortar barrel on my shoulder upper mount.
Speaker 1: How big is a mortar barrel?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's pretty big.  It's about, it's about three feet long and about four inches in diameter.  They weigh about fifty pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, do you remember where you were when you heard about the end of the War?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember where I was.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about it?
Speaker 2: I remember seeing these long lines of German soldiers marching along as prisoners, close to me.  And I was happy, and then I was scared they were gonna send us to the South Pacific.  But they sent us on guard duty in Naples [Italy].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, so did you come back some time in 1945?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 24688
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, what was your plan when you came--you could go to school on a GI Bill once you let you out, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: That's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I have a note here that some of the other guys that were in the 92nd Division, which is huge.  I know it's a big, a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But did you ever meet Edward Brooke, the Senator?  He was in 92nd.
Speaker 2: He's a relative.
Speaker 1: Really?  Okay.  So he's Eugenia Collier's--
Speaker 2: I never met him though. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Cousin.
Speaker 1: Cousin, all right, he's a cousin to Eugenia Collier, and, okay.  But you never met him.
Speaker 2: No, I never met him.
Speaker 1: All right, and then Earl Strayhorn from Chicago [Illinois] who was a famous lawyer and judge--
Speaker 2: Never met him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he was never--you never met him either?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought I'd ask 'cause, there were plenty other people in the 92nd too, probably the--did you meet anybody in the 92nd that people would know about now?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So and they didn't meet you either, I guess, and you're somebody we're interviewing.  So you're pretty important too.  So.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: When I interview them, I'll ask them about you.  So, okay, so you returned to the United States in 1945 or '6' [1946]?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: It was January of '46' [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, you went to, from what I understand, you went to Phoenix College [community college in Phoenix, Arizona], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, and you worked on a degree in electrical engineering?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell us about that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I was only there two years, got an Associate degree.
Speaker 1: So did you have any plans to go any further?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 24689
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, in 1947, you got married, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet your wife?  Did you know her already or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we'd been in high school together.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Rosemary Phillips.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you'd been in high school together.  So you knew her.  Okay, so you got married in 1947.  Now, did, now, how did you--now, you got your Bachelor of Science degree from University of California at Berkley.  Now, how was that arranged?  I mean how did you go from Phoenix to UC-Berkley?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I was going to a four-year college, and I liked California.  So I applied there, and I was accepted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there a lot of soldiers in school then, former soldiers?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, so, now what did you get your Bachelors of Science in?
Speaker 2: Biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, here's a question.  You know what this question is now.  How did you go from becoming an electrical engineer to a biochemist?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) While I was going to school at Cal [University of California], I was taking courses in the summer.  And I took some physiology courses, and I was so fascinated with them that I decided to change my major from engineering to biology.  And I wanted to combine chemistry.  So I chose biochemistry.  It took me a year longer to graduate.
Speaker 1: Was it worth it?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any, was there any particular instructor or teacher or mentor that guided you towards biochemistry that did something--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.  So this is, you just liked it better--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but the instructors had nothing to do with it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --whatsoever.  Okay.  All right, so, now, in 1950, you got your BS, and then you went to Meharry Medical College in Nashville [Tennessee] as an instructor?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So how was that arranged?
Speaker 2: When I graduated from Berkley [California], I took a job as a medical technician at a VA Hospital in Oakland, California.  And there was, there was a fellow who came there one summer who was a medical, a medical student at Meharry.  And he asked me why I didn't make an application to Meharry for a job.  And I did.  And Dr. Harold West was the chairman of the biochemistry department.  So I took a job teaching nursing students.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna pause here again.  It's another break, and we'll pick up.
Story_ID: 24690
Speaker 1: All right, U-C [University of California], you finished U-C Berkley, and you're on your way to Meharry [College]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, so you applied to Meharry, and they accepted you and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you were going there to teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, so you--were you teaching chemistry?
Speaker 2: Biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Biochemistry, okay.
Speaker 2: To nursing students.
Speaker 1: All right, to nursing students.  So how did you like Nashville?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I neglected to ask you if there were any important teachers or instructors at U-C Berkley that you remember or how you were treated there, you know.  What was that experience like at U-C Berkley?
Speaker 2: It was good.  I can't really remember any teachers that stood out.  But it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it better than the Army, I mean in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, a hell of a lot better (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, okay, at Meharry, now, you were there, what, four years?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.  Anybody at Meharry you remember after all these years?
Speaker 2: The chairman, Harold West.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is one of the few black medical schools in the country or the few schools that black doctors could attend in those days.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Meharry.
Speaker 2: Howard [University].
Speaker 1: Yeah, they could go to Howard, Coleman G. Phillips of St. Louis [Missouri].  There were a few, maybe a couple more, but there weren't too many places.  So, okay--
Speaker 2: Her father went to Howard.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, okay, so you left in 1952 then to go to graduate school, again, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 24691
Speaker 1: So, you went out to the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]. So you're really covering a lot of ground.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So how was that arranged, when you would go to the University of Washington?
Speaker 2: And I was driving every bit of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were you driving then?
Speaker 2: Let's see, there was, it was a 1949 Nash.  I drove that car until the wheels fell off of it one day right out there.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, so a 1949 Nash, and you drove it to University of Washington.  Now, that's in Seattle, right?
Speaker 2: I drove it from Nashville [Tennessee] all the way to the University of Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So there, you worked on your Masters degree in biology, right?
Speaker 2: Biochemistry.
Speaker 1: Biochemistry, okay.  We've got this wrong.  Okay.  Now, were there any memorable instructors there?
Speaker 2: Frank Huennekens.
Speaker 1: Okay, Frank, and how do you spell his--okay?
Speaker 2: H-U-E-N-N-E-K-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was his nationality, do you know?
Speaker 2: He was white (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you got your Masters degree there.  Now, were you encouraged to keep going for a PhD?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I guess I would just, I would think today that and really the feedback I get from all the scientists I interview, or most of them, is that, you know, if you're gonna get a Masters, you may as well get a PhD, you know.
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Most of them say if you're gonna get a Masters, you may as well get a PhD.  It's just another year, you know, of work.  So, if you're already on the track.  But you didn't think about it then, about getting a PhD?
Speaker 2: I thought about it, but I didn't wanna get it there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and why not there?
Speaker 2: I didn't think too much of the atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Okay, they treated you okay, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you really didn't like it?
Speaker 2: I didn't like the chairman of the department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Hans Norath.
Speaker 1: And what was it about him that you didn't like?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a cold bird who never encouraged you or anything.
Story_ID: 24692
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, after you--now, you continued graduate studies, it says here, at Stanford [University], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you weren't intending to get a PhD?  You were, so what did you study at Stanford?
Speaker 2: I was still studying biochemistry, but I was doing primarily research at Stanford.
Speaker 1: I neglected to ask you what was your thesis at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington] about?
Speaker 2: Ghee, the Intraconversion of Sharing to something. I forget now.  It's in my, in my folder. [It was called 'Enzymatic Interconversion of Serine and Glycine].
Speaker 1: And can you kind of explain to us in a, in the language that a child could understand what that is?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's for our benefit.
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  It was (unclear) proteins  are taken into the body and broken down into amino acids where certain of the amino acids go next and serine is one amino acid that's converted.  And it's converted into something that I can't recall right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So it was about the conversion of amino acids?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, so, from nineteen--at Stanford, you served as a research associate at Stanford for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --until 1958.  And so did you kind of hit it off with the people at Stanford.?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had a very good man who I was working with, Dr. J. Murray Luck.
Speaker 1: Gene Murray Luck, that's L-U-C-K?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Is he any relationship to the quarterback from Stanford?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, no.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is the million-dollar quarterback, Andrew Luck, yeah.  At any rate.
Speaker 2: He was a Canadian.
Speaker 1: Okay, Gene Murray Luck.  All right, so, you assisted him on research projects at--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --Stanford.  And what kind of research were you--was it still, well, I have here a note that you were working on, here that you found a key enzyme for the production of the amino acid called glycine, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you determined that this amino acid is the product, is produced both in plants and animals by exactly the same enzyme?  So glycine is produced by plants and animals.  So, and it says here you also discovered a chemical that could split protein molecules in a predictable way.  Okay, so you, can you tell us something about this research?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, any of the research at Stanford.  What was the thing that you remember the most about your research at Stanford?
Speaker 2: In Bromocyanamide [sic, bromoacetamide?] which split, which split off the terminal groups of proteins so that by studying the products of the splitting, you can determine the structure of that protein.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a major discovery at Stanford?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, now--
Speaker 2: One of my publications is on that.
Speaker 1: Now, are these the Aldehydes?  Is that the--
Speaker 2: Aldehydes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Is this what you're referring to now, Aldehydes?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 24693
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, it says here that even though you didn't receive a degree from Stanford [University], your work was recognized and applauded by people.  People recognized what you were doing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so in 1958, you joined the Research Institute for Advanced Studies in Baltimore.  Now, how did this come about?  And why did you leave Stanford to come to Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: There was a scientist from RIAS, what we called it the Research Institute for Advanced Studies.  He came out to Stanford for a meeting once.  And we talked and talked, and he offered me a job.  And the kind of research they were doing, I was interested in.  So I came on out.
Speaker 1: So this was more money than they were giving you at Stanford or a better position?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, so, substantially more, I would think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did Stanford try to match the offer and keep you at Stanford or could they compete?
Speaker 2: No, they encouraged me to take the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so this is 1958, and you worked for the Research Institute for Advanced Studies which is a division of Martin-Marietta Corporation which is famous for designing airplanes and space craft.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a connection here.  Now, were you, now from what I've read, you were working on a project to, focused on the regulation of a safe air supply for astronauts, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: And you were utilizing green algae as part of the--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --solution of this problem.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how does that work?  Tell us.
Speaker 2: Well, the culprit that we're trying to eliminate here is carbon monoxide and I was utilizing algae to take up carbon monoxide and convert it to carbon dioxide.
Speaker 1: Now, carbon monoxide is poisonous to human beings.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's, most people are familiar with a scenario of someone, you know, left in a car that's running in a garage and then being overcome by--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --carbon monoxide, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And some people commit suicide like that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And some people are killed like that, you know, inadvertently 'cause they don't understand what carbon monoxide can do to them.  So, you figured out a way by using green algae to convert carbon monoxide into carbon dioxide, which is not, will not kill you.  But we exhale carbon dioxide, right, when we breathe?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So, now, how did this work?  Now, I'm trying to imagine in my mind how the algae was used to do this?  How was it used?
Speaker 2: The algae take up carbon monoxide similar to the way they take up carbon dioxide.  It's taken in through the membrane and converted within the algae to carbon dioxide.
Speaker 1: Now, do you line an apparatus with algae or how does it work?  I just don't understand how you use the algae in the process?
Speaker 2: Well, you have a tank, you might say, filled with algae, and direct carbon monoxide into that tank.  And what you come out with is more CO2, thereby rendering the carbon monoxide helpless.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the gas, the carbon monoxide gas is then, is channeled through water that contains the algae--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and then that filters out the, that changes the composition of it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I understand.  Okay.  All right.  Okay, now, did this solve the problem for the astronauts and was it used on space flights?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if it was ever used.
Story_ID: 24694
Speaker 1: Okay, now, from '63' [1963] to 1966, you worked as a biochemist for Hazelton Laboratories in Falls Church [Virginia].  What project were you working on there?
Speaker 2: I was developing a system for determining if there was life on other planets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so you were there for a fairly long time working on this, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, from what I have here, they would call you an exobiologist, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Someone who is engaged in the search for extraterrestrial life and the effects of extraterrestrial surroundings on living organisms.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so at this point, you become an astrochemist, right.  So how do--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you like that title (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I never considered myself as an astrochemist, even though that was the title they put on me.  I was always, considered myself a biochemist.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, if you told somebody you were looking for, you were trying to determine if there was extraterrestrial life, what kind of conversations would you have with people?  I mean would they think it was like something that's impossible or what did people think then?
Speaker 2: Well, they wouldn't know what to think.  I'm still not sure whether or not there's life on other planets.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's likely?
Speaker 2: I think it's likely.  It's not life as we know it here on earth.  But I think it's likely that there's, there are organisms up there that reproduce.
Speaker 1: And so you're saying that there are definitely organisms in space that we produce here?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: You're saying there're organisms in space right now that we produce here in, on earth?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm saying that there's most likely life out there that will reproduce in their own environment, which is (unclear) a criterion of life, the ability to reproduce.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the target of your design, the instruments that you were designing was the Viking I Mission [the first successful NASA spacecraft to Mars] which occurred in 1975, right?
Speaker 2: That was supposed to be the vehicle on which my experiment would be flown, Viking.
Speaker 1: All right, so was it?  I mean did you have experiments--
Speaker 2: It never flew.
Speaker 1: It never flew.  Okay.  All right.  What happened?  Why didn't it fly?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  They decided that the experiment which I designed was too specific, that it would call for life, to be too close to life here on earth, and that most likely, it wouldn't work.
Speaker 1: Or it wouldn't detect something that might be close to life on earth, but not quite--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, but Viking did, Viking flew, but your instrumentation didn't go?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 24695
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, now, also, now, working on this project, you became interested in bioluminescence, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: And tell us how that took place.  What is bioluminescence, and what happened during the project to get you interested in it?
Speaker 2: You've seen a fire fly, haven't you?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Well, that's bioluminescence.  You can, you can take those fire flies and grind them up and extract the enzyme, mix it with Adenosine Triphosphate and get light.
Speaker 1: Now, this I kind of a code method of producing light, right?  I mean using something that's not, you know, on fire or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --something without a spark?
Speaker 2: You could call it that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so is there any heat produced from this light?
Speaker 2: No measurable heat.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are you the first then--I read that you were the first person to discover the chemical composition of bioluminescence, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, and that's why you're in the Inventors Hall of Fame, is that true, because of this?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, how was, how long did it take you to, you know, come up with the chemical composition of bioluminescence and--
Speaker 2: It took years.
Speaker 1: So, when, I mean how many years, I mean approximately how many years did it take to do that?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Approximately, how many years did it take you to discover this?
Speaker 2: Approximately three.
Speaker 1: Three years, okay.  All right, that's not a very long time.  But, so did you--now, as a biochemist, I didn't ask you this before, but I guess this is a good time--now is as good a time as any.  What's the day-to-day activities of a biochemist working on the projects that you were working on?  I mean how soon do you get to the laboratory, and how many breaks do you get, and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Is it a short work week or do you have time to play cards or do you, I mean what is the--or do you have to work real hard or what?  What is it like?
Speaker 2: Oh, a biochemist is a person who investigates the chemistry of living organisms.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I was asking about your routine.  What do you do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What do you mean by my routine?
Speaker 1: Well, what you do, you know, every day after you get up and get dressed and ready to go to work, what do you do at work?
Speaker 2: Well, you go into your laboratory and carry out experiments, hopefully, designed to answer questions as to, as to what are the chemical reactions involved in carrying out a certain biological reaction.
Speaker 1: Okay, typically, would you have a number of assistants or an assistant, or did you have to do everything by yourself or what?
Speaker 2: Usually, you have an assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so with this kind of investigation on the properties of bioluminescence, did you utilize electronic measurement devices as well as--
Speaker 2: Yes.  You have to use electronic devices to measure the light.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us any more detail or--(laughter) are we out of luck (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You start out with the fire fly which you have to obtain by way.  Either you catch it yourself or you pay the little kids to run around catching them for you.  Then you bring them into the lab.  You chop off their tails, grind them up and get a solution out of these ground-up tails which contains the enzyme sulforates (ph.) (unclear) and the cofactor Luciferin.  You add Adenosine Triphosphate to that mixture and you get light.  Adenosine Triphosphate is usually called ATP, which is found in all living organisms.  And we were able to use that reaction to, to measure the bacteria in infected urine samples and some of the reaction mixture to the urine sample and measure the amount of light we get.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, we're gonna pause here, and then we'll pick up again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I understand like what, yeah.
Story_ID: 24696
Speaker 1: All right, sir, you were, before we broke, you were referring to how bioluminescence is, those studies are used to show the number bacteria in drinking water, I mean or to illuminate bacteria in drinking water.
Speaker 2: Or urine.
Speaker 1: Urine, okay, not drinking water (laughter).  All right, but can it used to spot bacteria in drinking water too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, any liquid or basically?
Speaker 2: Any liquid or even if it's a solid, you can spread a little bit of the mixture on it and if it lights up, you have bacteria there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So is this the method they use when they inspect hotel rooms and that sort of thing for bacteria?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I know they have a light they shine and they can show--and it glows, where the bacteria is, glows and that sort of thing.  And it sounds like it does.  But the, you and Grace L.--
Speaker 2: Picciolo (ph.).
Speaker 1: --Picciolo, yeah, developed a method of instantly detecting bacteria in water which led to improved diagnosis of urinary tract infections, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the medical, big medical breakthrough for this, for bioluminescence.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1966, you joined NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at the Goddard Space Flight Center, in Greenbelt, Maryland.  Now, what were you doing at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center?
Speaker 2: Well, that's why, when I started there, I was developing a system for detecting extraterrestrial life, which you've covered already.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so that's, prior to the Viking [the Viking 1 was the first spacecraft that was sent to Mars] in 1975.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in, oh, so in '75' [1975], after Viking, then you went to Johns Hopkins, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what were you doing at Johns Hopkins?  I'm sorry, oh, is this--okay, so this is where--I'm sorry, my outline's kind of out of order.  But this is where bioluminescence was used to track urinary tract infections, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: All the bioluminescence work was done at Goddard [Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I went to Hopkins [Johns Hopkins], I was attempting to develop a procedure, help on the detection of cancer.
Speaker 1: Now, was this using some kind of bioluminescence too or some other way, some other method of detection?
Speaker 2: Some other method of detection.  It was thought that cancer cells might give off light on their own, which turned out not to be the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were at Johns Hopkins just to determine if cancer cells gave off light?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so in '77' [1977] you continue working with Goddard Space Flight Center, is that true?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were working as a remote sensing scientist?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means we were trying to, to measure crop health remotely.
Speaker 1: Okay, and by what means were you using, what means were you using to measure--
Speaker 2: When we first started, the only thing we were doing was, was measuring the spectra of green plants.
Speaker 1: Okay, so from what I understand, you were measuring the amount of fluorescents over, from green plants?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and by measuring the amount of fluorescents, you could determine the health of the plants?
Speaker 2: By looking at the spectra.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, so did you work for Goddard for the rest of your career, basically?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in, I know in--you were honored in 1994 with NASA's Exception Scientific Achievement Medal.  And was that for any specific contribution or for a lifetime of service?
Speaker 2: It was a lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, yeah, I know for your specific research in bioluminescence, you were included into the inventors' hall of fame and several other halls of fame and list of, you're the list of 100 Most Important Black Scientists, you know, of the century, and now, you retired from Goddard in 2001?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were seventy-six [years old].  So you worked a long time past retirement age of most people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were working--did you work so long because you were excited about your work or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 24697
Speaker 1: Okay, and, you know, what projects were you working on before you retired?
Speaker 2: Fluorescents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Distributed by lasers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, what effect do lasers have on fluorescents?
Speaker 2: Well, they, the lasers, had laser beams when they strike a vegetative surface, stimulate fluorescents of the chemicals that are in that surface.  And you get a spectra.  It looks like this.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so what's the future, what are the future implications of that study?
Speaker 2: The future implication is that you can, you can tell a great deal about the health or yield of the plants by looking at the fluorescent spectra.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I wouldn't have to wait until the crop season to find out if a plant was--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --okay, how good a producer a plant would be--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, I could, you know, I could test it with lasers.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what do you, what do you see as the future of your study of fluorescent and bioluminescence and that sort of, in this field?  I mean what's the future and what do you think we might discover in the future that's useful or what are you hoping to find out?
Speaker 2: [Pause] I don't know.  It can serve as the basis of (laughter) somebody else's work.
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess what I'm asking is that are you, can--I know you're a scientist, but can you imagine maybe what these discoveries on, you know, in fluorescents and bio-illumination might come to at some point or what they might, what are--is there any project that people are trying to, are there any problems that people are trying to solve that may be, that this might be a part of?
Speaker 2: You might be able to identify species.  For instance, you might be able to detect a marijuana plant by this technique.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that technique then would be developed by both criminals and law enforcement--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: --(laughter), I can suppose.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you can sell it to either one of 'em (laughter).  So, now, of all the honors that you received, is there any one that's the most important, you think, to you?
Speaker 2: They're all important.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, then what would you consider today to be your legacy in biochemistry?
Speaker 2: [Pause] My work in bioluminescence.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you wish you had more time to work on that--
Speaker 2: Well, I think you can always think of something that you wish you had done.  I wish I could have spent more time in fluorescents.
Speaker 1: Now, when you, looking back again, is there any major thing that you wish you'd done differently?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 24698
Speaker 1: And, sir, we always ask this question too.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I hope that they take advantage of the things that are available to them now.  I hope they take advantage of the education that's available to them now.  Looking back on it, I regret that I never got a PhD.
Speaker 1: Do you think if you'd received a PhD you would have been able to do better work or--
Speaker 2: No.  (Laughter) I would have just been called doctor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Would it have increased your pay, you think?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It could have.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I hear a lot of people say that, that, you know, that's the difference.  But tell us something about your family.  Now, you have children.  I know I met a son and a daughter today.  Tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: Well, I have another daughter, Carlotta, who works for Johns Hopkins.  I have another son who, who has some mental difficulties.
Speaker 1: Well, what about the other two, just because I met them, it doesn't mean that people watching this will know.  So--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Well, Debra's just a housewife right now.  And Mark, for some reason, never, never fulfilled his potential.  You met Mark, right?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were your parents, did they live long enough to see you graduate from college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you the first person in your family to graduate from college?
Speaker 2: No, my brother was the first.
Speaker 1: And what did he do?
Speaker 2: He's dead now.  He was killed in an automobile accident.  He was the oldest in the family.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked for the Post Office.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was you and your brother then were the two that--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You and your brother were the only two that graduated from college or went to college?
Speaker 2: My other brother also graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay--
Speaker 2: My sister graduated too.
Story_ID: 24699
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we haven't talk about that we need to talk about before we--
Speaker 2: No, I think we've covered, just about covered everything. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your students?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your students?  You have some students, you teach as well, right? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That came, summer interns, that came.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, these are summer interns, right?
Speaker 2: I've had one of my students who is now a big man at USDA [United States Department of Agriculture], Moon Kim.
Speaker 1: Moon Kim.  Is he Korean?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked with me a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody else?
Speaker 2: Lawrence Corp.  He's doing, works at Goddard.
Speaker 1: Lawrence Corp.  And that's--how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: C-O-R-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then numerous, had numerous summer students.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you often speak in, or did you have occasion to speak in the schools?
Speaker 2: I haven't done any of that.
Speaker 1: Okay. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  He got the Purple Heart.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know that, yeah, I was advised that you received the Purple Heart from the War too.  You were wounded twice, yeah, all--
Speaker 1: The Purple Heart and the Oak Leaf Cluster.
Speaker 2: Oak Leaf Cluster.  Now, what do they award the Oak Leaf Cluster for?
Speaker 1: That's for a subsequent Purple Heart.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is there anything else?
Speaker 1: That's it.
Story_ID: 24700
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a story about how you learned to swim that you didn't tell.  Do you wanna tell that story before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I learned how to swim when I was around eight years old.  There was this, there was a big irrigation ditch in back of our house where the kids all used to swim.  But I couldn't go in it.  I could wade in the shallow part.  So one day my brother tossed me in, and I swam out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Suppose you couldn't figure it out.  Then what?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Could your brother swim?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's good.  He was there in case you couldn't learn how to swim.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was dog paddling.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was eight.
Speaker 1: Eight, okay.  Well, I'd say you've been through a lot.  So, anything else that--
Speaker 2: Nothing I can think of.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you for spending the time, and our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a good man who loved his field of science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 24701
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, sir, go ahead and tell us about that photograph.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in Italy at a scientific meeting. About when?
Speaker 1: I'd say around 19--around 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay, it looks like you're in Italy?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's what he said.
Speaker 1: All right, sir, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where that picture is taken.  Eugenia, where was this picture taken? (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Oh, that was taken, yeah, it probably was, at Jackie's house.  That must have been around 2000.
Speaker 1: Where? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE):  At Jackie Williams' house.  Remember, she had a birthday party.  No, wait a minute, was that where-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Two-thousand seven [2007], that's fine.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in Italy. Okay.
Speaker 1: World War II, right?
Speaker 2: World War II [1939-1945].
Speaker 1: And with a Buffalo on your sleeve.
Speaker 2: Buffalo Soldier.
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of Rosemary and I sitting somewhere.  I can't recall.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was Rosemary your wife?
Speaker 1: Yes.  That wasn't Rosemary on that picture though.  That was Eugenia.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: That was taken at Assateague [Maryland] on a summer vacation.
Speaker 2: They have a lot of mosquitoes on Assateague.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That's my family.
Speaker 2: I camped on Assateague last year.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: My wife and I went camping on Assateague last year.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?  We used to love going to camp there.
Speaker 2: We'll start here.  Can you name everybody, going left to right.
Speaker 1: That's my daddy.
Speaker 2: His name?
Speaker 1: Isom, that's my baby sister, Helen, on his lap.  That's my brother, Willie, in the background, my mother and Leroy.  And at the bottom, that's me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me holding my daughter, Carlotta.
Speaker 2: This is a recent picture, going from left to right, my daughter, Carlotta, Emmett, Jada and my grandson, Chris, and in the foreground is Ty.  In the background, way back there is Debra and Carlotta's husband, Donald.
Speaker 1: That's me, but I really don't know when that was taken.
Speaker 2: It looks like about 1979 or '80' [1980].  It kind of has that kind of look to it, and compare this one to this one.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That was taken in Italy [World War II].
Speaker 2: During the War.
Speaker 1: In my winter gear.
Speaker 2: That was taken at Stanford.
Speaker 1: That was taken at Phoenix College where I was running, Smokey Diaz, Emmett, and I can't remember the name of the fellow on the right.
Speaker 2: So, all the races [ethnic races] of Arizona there in the picture.
Speaker 1: That was taken at USDA [United States Department of Agriculture].
Speaker 2: Okay, going from left to right, my oldest brother, Willie, who is now deceased, my next oldest brother, Leroy, still top row, my father, and Emmett.  The bottom, my mother and my sister, Helen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's it.
Speaker 2: All right, thank you, sir.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
