Story_ID: 1357
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers archives. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Charles Miller Collins, C-H-A-R-L-E-S M-I-L-L-E-R C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 22nd, 1947, right here in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the president and CEO of the YMCA of San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the tenth of March, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we are the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home at 24 Sixth Avenue, San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People Magazine"-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They always require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Mediterranean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Must be a responsible adult guiding youth.
Story_ID: 1358
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  And we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is DeReath Curtis James Collins, D-E-R-E-A-T-H C-U-R-T-I-S J-A-M-E-S C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Charleston, West Virginia, on November 18th, 1919.
Speaker 1: And what do you--what can you tell us about her side of the family?  First of all, how far back can you trace your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My mother's side we trace back to five great-grandfathers; so if we count that, including the generations that are alive now, it accounts for ten generations of family on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were telling me earlier, you go back to 1748?
Speaker 2: I would imagine we go back to be able to have accurate records to about 1748.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were her--what were your ancestors doing in 1748?  Where were they and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: They were along the James River in Virginia.  And to the best of our understanding, that they were merchants and traders.
Speaker 1: Now, were these free people of color?
Speaker 2: They were free people of color, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story at all that's passed down family as to how they achieved freedom and slavery?  (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, the methodology is always fun, isn't it?  But to our understanding, everyone comes essentially from Africa and you come over on a boat, and they came probably up to the James River and to the Jamestown Plantation.  And our understanding is that this progenitor that earned his freedom was because he saved the plantation owner's son from drowning in the river and was granted his freedom because of that.  He then worked as an indentured servant to earn money and to buy other members of his family out of their slavery.  And one family member bought another and another and another, so that they became free people
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Well, that's a good story.  That makes sense.  So they were traders?  What did they trade in, do you know?
Speaker 2: We don't know, but we imagine that if you can go back to the Jamestown Plantation, if you can go down to the colony; this is before the Revolutionary War [1775-1783], so it's still under the control of the British.  So probably, you know, there's staples of life.  Eventually that trading instinct developed into a company.  It still exists, called "C.H. James and Company," or "James Produce."  So we believe that these people had been merchants for many generations, and then they moved into owning their own ways and means of business, and distribution, packaging, labeling, private labeling, and lines of business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are relatives of yours still, you know, in charge of "C.H. James and Company"?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My cousin Chuck James, who lives in Chicago [Illinois], runs that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's remarkable.  I don't I've ever talked to anyone who can--has a business of that, you know, longevity still in--
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that history records is that, it's probably the oldest surviving black business in America.
Speaker 1: That is something.  Well, okay.  So what's the--well, continue with the narrative history of your mother's side and just kind of tell us what the story is.
Speaker 2: Well, the history is interesting for us as family members to back on because what you see is a combination of a mercantile effort backed by an ethic to educate members of the family.  So, and the Jameses, which has a kind of, you know, nice, interesting lineage also, they mix and meet well with people who are probably more educated.  I'd like to think that the Jameses were the merchants, but other members of the family were the intelligentsia.  So it was a kind of constant combination between, you know, making money and improving through education.  So the family moved to some point into Ohio, because when you're now dealing with the post-Revolutionary War and the harder and hardening yoke of slavery to be free south of the Mason-Dixon Line, is not a good place for black people to be.  And so, they immigrated to Ohio, and they planted themselves there and then married with other parts of the family that had come from Louisiana, and the family continued to develop. They also then moved into West Virginia which again is north of the Mason-Dixon Line.  And it was in Charleston, West, Virginia, in the late part of the nineteenth century, that the "James Produce Company" really comes into strong presence, and they developed the root of the modern age of the business; and Ohio, Kentucky, and West Virginia, was where they did most of their business.
Story_ID: 1359
Speaker 1: Now, I noticed that you had relatives in Gallipolis, Ohio, which is an historic place for black people at that, you know, during the part of the nineteenth century--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there's been research that I've seen in the paper about Gallipolis and the historic black community there.  I thought I'd just say that.  But the produce company was established in West Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Charleston.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they dealt with produce, farm produce?
Speaker 2: Produce, poultry; and then eventually they went into institutional foods by supplying, you know, government, schools, colleges, universities, and probably prisons, with institutional food.  My cousin Chuck James grew the company and developed more wholesale work in fresh produce, and just has continued to expand the business into franchises of that sort.
Speaker 1: Well, it is something.  This is something that I can run and tell a lot of people because I don't think anybody knows of black business that has survived, you know, for this period of time and is still, you know, viable.  We often talk about us having really very little inheritance, you know.  That your mother's side of the family, you, your family certainly seems to have that.
Speaker 2: They were always very intent.  They were a very determined people, and they continue to be determined.  My cousins are wonderful friends.  They're highly accomplished, but I think what we like most about our family is that, they have very strong relationships to their communities.  So they're integrated into the work of the community and the progress of the community employing people, looking at the foundations of communities as being substantial in terms of a family enterprise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of your more immediate family, did you know the grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they put a smile on my face to even remember them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what were they like and what did they do?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather was bald like me, so I think that I have inherited this honestly.  He had a tremendous sense of humor.  He was the father of seven children, so clearly they liked to have kids.  And he was a person who rubbed your head and squeezed you, and always made sure that at Christmas time you had a five dollar bill in an envelope that came to you, and it was always special.  I remember the trips that they took from West Virginia to San Francisco, and I remember the times that we got in a car and we drove across the country to get to Charleston [South Carolina] and Institute [West Virginia], so that we knew our mother's family.  We lived in Washington [D.C.], D.C., for two years in the mid-1950s.  And we took regular trips from Washington to Institute, West Virginia, where our grandparents' place was.  My grandmother was a formidable person.  She was substantial in stature.  We always felt very loved by her.  She liked to cook for us, but she was also a person who probably spent more time thinking about how you're doing in school, what you're doing in school, making sure that there was progress on that.  As a member of the Shaw family, again, she was very concerned, very focused on making sure that we got our studies and we were going to good schools.  She took great pride in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Edward Lawrence James.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Stella Shaw James.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the Shaws.  Now what should we know about the Shaws?
Speaker 2: Well, what we know about the Shaws dates to the middle of the nineteenth century, in Bayou Boeuf in Louisiana.  We're led to believe, and I think that there're records that we support that, my great-grandfather's father, so my great-great-grandfather, probably fought in the Civil War [1861-1865], and we don't know that he died but there's no record of him following the Civil War.  And my great-great-grandmother had, we believe, three children.  Daniel Webster Shaw, who is my great-grandfather, moved from Bayou Boeuf to Lorain, Ohio, to go to the Berea College as a janitor.  He was a boy who got on a train and was deposited hundreds of miles away in his teen age.  But this was opportunity for him, and he took well advantage of it, because not only was he a great janitor, but he ended up finishing first in oratory; he was an actor, he was a debater, he was a writer, but he also could throw a mean curveball.  So he was a very balanced person.  And he went on to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] where we believe that he received a Ph.D. in Theology, and he was--
Speaker 1: He was the first--
Speaker 2: We believe so.
Speaker 1: --African-American to--
Speaker 2: We believe so.
Speaker 1: So he was like the pre-Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. 1929-1968] --Martin Luther King is famous for (unclear)--
Story_ID: 1360
Speaker 1: Well, there's an interesting parallel there because Howard Thurman, who is our family minister and an incredibly close member of our extended family, and the godfather of my youngest brother [Craig Collins], was the dean of the chapel at Marsh Chapel, Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  And so, there is a kind of continuation of all this because Howard Thurman was at Boston University at the time that Martin Luther King was there.  So Boston University plays very heavily into our family narrative.
Speaker 2: So Howard Thurman followed your ancestor Daniel Webster Shaw?
Speaker 1: That's a nice way of putting it.  But I think that both of them were such great, you know, great men.  But clearly--
Speaker 2: Were they there about the same time?
Speaker 1: No.  They were--
Speaker 2: He was there first?
Speaker 1: A generation before him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because Howard Thurman was at Boston University in the early 1950s through the end of end of the 1950s, and I think right into the early 1960s.  And my great-grandfather would have been there probably in the 1880s.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  And Howard Thurman, I know he went to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] at one point.
Speaker 1: Oh, Howard Thurman went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then he went to Colgate Rochester [Colgate Rochester Crozer Divinity School, Rochester, New York], which was a Doctor's Seminary, and that was where he received his degree in divinity.  And he may have spent some time in Oberlin because he met, you know, the great Sue Bailey Thurman, who is a graduate of, I think of Oberlin University.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was there for some reason, and I'm--and the story of--here in my memory is, but the great pastor from--the founder of the Progressive National Baptist Convention--he's the first person I ever interviewed, and he went there to meet Thurman, and Thurman left just before he got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, Howard Thurman had a great influence--
Speaker 2: --Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 1: Gardner Taylor.  You've got a great memory.  But Howard Thurman had a tremendous influence on us because he was our spiritual teacher.  And I was raised in his church here, the Church for the Fellowship of all Peoples, here in San Francisco [California]; the first interdenominational and inter-racial church probably west of the Mississippi that was founded in about 1943, somewhere in there.  So he was a--he was a big figure in our lives.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  And--all right.  Then Boston and maybe Ohio, and then (unclear)
Speaker 1: Well, yes.  And Doctor Daniel Webster Shaw.  And Daniel became the minister of a big Methodist Church in Baltimore [Maryland].  And so, that's where my grandmother, Stella Shaw James grew up, in Baltimore.  And there's a wonderful kind of family record around that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So that's her father's name, Daniel Webster Shaw.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And she grew up--okay.  All right.  So she was there during the early days of the NAACP and all that and--did she play a role in any of the (unclear)
Speaker 1: I don't know that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I know that they were very close to the Murphy Family.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  Because we're going to do the Murphys and the Mitchells and the, you know.  And there's a lot of history in Boston.
Speaker 1: We remain close to the current generation of the Murphys to this day.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right. So, well, let's follow it on up to your mother [Dereath James Collins].  Now, did she grow up in Baltimore?
Speaker 1: My mother grew up in Charleston, West Virginia?
Speaker 2: Charleston, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.  And so, what did she say about growing up?  What's her narrative of growing up in Charleston--?
Speaker 1: My mother grew up in the cusp of the end of the Roaring Twenties and the Great Depression.  So my mother grew up in two different worlds.  Her early childhood as one of, I would say, of fairly remarkable patrician wealth for its time and place.  They were well-educated.  They were prominent in their community.  They had a lot of stuff.  And so, that could be described in those terms.  By the same token, when the Depression hit everybody had to stop what they were doing and go to work.  And so, my mother learned how to drive teams of mules, she learned how to drive the delivery trucks, how to load freight, how to make deliveries, how to collect money; and all the kids went to work during the Depression.  And that other big change was from my grandmother who went from being, you know, the at-home mother of seven children to becoming the post-mistress of the [United States] Post Office in Institute, West Virginia.  So my grandmother went to work too.  So everybody was about work at that point in time.  And so, it was a very interesting period for my mother because she had this very laced-curtain early childhood.  There were chauffeurs and cars driving and from, and all of that, to hitting the ground running and as a working teenager and making sure that the family enterprise survived.  So all of the kids felt very invested in the work of the family because they had to then convert from being supported by a business to making the business actually function.  And I think that that characterizes that generation.  They were hard workers.  They took their lives as kind of an article of get up, get going, and don't make a whole lot of excuses.  But then my mother went on to West Virginia State College [Institute, West Virginia], and then she went on to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] where she studied dental hygiene and she met my father [Daniel Andrew Collins].
Story_ID: 1361
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, let's go to your father's side of the family, and can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Daniel Andrew Collins, D-A-N-I-E-L A-N-D-R-E-W C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on January 11th, 1916, in Darlington, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Darlington.  All right.  And, well, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's story is interesting.  Let's take his mother's side first because it's the least complicated.  Their names were the Miller family, and that's where I get my middle name, M-I-L-L-E-R.  They were in the Florence area of South Carolina, and then they were also in the islands off the coast of South Carolina where they were a part of the Penn School.  And the Penn School, as you probably know, was a school that was started after the Civil War [1861-1865] for recently-freed African-Americans, negroes, or blacks, whatever we were called at that point in time; and it was dedicated to the education of the community.  So my grandmother came out of that.  And then she married a few times, because she had four children and they were each an interesting story in and of themselves.  But my grandmother's side of the family was pretty much rooted in education and also owning property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I can't pass up the interesting stories.  You said there are interesting stories.  I want to go back and hear them (laughter) of the other children or--
Speaker 2: Well, the oldest one, his name is Otto, ended up being a person who was a bootlegger in Harlem [New York] during that period of time.  And he had a fast life and beautiful women.  He died in New York.  The next was a son, Elliot Turnage, who graduated from Fisk College or Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] when I believe he was about sixteen years old, and then he graduated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], I believe, in 1932.  That's Elliot Turnage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the third child was my father's favorite sibling, and she was a school teacher.  Her name was Andrena Collins.  And she died, unfortunately, early in her life.  And then there was my father, Daniel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Elliot, was he the first black graduate of Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: No, he wouldn't have been the first black graduate of Harvard Law School, but he might have been one of the first twenty.  I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't think of who the first one--it might have been--I'm thinking of Richard T. Greener.  He either came out of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or Harvard, I'm not sure.  We got to look that up.  So whoever's watching this, you know.
Speaker 2: Whoever's watching this, come on and help us out with this one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because Elliott Turnage (ph.), he's close if he's not the first.  Okay, so, and your father, you know--so what did your father say about growing up in Darlington, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Well, his dad, he always called Andrew Sumner Collins his dad, was a contractor and house builder and a house mover, because this is the route that development of the train systems, of rails, and you know, creating rights-of-way, and moving people and houses and buildings, to make room for progress.  And so, my grandfather Andrew Sumner Collins was that kind of enterprising person.  And my father was very close to him, and they did--he went out, you know, on the teams, he would, again with the mules, and moving things around.  My father developed a very strong practical sense of how things worked and building things.  And I think that was because of the great relationship that he had with who he called his dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said who he called his dad, but was he actually--
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, my father's dad was a man, who I believe his name was George Lithcott (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Who was a doctor who lived in Darlington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is another black person?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Lithcott (ph.).  So what other stories do you--can you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I think that August Wilson's story "Fences" is the closest that I've ever come to understanding, you know, what happens in a situation like this.  But my grandmother had obviously an affair with another person, and my father was the product of that relationship.  And so, though his parents didn't divorce, my father lived between the lives of these two essentially estranged people.  And he was loved by both of them, but he found himself as a child with cousins around in a very, very difficult place.  It was extremely difficult for my father because he was not the child of the man that my grandmother was married to.
Story_ID: 1362
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So your father [Daniel Andrew Collins], now, he went on to medical school?
Speaker 2: He went on to dental school.  He went to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  My father went to Payne College in Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he graduated there in 1936.  And then he finished dental school at Meharry in 1940-1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And that's where he met your mother [Dereath James Collins]?
Speaker 2: He met my mother there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story that they tell about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, imagine, you know, two hot-blooded, probably really good looking people, and my father was a student, and my mother was a student and she was studying dental hygiene, and he was the dental student.  And I don't really think it really took too much for them to fall in love.  My mother was beautiful and my father was very smart.  And that was a kind of good combination for the two of them.  So they fell in love in Nashville, Tennessee, and they were married very soon thereafter in Institute, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did they initially live?  In Institute?
Speaker 2: No.  They initially lived in New York City.  My father, upon graduating from Meharry where he finished first in his class, was given a position at Harlem Hospital and with a Guggenheim Fellowship.  And so, he was there to do post-graduate work and to pursue what was eventually going to be a teaching career.  And then, though, as you know, the war broke out [World War II], and my father tried to enlist in the [United States] Army.  As you also know, the Army was segregated at that time of the war, and so, he was not--there was no position for him in the black Army as a commissioned captain.  So the Selective Service, or the forces that be, sent my father to teach at the University of California at San Francisco.  So they moved from New York City with one child to San Francisco, and that was the new, big chapter of my parents' life, when we were born here in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's how they--the family gets to San Francisco.  So do you have--well, first of all, can you give us the names of your brothers and sisters and the order?
Speaker 2: Sure I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There're four boys in my family.  The oldest is Daniel Andrew Collins Junior.  Then there's Edward James Collins, I'm Charles Miller Collins, and our youngest brother is Craig Shaw Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So four of you all together?
Speaker 2: There're four boys.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, I do, yeah.  I have--maybe there's several of them and, you know, you get older and they get fused.  But I remember living here in San Francisco at 2003 Pine Street, and I remember, you know, growing up in a house with a lot of kids around in the post-war environment of San Francisco, and plenty of action; playing the in streets and sidewalks and backyards, climbing all over everybody's fences, you know, going to the park, and having a lot of freedom as a child in San Francisco with having two older brothers; they got me into a lot of trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have very strong memories of that because my older cousins were around, and next-door neighbors who were kind of fused in your thought as a child of who's your parent, you know, who's in charge here, because in those days, everybody had both praising rights, but they also all had whipping rights.  So if you did something wrong and you stepped out of line, sure enough, Jean Welcher (ph.) upstairs or, you know, Hattie, Miss Hattie next door, who would make sure that you were disciplined on the spot right then and there.  And then you had to repeat that.  So all of--a lot of those ideas about, you know, how we were raised at that time was a very, very, you know, kind of clear part of I think who made me who I am today.  I also remember the day that my--
Speaker 1: I have to pause.  We will have to pick up at that point because he's got to make a notation.
Story_ID: 1363
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you remember (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the day that our youngest brother [Craig Collins] came home from the hospital.  I was probably about three and a half years older, and we brought him from Children's Hospital where three of us had been born, and it was a very, very special day for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your expectations of him at that point (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, our expectations shifted very quickly because our parents told us that our youngest brother was retarded.  And so, it meant that (pause)--we'd have a special member of our family.  So one of the other really important days was when my youngest brother came home, and he was born mentally retarded.  And at that time, that was the term that was used, and it was a very difficult thing for me to wrap my head around because I was just a little boy myself.  But I thought that, you know, that I was going to be a big brother in the same way as my big brothers, you know, where I could torture him, and I could lead him down the wrong path, and, you know, I could get him in trouble (laughter), but Craig ended being a very different person.  So it caused me as a really young boy to have to bear into a level of responsibility that I think was unusual.  And we all had to; I wasn't the only one.  We all wrapped our lives around Craig.  And today he's just an amazing person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So instead of teasing him and--you had to be patient.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But we--I got my licks in.  Because I think a part of the reason why he is who he is today is that while he has, you know, really very marked, you know, learning difficulties, or you know, differences or who we call them developmental disabilities today, he was still a wonderful little boy.  And so, you know, I took my shots at him, and we had just an interesting childhood; all of us did because while we were protective of him, and especially externally protective of him, he still got, you know, to be jostled around and teased and things like that.  And I think that as an adult, you know, he is--he's fun because of that.  He has a great sense of humor, and he lights up our family.  He's sixty years old now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now at age you--he was born you were about how old?
Speaker 2: I was about three and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was about three and a half.  It had a remarkable impact on my mother's [Dereath James Collins] life because my mother made the choice to bring him home and to raise him as another member of our family as opposed to, what was the typical diagnosis and consignment, to the State Mental Institution.  And in 1951 when he was born, there were no support groups.  There was no infrastructure.  There were no schools, you know, that were normalized, or places in open society where people such as my brother could thrive and live and grow.  And so, my mother took this on as probably the most important work of her life, was to develop organizations that were responsible to and for the developmentally disabled.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you grew up in the Fillmore District.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I remember first hearing about that from Lou Rawls on an album, you know, where he talked the black communities of the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], the Fillmore District of San Francisco, and I said, "Oh, that's the black community."  Well, tell me about what the Fillmore District was like when you grew up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I was born in 1947, and we lived on Pine Street on the edge of what would be called The Fillmore, but also on the edge of what was called Japan Town.  So growing up as we did in the early--in the late 1940s and early 1950s in this neighborhood meant that we had the full range of different kinds of people, of all of whom were eventually the same or neighbors or friends or, you know, playmates, or people that, you know, you lived with.  But different foods and, you know, different ways of practicing religion, and different family habits and cultures.  And so, we grew up, you know, equally fun, you know, eating classic black food, but going over to Japan Town and having Japanese food.  That was just the way it is.  Over here you can eat this and over here you can eat that.  So a lot of this stuff you developed a strong, not only understanding, but a real appetite, you know, for these parts of your life to be integrated and to be a part of what brings you into a community.  So The Fillmore can be characterized in many ways as having this very, very strong black identity, but it was really surrounded by a lot of other, I think, very important forces.  It was a place where ever service that you needed, you could get from black people; there were black lawyers, there were black doctors, there were black dentists, funeral homes, accountants, real estate people, storekeepers, photographers, teachers, and all of that stuff because people lived together.  The community was not separated.  It did not dissipate.  It was a very strong, dense mass of very, very diverse set of people with tremendous potential.  And these individuals started churches.  They started banks.  They started savings and loans organizations.  They started community projects and community organizations, and they founded chapters of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People or the National Urban League.  They were extremely involved in creating here in San Francisco the infrastructure that you would see in Chicago or in New York or Washington or Atlanta.  So we had that growing up.  And I think out of that, a whole generation of young people prospered and did well.
Story_ID: 1364
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of the Japanese community, did you--I know you were young when--can you kind of describe, I guess--or did you--did you have a sense of the fact that they had been interned and all that sort of thing during the war, and I know there was a period of time when even the cartoons on television--a lot of the popular culture messages we got about the Japanese were very, very negative, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  What I have to always be careful of is what do I remember or what did I learn.  What I remember, because I was born in 1947, and the internment was over, I believe, in 1946.  So what happened historically is that Japanese had been moved out of these neighborhoods; during the war blacks moved in, in order to work in the munitions factories, and the shipbuilding, and preparing America for war; and actually to be at war.  So that labor needed to come from somewhere and that was the Great Migration of blacks from the South and from the Midwest into San Francisco [California].  So the Japanese left, the blacks came in.  And so there were like two tidal movements going on.  So when the Japanese returned to San Francisco, there were questions of where were they going to live, and their houses, you know, were probably occupied by other people.  So there was a repatriation and then entitlement.  The Japanese had to be able to go back to their homes.  But as children, we just played together.  You know, we would go over to Japan Town because they always had that great, you know, puzzles and different ways of working with paper and food that was, you know, really yummy but different.  So, you know, that was, you know, something that I know from history, but there are other things that I experienced.  So there wasn't a lot of friction there; in fact, it was a lot of overlap.  And people such as Yori Wada, who was the great youth developer, that had come out of the YMCA movement was as interested in the development of Japanese youth as he was interested in the development of Filipino youth, and black youth, and whoever youth was there.  He was a youth worker.  And so, we grew up with a sense that your identity as--your ethnic identity was not limiting you, it was just a descriptor more so; that's who you are, that's your family background but don't leave it there; there are a lot of other things to be involved within.  It was a fluid time, and I'm not really creating a fiction here; this is the way it was.  There were many other forces that tended to pull that a part and that's the unfortunate part of the rest of the history of The Fillmore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--now, I'm going to ask you this question.  Even though you came here as a young man, you were here at the beginnings of black activity in San Francisco, but you probably know.  Black people have a long history in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, can you just kind of give us (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, his name was, I think, Eric Leeds Dorf, who was a merchant.  He was a seaman. He owned boats.  He owns the means of commerce and shipping.  And, in fact, there's a street downtown in the financial district named after Leeds Dorf.  He was a prominent person and he was important to laying a type of commercial foundation at a time that I don't think that race was bearing into a lot of this; it's like this is a Gold Rush.  Yeah, this is like "come here and get it."  Then there's a really great character in the history whose name is Mary Ellen Pleasant.  And Mamie Pleasant was, you could call her notorious, but she was a person who was friends with the wealthiest men in San Francisco.  She was a madam.  She had a brothel, and at that time, that was a type of entertainment.  So it's called, that she was in her time the head of the House of Geishas.  And she entertained the wealthiest and most powerful men, and for that, she developed a lot of political liaisons.  And she was very instrumental in the Underground Railroad, in helping to spirit money and resources to help create a sense of promise and liberation.  So these two very iconic people were a part of the history of San Francisco.  And so, there was perhaps at the very beginning a kind of rightness that the black people could do well in this city.  I don't believe that that promise was ever completely fulfilled.
Speaker 1: Right.  And I remember at the Presidio there was a picture of Colonel Charles Young in the redwood forest with the Tenth Calvary.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because the Buffalo Soldiers had a very strong encampment at the Presidio which is right about twenty feet from where we live right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So a lot of history here, and I just wanted to raise that.  But, so when you were growing up, did you hear about the history of black folks here--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I mean that was very important because our parents were intent on us knowing always where we were and what we were a part of, and also to connect into, you know, where people came from and how we would make progress going forward.  So that sense of history was upon us, but it was a very thin history.  I don't want to try to overstate how broad this history was.  It's actually very thin because when before the great migration of blacks in the 1940s here, there were probably, you know, less than a thousand black people who lived in San Francisco.  And they have done well but they were not well distributed, and they were not, you know, deeply ingrained.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, your family came in a different--took a different path because of the--your father being a professional when coming to take a job during the war, but where did most black--I mean, during the Great Migration, where did most black people come from?
Speaker 2: Well, they came from the Deep South, they came from Texas, and they came from the Midwest.  And they came here because you had to build ships, you had to build bonds, you had to service ships, you had to supply ships, you had to on and off load.  The war--this was one of the most important theatres, with the big, you know, Kaiser Shipyards and what it took to outfit all of this.  So during the war, there was all of the work that you could have.  And so, in San Francisco the places where the large pieces of the black population lived were here in the Fillmore District or in the Bayview-Hunter's Point area.  And those are still the two, kind of historic nodes of the black population of San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know a lot of the black soldiers who came back from the Pacific Theatre came through San Francisco and some stayed.  I think that's another--there might be another path, I don't know.  But I've heard--I heard a couple of people, you know, talk about that, you know, as well.  So I don't know.  And then there's the famous World War II incident that the Port Chicago--
Speaker 2: Port Chicago, right.  That was the blowing up of the munitions factory and the loss of life there because people working in incredibly dangerous situations.  Yes.
Story_ID: 1365
Speaker 1: Right.  So any rate.  So growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, that brings back really great memories because you got to think about the cable cars that moved all over places in San Francisco [California], where they don't run any more.  And the cable cars came all the way out with that type of street traffic, and what it sounded like to have a metal wheel grating against the rail on the road.  That was a part of it, you know, the ringing of the chimes of the bells of the cable cars, and getting on as a little boy and riding in the open air of a cable car.  One of the other great memories is when we would take the ferryboats across the [San Francisco] Bay, and we'd load up our car and we would take the ferryboat and--that was great because we have--a lot of friends were over in the East Bay, over in Berkeley and Oakland.  So the feel of the day, the sound of a ferryboat, and the movement of water, and being on the water.  So a part of the great story, the big story of California, is it's natural landscape.  And so, you know, the feeling of the Sierra Nevada mountains, the magnificent character of the Great Sequoia gigantean, to go to Yosemite [National Park] or to, you know, see what, you know, the great painters or the great photographers were inspired by.  This was all a part of the big picture, to be able to go to the mountains and ski, and to--from one, you know, one climate here in San Francisco, but only three hours away to be in deep snow.  So what plays prominently in the entire California narrative is the importance of the natural landscape.  So, a lot of that feel of fog, and weather, and, you know, the kind of physicality of San Francisco.  And we all, of course, remember the first time that we experienced an earthquake because that's a part of living here.
Speaker 1: What was the first memory that you have of an earthquake?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember an earthquake when we moved to Mill Valley [California], and I was probably in kindergarten and we were told to get under the desk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you experience?
Speaker 2: I got under the desk and things shook, and we were all excited.  We weren't really afraid.  It was just like "whoa.,"  That's like, because you're just a kid.  You don't truly appreciate the destructive character.  There's a methodology when you're a little kid, it's like "Okay, earthquakes happen, and they're dangerous, and they're, you know, they're life-threatening," but when it actually happens to you, it's like being on a rollercoaster ride.  You probably overplay it, over, you know, over express, you know, what it really is about. It's about the movement of Earth, but as a little kid, we sort of looked forward like, "When's an earthquake going to come?"  We weren't afraid of earthquakes, but that's only because we didn't know the ugly truth about earthquakes.
Speaker 1: So, what it sound like, your family was very active in terms of checking out the various attractions that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --exist, you know, right around the Bay Area or (unclear).
Speaker 2: A series of station wagons with lots of kids in it and parents and, you know, picnic baskets.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you into baseball?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't a baseball player.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So I'm thinking about, you know, the advent of Willie Mays (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, there's a difference in being a baseball player and knowing when the Giants came into town.  And so, that was a big deal for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a big deal with the Giants won the, you know, the World Series in 2010.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to go to the games?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to one single game.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Willie Mays, Juan Marichal,--(unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Willie McCovey.
Speaker 1: --Oh, Willie McCovey, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  Since, at any rate.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Dereath James Collins] was conflicted because growing as she did, her greatest, you know, baseball player was Jackie Robinson.  So she was a Dodgers fan.  And I remember when we were living in Washington, D.C., I believed that the Dodgers were in the World Series, and you know, we were kind of raised to, you know, go for the Dodgers.  But when the Dodgers went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and the Giants came here-just changed hats-and we went to Giants.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Oakland's produced a number of iconic athletes of the '60s' (1960s), like Frank Robinson, Bill Russell--there's some--did--well, they're not in San Francisco, but did you ever--
Speaker 2: No.  I think, you know, we've always enjoyed comfortable distant with the East Bay.  And it's--we're probably more when it comes to the West Bay and the East Bay, like some people are with Northern and Southern California.  We have a nice, healthy rivalry there.  We all get along, but it's nice to have competing teams.  You have the "A's" here there and you have the "Giants" over here, you have the "Raiders" over here, and you have--there, and the "Forty-Niners" over here.  You know, we like to have this kind of regional, what we call the "Battle of the Day."
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, well, what did you like to do when you were growing up the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think what I loved to do the most when I was growing was to get on a bike and go on trails and just bike all over, you know.  And then when I was old enough to get a motorcycle, to get on a motorcycle and just drive it all over.  You know, those were less restricted days.  There were fewer rules, and we had a lot of independence because we moved from San Francisco in 1951 or 1952 to Marin County [California], and we lived on the edge of Mount Tamalpais.  So we grew up in a kind of unbridled natural environment.  And I liked to be able to get out, and hike, and camp, and walk, and get on a, you know, a motorcycle and be able to go, you know, miles and miles and miles off trail on, you know, back areas.  I think I've always been a person who likes, you know, the natural environment.  I feel comfortable in it, feel comfortable sleeping under the stars.  I like weather, I like nature.  I like that sense of the unlimited.  So that's a very, you know, personal part.  At the same time, you know, I loved, you know, to party.  I like, you know, to be, you know, around a lot of people.  You know, you live over there kind of in an isolated place, but all the action was in San Francisco and the East Bay.  So, you know, that kind of, you know, moving around and--I was comfortable in both worlds.
Story_ID: 1366
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Well, I started elementary school in Mill Valley, California.
Speaker 1: So this is sort of a suburban community?
Speaker 2: Mill Valley is right across the Golden Gate Bridge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just to the north of San Francisco.  And when my father [Daniel Andrew Collins] wanted to buy a larger for his growing family, in San Francisco, the neighborhoods where he wanted to live were all deed-restricted; no Negroes and no Orientals.  So in the neighborhoods where he would have wanted to buy a home, he couldn't do that.  So instead, he bought a fairly beautiful piece of property of the side of Mount Tamalpais in Mill Valley, and that's where we moved, in the early 1950s.  And that was where I went to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the Golden Gate Bridge was a regular feature for you.
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  Sometimes every day, because while we lived over there, my father's practice was here in San Francisco.  We had so many friends over here and family over here, and social events.  So we were on the bridge a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One thing as a generalist in history, I've noticed this, you know, over the years, that this certain generation of black folks that came out of college in the mid--early '60s (1960s) to mid-'60s (1960s) have a big picture of the Golden Gate Bridge behind their couch.  (laughter).  Now, but you--I mean, I don't know if they do it here in San Francisco, but everywhere else, you know, this is--everything--you've know, I've seen this so many times.
Speaker 2: Well, if you went into my iPhone right now, you would find a picture that I took of the Golden Gate Bridge last week, because even if you have been born here and the Golden Gate Bridge is two minutes from here right now, there's not a time that I look at that bridge that I don't reflect on the privilege of being who I am, where I am, and what I'm looking at.  It is a--it is something that is more than iconic.  I mean, it just--it has a resonance.  It stands, you know, a beautiful natural landscape to a city.  You know, to the west is the great Pacific; to the east of the Sierra-Nevada Mountains.  And so it sits as the gateway of our watershed.  And it's a very important, you know, it's a--a lot about San Francisco, a lot about California is very physical.  And nobody ever misses that.  And you never lose your appreciation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd just have to raise that.  So did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I mean, you know, yeah, you're a kid and school's there, and a lot to learn.  You know, we were the only black people in an all-white town.  And so, the Collins boys were in some ways a little asymmetrical with Mill Valley of the 1950s.  There were many wonderful people.  There were really wonderful teachers.  But by contrast, there were some very harsh realities that we had to face.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--how far is this?
Speaker 2: Well, there was an unfairness.  I mean, I think that we were instantly judged by color, and, you know, how people are selected, and what is the dominate, you know, kind of cultural narrativeness that's going on, and who gets the parts.  You know, who are the leaders; you know, who gets the role to play; you know, who accelerates.  And there was always another thing that we had to carry with us everywhere we went, and that was our color; and that was our race; that was our background.  And so, we learned very early how important that was to us.  And how we had to cope and deal with it and not hide behind it; not use it as an excuse, but to look at the richness of our family and how, I think, fortunate we were to be born who we were and not to best on any excuses.  They weren't permitted.  And it wasn't as if there was a finger wagging at you.  I was just the charge of the household; this is what you did, and this is how well, you know, you were expected to perform.  But I don't think these things were really ever told to us.  It was just the, you know, it was the baseline.  So growing up in Mill Valley was a series of contrasts.  I mean, here you had this wonderful landscape and, you know, beautiful views of the city and kind of unbridled physical, you know, reach.  At the same time, you know, there were people there, very few of whom had ever had productive, constructive relationships with black people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So San Francisco, the Bay Area was a lot like other parts of the country?
Story_ID: 1367
Speaker 1: Except for us, something else really wonderful happened, and that was in 1956.  Our father [Daniel Andrew Collins] was drafted into the U.S. Army.  So we moved to Washington, D.C., and we lived in Washington, D.C., for two years.  We moved to Washington the year after the desegregation of the Washington public schools.  So imagine California boys, you know, being planted right in Washington, D.C., at that time and place.  And it was a great period of adjustment for us because while we had been for so many years ensconced in Mill Valley [California], there we were in Washington, D.C., which was such an important and prominent black community, a black city.
Speaker 2: So you're nine years old then?
Speaker 1: I was about--probably about nine years old, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I was there for fourth and fifth grades.  And it was, and to now, you know, see some of this, it's much more big time.  And be on the campus of Howard University, and to hear Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson preach.  You know, I remember these things because I was raised with a great preacher, Howard Thurmond.  And so, to know what great preaching is, I appreciated it early in my life.  And Mordecai Johnson was who preached the sermon at Howard when we went there often.  And then living in Washington, D.C., was seeing so many people.  It was the first time that I had a black teacher.  And I remember, you know, Miss Hill and Miss Burroughs (ph.) to this day.  And that was, you know, fifty-something years ago.  And why that was important to me is because they had an unbridled expectation of my best.  And that was a different thing that I had experienced.  I hadn't experienced that feeling, you know, of a black teacher who would pull my ear if I did something wrong.  They would take a ruler out and they would rap your knuckles right then and there because they practiced corporeal punishment, the Washington schools of the 1950s.  But I never felt diminished by it.  I never felt lesser.  What I felt was that these black women expected that every kid in their class was going to get a good education, and they were going to make sure that you got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So what was the name of the school that you attended--
Speaker 1: I went to John--I went to W.B. Powell School on Upshur Street.  I think it was between thirteenth and fourteenth on Upshur Street in Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  We have to pause here again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 1368
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're having this wonderful experience in Washington, D.C., most of--this very strong--in this very strong black community.  Certainly the black professional community is really strong in a city like Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  But you're also aware of the contrast in Washington even then.  There were, you know, wealthy black people, and highly-educated black people, and, you know, teachers' colleges, and Howard University, and a lot of that going on.  But you were also aware of an underclass in Washington.  And I was aware of it even at that time because there were kids at the Powell School that lived a different way.  Now, I'm not sure that I understood it really well then and there, but you were aware that there was a very strong class system, if not caste system, in Washington.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that some of the poorest communities in the U.S. were blocks from the White House.  That used to be in- (unclear)
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: In the shadow of the capitol.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  Right.  So you were there two years?
Speaker 2: We were there from 1956 to 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were there during the Montgomery Boycott years that Doctor King was in the national news for the first time.  Did your family discuss--I'm sure you did, but you remember those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I probably don't have a sharp recollection because I was probably too young.  But what I was aware of in a general sense was civil rights.  You knew you had a feeling that something was stirring because you were given this information by your parents that there was a very strong underbelly of unemployed or underemployed people, and there was a growing distance between parts of the community.  And so, I'm not sure that I knew at that point, and I know as I'm careful, I don't want to try to mix my own knowledge of what I gained as opposed to what I experienced.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--how aware were you at that age of the black institutions like the Urban League and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and--
Speaker 2: Raised in them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, just raised in all these things, and you know, go to conventions and see all your family--there are people from--and friends and classmates of your parents, and all those people.  So, you know, I think that you probably can reflect at that time that nobody used public accommodations.  You didn't go into a hotel and stay or motel and stay.  Anytime you move from one place to the other, you stayed at somebody's house.  And that was expected.  That was fun, and so, you know, we're going to drive this far, but it means we've got to stop along the way.  And you stopped along the way the whole--or probably waited to be navigated was because these people live here and those people live there.  And as we moved and we drove back and forth across the country those two times, we never stayed in a hotel or motel or anything like that.  We stayed at people's houses.  That--I loved that.  I loved that I have those memories because they tell me something about how the community worked and how people stayed in touch with each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a sense--now, you still young.  you're nine or ten, but did you have a sense of the difference between Washington, D.C., and San Francisco in terms of the social world?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  Not only did I have a sharp sense of the difference between Washington, D.C. and San Francisco, I liked Washington, D.C. probably better because I could be indivisible in Washington.  I could just be a kid.  And I could be surrounded by people that weren't any different than my parents or my family.  Again, my two school teachers in fourth and fifth grade propelled me so well that when I got back to the public schools of Mill Valley, that I was way ahead of everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Miss Burroughs (ph.)--
Speaker 2: Miss Burroughs (ph.) and Miss Hill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were--they were just great teachers.  And so, you know, there was a kind of a sharp difference.  You just didn't feel--you didn't feel different.  Now, you know, kids at that age are worried about being different.  You know, as life goes on I'm not really all that worried about being different, it's just kind of who I am and everybody's different, and everybody's in many ways are the same.  So, but when you're a kid, you're probably more interested in conformity.  And, you know, try to be like everybody else.  But the sharpest difference that I felt and that I experienced was when we would drive from Washington to Darlington, South Carolina.  So we went from what seemed to be a more cosmopolitan Washington environment, now we're going into the Deep South.  And what I experienced in the 1950s in the Deep South was absolute clear segregation.  And what that meant to go to my father's hometown and to be with my cousins that were there was that the rules were very clear.  So you ask the question about civil rights, right.  So that was a part of a movement that I'm not sure that I could grasp at that point in time.  But what I experienced from San Francisco to Washington to Darlington, South Carolina, gave me a very, very strong, literal, visceral understanding that you don't go to certain places.  And I made that mistake because I was born in San Francisco, and there were apparently wasn't--I mean there apparently wasn't anywhere that you couldn't go.  But you couldn't buy a house in certain neighborhoods, right?  But the rules of segregation in Darlington, South Carolina, were outlined in black and white, in letters: "Colored Only.  White Only."  You know, when you went to the movie theatre, you did not go downstairs, you had to go upstairs.  But I didn't know that, so I was instructed on those trips about how to be a person who is a "colored" person in a segregated society.  I'm glad I knew that.  I'm glad that that's not a fiction in my life.  I don't want to carry the scar tissue that's associated with that.  But I don't want to have to, you know, think Was that real or was not that.  It was very clear.  It was very outlined.  And I think that my father and my mother wanted us to have that experience.  I think they wanted us not to rest on being the children of a doctor in San Francisco with a lot of privilege without understanding what that privilege was based on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they would take the time to prepare you for (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  When we went to West Virginia, we went to Harper's Ferry.  We ended--when we went by these places to understand where the Civil War had been fun--who was John Brown?  What did all of that stuff mean?  What was the Mason-Dixon Line?  And what were those things--what were those principles upon which all of this was based?  So that period of time in Washington, my face lights up when I think about it, because I don't know who I would be, how I would have navigated the rest of my life if I had only grown up, you know, in San Francisco Bay Area.  I don't know.  And I'm glad that it didn't happen that way.
Story_ID: 1369
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you come back to the Bay Area, California in the (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In 1958.
Speaker 1: 1958.  And you're in the--
Speaker 2: I went to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: --sixth grade.  Right.  Okay.  And you went back to the same school?
Speaker 2: Went back to the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your attitude when you come back to this school?  Was it any different than it was before you left?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, when you get into sixth grade, you're at the dawning of interesting girls.  Now, that's going to pose a dilemma because here I'd been in Washington, D.C., and maybe it wasn't dawning on me but it was about to dawn on me that girls exist in the world.  And so, I had a very fluid kind of social situation, you know.  It was nice in Washington, you know.  All the pretty little girls were, you know, all right there, and they dressed up every day.  But when I came back to San Francisco and when we came back to Mill Valley, California, you know, I was a preteen, and there'd began to be a subtle shift in the boundaries, because now different things could happen.  And this was still 1959.  But in that same year, I was--I had a great thing to happen to me which was just an extraordinary event that catapulted me in a different direction.  That was, I was chosen as one of four, eleven-year-olds to represent the United States at an international summer camp in Finland.  And so, for the summer of 1959, with an adult chaperone and three other eleven-year-olds, I spent that summer in Finland, and in Scandinavia.  And I had then a global experience because there were kids coming from throughout the world.  It was the first time that I experienced the polyglot, multicultural environment in which all the kids were the same age, and we had a chance to interact.
Speaker 1: That's Finland.  Okay.  Well, that was--now, you had some enriching experiences as a youth.  Now, this is--what were you--well, give us your impression of Finland and that experience?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that if we go back and look at the boxing history, Floyd Patterson and Ingemar Johansson were fighting.  And so, now you've got the black man and you've got the Swede.  Now, Scandinavians, I think, first and foremost consider themselves Scandinavians, right?  And Ingemar Johansson was embraced, you know, by all of that.  And while it might have been seen as a battle of race, I think it was really a battle of national pride because Floyd Patterson, you know, won this fight.  And as a little boy, now--well, not so little but I was eleven.  You know, I'm now in Finland, and I was probably for most people the first person of this color that they had ever seen.  And I brown out pretty good in the summertime.  And the experiences of being around kids from all over the world and just being there, and spending time, waking up, and having breakfast.  You know, I took my first sauna.  you know, I swam in glacial lakes.  We went into the Arctic Circle.  I lived for a few days with a family in the Arctic Circle.  I was pretty much on my own at one point in time.  So far away from anything that I had ever understood.  People would touch my skin because they just couldn't imagine like, what is this, because they are so fair-skinned.  And when you're eleven years old, and the way I was raised, I never took any of that stuff personally.  It was an experience for me.  I was an object of curiosity as much as they were curious to me, because I hadn't really seen that type of culture.  You know, we're going back, you know, fifty years from now.  And so, there was a type of unexplored naivete that I experienced.  I didn't know that anything was wrong, and I was just flat out experiencing every day, something was brand-new.  And that brought for the first time in my life a global focus.  We called it "international" in those days, to my development.  And it created a type of curiosity that I've exposed for the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there other--any other black children there from the other--
Speaker 2: No.  No, because, you know, the only place they probably would have come from would have been Africa, or the Caribbean.  And at that point, you know, Africa was still just barely laboring with independence.  And the Caribbean was still largely under control of the British because we still had the Commonwealth.  So the kids were coming from other Scandinavian countries, from Russia, from Spanish-speaking countries, from France, Germany, European and Canadian, and American.  But it was a rich enough group of kids that we had a lot of, now what we call diversity, but just, you know, different national origins.
Story_ID: 1370
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is nineteen-sixty--
Speaker 2: 1959.
Speaker 1: '59 (1959).  '59 (1959), okay.  All right.  So Eisenhower's [U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953-1961] still the president, and--now, what did your--well, what were your parents' political affiliation?  Were they Republicans or Democrats in '59' (1959)?  Now, we can ask this now, okay (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't have any qualms about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father [Daniel Collins] came into the Democratic Party because my grandfather [Edward Lawrence James] was a staunch Democrat from West Virginia.  In fact, he was, I believe, at the 1952 and 1956 Conventions.  And there are legendary arguments that he had with Senator [Robert] Byrd because Byrd was an arch-segregationist.  He reformed himself over time, and--but my grandfather, Edward Lawrence James in Charleston [South Carolina], was a very powerful person.  I mean, he was probably as economically as powerful as anybody outside of Union Carbide or the, you know, the big petrochemical industries or the mining companies.  But in terms of being a merchant and with the black community, what Eddie James kind of said probably had a lot of influence.  So he was a part of that.  And my grandfather had a strong influence on my father to become a Democrat because, as you know, in South Carolina, you were probably going to be a Republican in that time, because the Democratic Party was the under control of the Dixiecrats and the Segregationists.  So my father moved into Democratic politics, and I believe that he was a member of the Delegation in 1960 that nominated Jack Kennedy.  That same grandfather under the--in the Kennedy Administration was a guest of the State Dinner at the White House for Emperor Haile Selassie.  So they figured prominently in the Democratic Party.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your father--did you meet some of the, I guess, figures in the political life of--I mean the black community in San Francisco, some of the leaders when you were (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure because those were--that was the generation, you know, Jones and Haynes and Boswell, and--but, you know, it wasn't just that.  They were business leaders too.  Jefferson Beavers, who started, you know, Transbay Savings, and people who started, you know, Beneficial Savings and Loan.  So there was a lot--there were a lot of those guys and women who really thought they could do anything, and they really did a lot.  So, yeah, we were raised around and very comfortable with people who were making, you know, a type of investment in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Carlton Goodlett?
Speaker 2: When my father started the [San Francisco] Sun-Reporter with Carlton Goodlett.  My father had the money and Carlton Goodlett had the vision.  And so, they bought the newspaper together, and they co-owned the newspaper for years.  And then eventually, my father sold his interest to Carlton.  They were--they were very good friends all the way through life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your household is basically in the center of (laughter)--I mean, is close to the center (unclear)(simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, there were probably many centers, but that power was shared.  And I think because of that, because they had a sense of who was going to be, you know, really good at what that they would (unclear).  My father was (unclear) at the university.  I mean, he would, after all--during all of this time that I'm talking about, had an academic appointment at the University of California at San Francisco, and it was teaching dentistry.  He was a Board Certified oral pathologist elected to the Royal Academy of Oral Pathologists.  He was the first black certified oral pathologist in American history.  So he had a whole other world, which is the world of the academy and of science; and of that order.  So he was both a businessman, he was a dentist, he was a scientist, and he was a political leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So now, okay.  Seventh and eighth--junior high school, you went to another school, right?
Speaker 2: I went to the local public elemen--you know, middle schools.
Speaker 1: Is that Ed McGuire (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Edna Maguire School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was sixth and seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not very noteworthy years in--because I think what was happening there is, as I was saying, that now you've got the growing interest that you have in girls.  And at the same time, a kind more restrictive sense of social activity in Mill Valley.  So I spent a lot of my time in San Francisco in the East Bay.
Story_ID: 1371
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--okay.  That's basically the same in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, now in high school something else happened, and that is that the high school that I went to, Tamalpais High School not only kids from Mill Valley [California], but it had kids from Sausalito and Marin City.  And Marin City was one of the communities that came up during the 1940s because it was adjacent to the Marin Shipyards where there was a lot of ship repair and shipbuilding going on.  So there was a very, very strong ensconced black community in Marin City.  And those kids went to Tam High [Tamalpais High School].  So I was back to [Washington] D.C.  I was back to a place where I was no longer the isolated black kid in an all-white situation.  I could then blend back in to a much, kind of broader demographic.  And I felt much more comfortable in high school for the first time since I had been in Washington, because I was around a bunch of other black kids, many of who were much smarter than me, and who came from families where academic progress and doing well in school was just absolutely expected.  So there was again, nothing--there was for the first time in now my teenage, you know, I was around a bunch of really fun kids; academics, leaders, athletes, musicians; George Duke was at Tam high  with me.  And so, you know, Bill Champlin, who was a great, you know songwriter and guitarist and musician; and I grew up with these kids.  And they really, you know, became just, you know, brilliant musicians.  And so, it was a--it was a lot better because again, you know, my thing is, it's all about diversity and inclusion.  We all do better when we have a lot of mixture and a lot of new flavors coming in to what we are and what we're becoming.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember George Duke's mother?
Speaker 2: I don't think I knew Mrs. Duke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did you know her?
Speaker 1: I did not, but we interviewed George Duke last summer, and he was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) it was the summer before and he was talking about her political activities.  She did--it's something she did  I can't remember exactly what it is; however, did--she was a--she took a civil rights stand--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't be surprised at all because out of what--it was then Marin City--came, you know, a lot of people who really made something strong of themselves.  Because, again, opportunity was still possible.  What's happened in Marin City, you know, has not been that same story repeated.  (unclear) educational gaps, and social gaps and employment gaps.  You know, as people who could've moved out, but there's also a group of people that are left in Marin City who have never, you know, doused the flame of hope for that community.  So, you know, but George Duke was, you know, he was just another guy there, but you could see something else was going on.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now he's responsible for so much music that people don't even know he's responsible for.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: He's the arranger for Anita Baker and a lot of people--he's not even on the album.
Speaker 2: He was always like that.  He was--he had very little ego.  George was kind person.  But there was--there was another deep going on with George too.  By contrast, you know, or by comparison or addition, Bill Champlin, you know, who was famous in the rock world of his time.  They come out of a--we call them now "garbage bins," but these guys picked up guitars and drums and saxophones and stuff and just learned how to play them.  But a part of the two was in at the time that we went to high school, you had music in the schools; you have in the schools.  You know, you were--you had athletics in the schools.  You know, you had drama.  You know, you had well outfitted organizations surrounding schools with, you know, scouting and with YMCAs and club activities, and little leagues, and Pop Warner and stuff like that.  So the school was a part of a larger community.  And so, as kids growing up at that time, we were advantaged by all these other institutions.  And so, we had a great--we had great music teachers, you know, at our high school.  And for that, these kids who had the raw talent, you know, could be developed.
Story_ID: 1372
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--now, I take it that you're a decent student at this point, and I don't have any reason to think otherwise.  And were you--did you run for class office or anything like that or did you--were in the National Honor Society or anything (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had those--you know, those things that came along with good grades.  I was the president in my freshman class.  And I, you know, being a high school leader is really popularity contest.  I take kind of a deep breath there because maybe when you're a freshman in high school you want to be the president of a class.  And my brother was the president of the student body in his time, four years ahead of me.  But whenever my brother went one direction, I wanted to go the other direction because he was so good at what he did--at everything.  You know, he would triple, you know, letters in sports, and he was American Field Service Student, went to Austria, he was student body president, probably the most popular boy in the school.  And those--all of those expectations were sitting there for me.  But I never wanted to be who he was, maybe sometimes to my detriment.  He's a great scientist; my brother went on to become a doctor.  But I would tend to go in another direction, maybe just because I'm a third child I'm a little contrarian.  So I moved in just different directions from him.  And today he's really one of my best friends.  Did I--I never wanted to compete with my brothers.  But they left very little room to move because both my older brothers were just extraordinary in their own ways.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So they kind of--everybody knew you from your--as you matured (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was little--I was, you know, somebody's little brother.  And therefore, being somebody's little brother, I just kind of parked them over there, and I just had to, you know, kind of go about and do my thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what were your aspirations in high school?
Speaker 2: Probably to be liked (probably).  Probably to have fun with kids, and we used to play a lot.  I was a child of the '60s' (1960s).  And so, you know, all the temptations that were out there that you had to take a taste of.  And so, it was both an interesting time, but it was a time that was ladened  with minefields and potholes because growing up really did--just about everything happened.  And also at the same time, I had that man called Daniel Collins and that woman DeReath Collins that I had to go home to every day, and whenever I had strayed they would know and I had to deal with that.  And I strayed, and there's no question about it.  I was a child of the '60s' (1960s).  And I'm not going to try to go back and revise what was going on there.  But what it did is that it caused me always to have to have another part of my brain going.  I could never really fall into the trap.  I could never go but so far in any one direction.  It might not be healthy or just antisocial, though I probably walked on that rail a little bit.  But there was always something else that guided me back, and that was with the straight line where the North Star was, that was there, not really talked about a lot.  But it was there in our household.  And I knew it was there and I knew what was right and I knew what was wrong.  So when I tempted wrong, because--and I'm glad I did, because I know what--I know it to some degree what lives over there.  But I knew how to steer myself back.  I didn't have any choice about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of music did you like when you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked R and B.  You know, growing--you know, those years in D.C. got you in touch with a whole other thing and, you know, that was, you know, we had American Bandstand and Dance Party going on in D.C.  So, you know, the Platters and all that business, you know.  The Miracles.  I liked all that music.  I liked forty-fives.  We used to call them records or your forty-fives.  And so, Dance Party music, and that kind of stuff, you know.  It was just everywhere all the time.  And so, I think that because I lived in this other world, which was to go over to somebody's basement and dance.  We just listened to, you know, to popular records.  I also had, because my father played classical guitar, and so in the sound of our house in the morning was the sound--I woke up to the sound of my father playing classical guitar music.  And he was--his music was brilliant, it was beautiful.  He played Bach, he played, you know, these themes and variations of Bennison (ph.)(unclear).  It was the lyrical side of waking up because what it meant was that, when he was practicing, we didn't make a lot of noise.  And he wanted to put in probably about an half an hour to forty-five minutes, starting maybe about 5:30 in the morning, before we got up and then had to make noise and get ready to go out.  But he was very disciplined like this.  My father would take probably an half an hour in the middle of his dental practice and pull out his guitar, and he would practice.  He studied twice a week with his teacher.  So we attended a lot of, you know, symphonic and European music concerts, but with a real flavor towards classical guitar.  And so, that was another part of it.  I loved that.  You know, we also grew up because my mother--a part of my mother's family had--there're composers in it.  So we grew up with a lot of jazz music around.  And that was just, you know, a part of the sound of the household, the full range of it.  So the boys were over here, we were called the boys, playing our forty-fives; my father would play, you know, his guitar music, but then there was a lot of jazz around too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 1373
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, high school.  We're still in high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so as you start getting towards your--end of your senior year, what are your prospects?  What are you thinking?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm thinking that I want to go to Berkeley [University of California Berkeley] because it is right across the bridge, or I want to go to--University of California has opened a new campus at Santa Cruz, and wouldn't that be nice to go down to Santa Cruz; all the Santa Cruz mountains and, you know, like some--some part of me is a city boy, but some part of me that loves this outdoors business.  So I wanted to, you know, I didn't have a whole lot of high expectations about where I would go to college because I was probably more moving in this direction than this direction.  But then something--another kind of strange thing happened to me, and that was in the fall of my senior year.  And I got a message to come to my counselor's office immediately.  Well, I didn't know if I had been caught for one of my many infractions, which was learning how to cut school and go out of windows and, you know, leave class and just pull all the stunts that you do as a senior in high school.  But in fact, there was a gentleman there that was waiting to talk to me, and his name was Albert Schreck.  And he was with also the Dean of Admissions of Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts].  And Mr. Schreck and Mr. Copland (ph.) had planted the idea that I would go to Williams College.  And I didn't know really much about that at all.  I knew that there was some place called Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and there was, you know, I--certainly you know about the Ivy League.  But those weren't things that I was particularly interested in.  But a funny thing happened on the way to college, and that was that I was granted admissions to Williams and that's where I went.
Speaker 1: So, I mean, okay.  Now, I'm trying to figure out now why you would choose Williams College.  Now, did you talk to other college recruiters?  What seem like to me (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I went to--I talked to other college recruiters and looked at other colleges.  But there was a part of me that, in spite of what I might try to explain as being a cosmopolitan sophisticate, I'm really a kind of a small town guy.  And the idea of going to a liberal arts college that was going to then take--try to take this unformed brain that I had, a California public school boy, and they said to me that I would probably do better at a small liberal arts college that was completely devoted, you know, to this age group of eighteen to twenty-one years old, and that they--I would be taught by professors, I wouldn't have teaching assistance; I would have all of the tools and resources and libraries and laboratories and museums and things like that at a small liberal arts college.  And that was really attractive to me ultimately rather than going to, you know, in some ways, a more anonymous big university, no matter what its size or prestige.
Speaker 1: I haven't asked you this, but it's kind of odd.  I should have asked it earlier, but what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite subject in school was probably the intersection of art and history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not necessarily what I was best at.  I was best at science.  I remember my brother had gone into science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were trying to--
Speaker 2: So I moved more in this direction.  But I've always had a strong interest in visual culture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you--did you have a favorite artist in those days?
Speaker 2: In those days, who would have been my favorite artist?  Now, we're talking about when I was in high school or college?
Speaker 1: High school.
Speaker 2: They would probably be, you know, the Italian masters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that's, you know, we were still taught essentially, you know, that canon was the European canon.  But the other piece that happened was that my father [Daniel Andrew Collins] developed a business in Africa in the 1950s and early 1960s.  And so, when he started doing in terms of his own collection, was bringing out back with him these pieces of African art.  And so, my first exploration outside of the European canon was to begin this education that my father prompted in understanding West African art.  I think that probably happened at the same time because these beautiful pieces, you know, came into the family collection.  And so, you know, what is, you know, this art, and what is now, you know, the political or cultural or historical roots of what we now call West Africa, and all divided up into these post-colonial countries.  But, my dad would want us to try to understand what was behind that, what happened before.  And so, that period of time awakened, you know, my appetite and my interest in that area.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Well this is just at the edge of a reawakening of black consciousness, I guess, in terms of arts and culture.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, so this--we're talking 1965 I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're talking about 1960, '61 (1961).
Speaker 1: '60 (1960)-'61 (1961)?
Story_ID: 1374
Speaker 1: My father went to the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to the Independent Celebration as a guest of the government of--that would become Nigeria.  And we--we were scheduled to move to Nigeria with this business that my father had started, which is an import-export business.  But that never came to pass.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know there were some--well, when Nnamdi Azikiwe was the first president [Nigeria], and then there's like an upheaval or something and he's overturned, and then some period of time when the Biafran [Nigerian-Biafran War, 1967-1970] conflict was going on.
Speaker 1: That would have been the mid-1960s.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mid-1960s, right.  So it was a little dangerous to be in--
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: --to be there.  So that probably put the kibosh on it, I guess.
Speaker 1: Also, correction.  What you purchased and bought wouldn't necessarily be what landed and what people expected.  So, and I think that's been an ongoing problem.  So, you know, how to develop secure trade routes was the biggest problem that my dad had.  He had good, strong relationships with people that wanted to buy raw materials from West Africa, primarily in Nigeria, but he could never control what would happen between Lagos [Nigeria] and Amsterdam [Netherlands].
Speaker 2: Now, how did he make that connection?  How did he get connected with Nigeria?
Speaker 1: Well, he was connected with a guy who was just this hugely interesting person named Tony Fernandez, who is a Yoruba, and had a--probably some strain of the Portuguese in him.  But he was a bigger-than-life guy, who was interested in, at that time, helping to develop the raw resources, the raw materials, and to create, you know, trade routes in a post-colonial world between and among West African countries and other ports that wanted their goods and services.  And so, you're--you know, you've got cocoa, you've got zinc, you've got gum arabic, you have all of this coffee and everything.  And, you know, the bounty of West Africa was just unbridled.  And so, my father was connected with Tony, and they developed a company; but they also, because they were able to finance it, you know, based on a number of people here in San Francisco [California], in the black community.  They had businesses; they had enterprises; they had banks.  And so, money could be lent or investments could be made in these sorts of things, and they did.
Speaker 2: Now did your father know William Leo Hansberry of Howard?  He was a--
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know he was brought over to, you know, found the Library of African Studies at the University of (unclear).
Speaker 1: But you also (pause)--you're also dealing with the Kennedy Administration [U.S. President John F. Kennedy, 1961-1963], and the first time that a number of blacks have gone into the government at a kind of new level.  So there is a heightened awareness of the early potential of the--an African-American interest merging with African interest.  Now, it's taken three generations to make that better.  The African-American community has changed and evolved and so has Africa.  But, you know, these are the early people, you know, past Marcus Garvey, but the kind of next wave of people that are trying to really make something, you know, of this potential.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Now, there was so much excitement of the emerging, new nations of Africa in those days.
Speaker 1: One of the biggest challenges is that, I think, that history will tell us that education was not broadly distributed.  Pre-colonial Africa--during the colonial period of Africa, and then when liberation and freedom and independence is granted, you would think there would be an intelligentsia that had the ability to manage the reins of government.  But a lot of the control of the new governments were moving down tribal lines that were not necessarily sophisticated, cosmopolitan, well-exposed, and educated.  But they did have the political power to do certain things.  So, you know, that lack of readiness for independence has really been a lot of the narrative of what's happened, you know, in post-colonial Africa.
Speaker 2: With states arbitrarily cut up and then made the former states (unclear) in the beginning.
Speaker 1: Without the preparation.
Story_ID: 1375
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  So as a senior in high school--well, you know, you decided to go to Williams College, and, okay.  And that's in Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: It's in Western Massachusetts, yeah.  In Williamstown, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Williamstown, okay.  All right.  So how did you like it when you got there?
Speaker 2: I'd never been there before, and I was told that it was in something called the Berkshire Mountains.  So I thought that we were going to roll up the Sierra-Nevada or the Alps or the Rocky Mountains, or we were going to see the Cascades or, you know, a great mountain chain.  At least the Himalayas (laugher).  But, in fact, the Berkshire Mountains are very old mountains, very mature mountains, and they look more like foothills from a California perspective.  So the big surprise for me was that what I'd expected in terms of what mountains looked like; didn't look anything like what I found.  And I was an all-men's college, because Williams didn't go co-ed until many years later or several years later.  But what I found there were a group of dedicated teachers and professors in academics, who were going to train your mind.  They were going to teach you how to write and how to express yourself.  And so, it was very, very difficult for me.  I struggled; struggled really hard my first year at Williams, maybe my first two years.  And the gaps that I had coming out of, you know, Mill Valley Public Schools, were very evident.  I was not competing with kids that had gone to really refined prep schools or Jesuit schools where they had understood theology, religion, and philosophy.  And a lot of these concepts were foreign to me.  We didn't have advanced placement courses.  And in comparison to kids that had come out of, you know, public school systems in New York or Boston or Rochester, you know, all over the place, there was a big gap that I had to deal with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now, there was a--is there an adjacent girls' school (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We're a long ways (unclear).
Speaker 1: --or women's school?
Speaker 2: No.  Williams is more isolated than probably any of the colleges.
Speaker 1: So, Wells [Aurora, New York] or Wellesley [Wellesley, Massachusetts] or--
Speaker 2: Wellesley was near Boston, Cambridge.  Vassar was near New York City in Keepeesie.  Then there was Smith and Roanoke that were nearer to Amherst.  Skidmore [Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York] was close to us.  Bennington College [Bennington, Vermont] was close to us.  But nothing is adjacent.  Nothing was proximate.
Speaker 1: You really must have--were there other--any other black students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were kids from Indianapolis [Indiana]; from Washington, D.C.; from Cleveland [Ohio]; New York; Wilmington [Delaware].  There were really a group of black guys in my class at Williams.  We were all very close.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, okay.  I would imagine you would have felt sort of isolated being that far away from home.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the isolation was something that I had chosen, and I knew that I was, you know, I wanted to be at that point.  I mean I had now made the decision that I wasn't going to be around, you know, California.  And so, when I left I really left.  And I had a chance on the way to college to go back to D.C., and to see, you know, see my Washington family, and to remember what it was like to be in Washington.  So now I was really stitching together what was going to be, you know, these next chapters of my life, and I was beginning probably to be able to integrate a lot of things.  The (unclear) were still in Boston.  My godparents lived in Harlem.  And so, for me, as about a seventeen or eighteen year old, to be able to get on a bus or get in the car and go to Washington, or go to New York, or go to, you know, to Boston, meant that I was getting to be independent, on my own terms.  And that meant a lot to me.  So while there--might have been isolation in Western Massachusetts, that was probably really good for me because I needed to depart myself down there and get to the library and write those papers.  I wasn't distracted on a daily basis by the enormity of New York or all the opportunities in Boston.  There were limited choices there in terms of externalities, but unlimited academic possibility; and that's why I went to college.  So I think that in some ways kids going to college now want this, you know, this experience.  I think I pretty well knew intuitively that it was time for me to buckle down and learn how to think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, was that--was Williams a good place for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the perfect place for me.  And I can remember this because the professors that had the expectations for me, you know, were extremely demanding.  And I never--I was never--I could never skate.  I could never be artful.  I could never dodge the assignment.  Everything was in pretty bold--either you've got it or you didn't.  Either you explained it well or you had to rewrite it.  And I did a lot of rewriting.
Story_ID: 1376
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was your major?
Speaker 2: I had a double major in history and history of art.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  History and history of art.  Now, what did you learn about art that you--that you, you know, that you consider important today (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, we call it art.  I tend to try to call it visual culture because I think that the scope of visual culture can embrace then things that may have their origin in cultural expressions.  We label something art probably when it moves you in a certain way.  Or there may be some political aspects of why you call something a work of art.  But I think that a lot of the things that we look at, in particular, you know, religious artifacts or, you know, sculpture from, you know, eons ago or things that were, you know, made in tribal culture of Africa that weren't probably produced as a piece of art, but perhaps as a practice of ritual.  So visual culture is a much broader definition for me.  That's one piece.  The other is that I was always interested in, and could track, history pretty well.  My mind can sort history, and I can integrate history and historical things, and historical narratives (unclear) and facts.  It works well in my brain.  And so, what I was always interested in was this intersection between, you know, the historical narrative and the visual culture.  It's expressed in so many different ways, but how do people look; how do they feel; what do they express; what do they say about their times; how were their cities formed, you know; what are the relationships between the various elements of society that get expressed in cities.  So I developed, you know, through this a kind of integrative understanding and fascination with how cities emerge, and how communities emerge.  So, the academic pieces of that, which I understand, you know, these areas of history, but also where I could let my mind just kind of be free and have these kinds of unlimited explorations when around pictures and objects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that continues to this day.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you develop an appreciation for a specific kind of art?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened in college was that I was tactically in my record, so I was pretty good in this.  And I could memorize pictures, and I could understand their historical themes and recognize stuff and explain it.  And I also learned with a great of set teachers something about critical thinking in art.  That was very helpful because it's also helped me to better understand my history.  My history would inform the other side the other direction.  But, you know, now we're in the mid-1960s, and the revolution is on and black culture is really expressing itself, and really just pouring out of the consciousness, and the presence and the social fabric.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you couldn't miss the times at all.  And even in Williamstown, which seemed to be so far away from everything else; you know, we had our own version of that.  And so, it was at that time that I developed my deep and abiding love for African-American art.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did you have teachers that knew anything about African-American art (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I had one teacher that came up from New York and spent several weeks, and that was Romare Bearden.  He came in residency--it was at my invitation because as a senior, I had the ability to make a few things happen as a student, and I asked the department to request that Romare (ph.) Bearden, Mr. and Mrs. Bearden, would come and residence to Williamstown, and they did for several weeks.  And so, it was at that time that I developed a personal relationship with Romie [Romare Bearden], and I visited him on occasion, and corresponded with him.  He was a really wonderful person.  And he gave me a type of faith in how good somebody could be, but also so rooted in his background and his history in creating these fabulous narratives, you know, about the history and the movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is one of the (unclear) celebrated artists in Harlem [New York] history, and so--so it was a good choice I think.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a fortuitous choice for me because the relationship never failed me.  And just--and it was again one of these things that happen.  And I got to, you know, walk him from where he lived to on campus to where he taught, because, you know, I would spend every minute that I could possibly could with him.  And to have breakfast or lunch or dinner.  That was--that was something special.  And that's the sort of thing that could happen at Williams.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you--how did you come to choose--to bring Romare Bearden--had you met him prior to--
Speaker 2: No, but I had only seen his work.  And what he was creating was this beautiful body of work, you know, expressing what was going on in cities.  But it was also coming out of his experience in North Carolina.  So he had a lot of the formalities behind him, you know, his drawing, his painting, his narrative of jazz and other music; you know, his telling of the stories, you know, the migration routes.  I mean, you know, he and Jake Lawrence are two of these people that are really kind of telling the story through pictures, and they're not afraid to do that.  And so, the pictorial aspect of it is rooted in this history.  And again, I'm fascinated by history, but I'm also interested in visual culture.  So I was less interested in the abstractionists.  You know, I appreciate their work and where it really fits, but I like pictures, and that's just something that--kind of the way I am.  That's not right, that's not wrong.  But, you know, Romie also produced this incredible narrative of Harlem.   And in being able to go down to New York and to see what he was producing, and how he was explaining this, and using his own visual intelligence, you know, to see these things, was just interesting to me.  You know, and that endured.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What a gift.  Now, here you know Lowell (unclear) Sturmond (unclear)--I mean the--I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: Howard Thurman.
Speaker 1: Howard Thurman.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know Romare Bearden, now.  You're able to, as a student, and bring him to a campus.  You're able to talk to him--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and drive him around, and do--just be around him in unguarded moments (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Just totally naive and carefree.  But, you know, back to Howard Thurman for a second.  I was the chairman of the Howard Thurman Trust.  So, you know, there was a time at the end of Howard's life that a lot of the matters for Howard and Sue Bailey Thurman rested on my shoulders and less impressed on the Trust to have to arrange--that's another story.
Speaker 1: Right.  You have so many good stories about what--Howard Thurman at Howard, and the--his (unclear) talk to his students and, you know, (unclear) over the years.  So, what--who--so in a way, as a (unclear), you're really guiding your own education since by bring in somebody like Romare Bearden.
Speaker 2: Well, again, that was one of the privileges that Williams allowed us, is that we were encouraged to, you know, begin to look at the broader world and to play with it, and to use those resources for our own development and education.  And that was not unusual.  I mean, what I was allowed to do was absolutely, you know, what--you take a proposal forward and you see if you can get it worked through and make it happen.  And so, I was--maybe I could say that I was empowered to do things like that.  And maybe that was a good thing, but also, you know, bear in mind that when I went to Williams College, there was not a single course in African-American history.  There was not a single course in African-American literature.  There was not a single course in African history.  And so, this whole other part, you know, what you were being taught in the academy was missing.  And we had to say something about that in our time and place at Williams.  We had to say that this is important for all of our understanding; not just us as African-Americans, but everybody needs to understand everybody else's history.  We're still figuring ourselves out as American society.  And so, we had to--we had to get busy with student activism around things like this.  And so, perhaps a part of what I was privileged to do inviting Nanette (ph.) and Romare Bearden to Williams, was because we had made these things more conscious and important on the part of the administration and the leadership.  That change had to happen.
Story_ID: 1377
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how was the Williams College deplored (sic) in terms of the politics of the place?  Was it a very conservative place or was it a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was a liberal arts college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't believe that I experienced a political agenda so much as I experienced a type of historic dissonance.  The times were changing, you know, civil rights are on.  The Black Power Movement is alive.  And all these issues that are teeming in urban America and in rural America, and about injustice.  We can easily talk about the Fannie Lou Hamer as we could about H. Rap Brown.  I mean, you know, it's like, where is justice lying for black people in America?  And in a sense, you know, all the institutions were in that process of change.  And we can go back and to say--and I've had these discussions with my former professors and presidents of the college, you know.  What was it about the time that was so dissonant?  And what I think that we all say with that degree of reflection now, is that we weren't prepared for the--for speed of change.  And not only was that happening, but poor education is happening.  So women are now going to influence the direction of the institution.  And so, this wasn't isolated.  This is what's happening in America.
Speaker 1: So did women come to campus while you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, women came to campus while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About when?
Speaker 2: I think that they were there probably in the spring of 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were coming as transfer--not as transfer students, but as visiting students, as--what is the term for it; I don't remember.  But they were allowed to take courses and visiting students--beginning to kind of soften up for what it would really mean to have the first class of entering women into the college.  So I believe it was in the fall of 1971.  So I think the first full class that graduated from Williams was 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about the history department, and how did the history department, I guess, you know--so here's a time when the country is just going--when you were in high school, they were going through Civil War Centennial.  And there's a lot of--I know of stuff about the Civil War on television, books and all those things.  Then you get into, I guess, when McPherson writes the "Negro Civil War," I think in '68 (1968) or something.  It was the first time somebody really had written a serious book about blacks in the Civil War [1861-1865].  How were your professors dealing with all the--and the Civil Rights Movement being in the news so much?
Speaker 2: We were very agile.  My professors were very agile.  They had nothing invested in not being able to expand the offerings.  Now, an interesting thing happens here, too.  I refer back to the guy that showed up for me at Tamalpais High School [Mill Valley, California], Mr. Albert Schreck.  Mr. Albert Schreck, unbeknownst to me for years--I didn't learn about this until only a few years ago--gave a very, very important grant to Williams, to essentially found studies in African American history and African American studies.  I never knew this.  But has grown into an endowment that continues to enrich the ability of Williams to bring in resources in African-American history and African-American culture.  So it's funny how your life begins to develop certain things, but this person who caused me to go to Williams actually was watching along the way what was good and what was difficult about my experience.  And he took that as a call to action, but never made it something that he did for me or that I even knew about.  He felt that it was the right--I asked him much later on, he felt it was the right thing to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have to pause again.
Story_ID: 1378
Speaker 1: In college, there was a time when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was recruiting on college campuses and people were going south to participate in the Civil Rights--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Movement.  Were you recruited at all or did you feel tempted to go?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all recruited, and we all felt tempted to go.  I mean, you just--the times were so present and the issues were so patent that you wanted to be involved.  In 1968, I was in Washington, D.C., for spring vacation, and I was interviewing two Williams College graduates who were professors at Howard University.  One was Rayford Logan, and the other one was Sterling Brown because I wanted to better understand, you know, these giants in their field; and Sterling Brown in the area of literature, and Rayford Logan in the area of history and politics.  And these guys are going to Williams; they were public school boys from probably Dunbar High School that are going to Williams from Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: I did not know that information.
Speaker 2: I could be somewhat wrong there.  But nonetheless, they had gone to Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] in the 1930s, at the same time as my uncle was at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And it was a very difficult world for them because there was abject segregation.  But Williams always had its sprinkling as did Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] did and the others of their Negro boys.  And so, I did my own history, and through my own forensics I really wanted to know, you know, who is Rayford Logan?  You know, who was Sterling Brown?  And so, I was on the campus of Howard University at a meeting with Sterling Brown when the news of Dr. King's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] murder happened.  And there I was in the middle of Washington literally seeing the flames begin.  The reason I was in Washington was the exploration of African-American history, and maybe my own relationship to that.  But I witnessed that history there in Washington on that day, and I'll never forget it.
Speaker 1: Now that--the whole reaction of D.C. to the murder of Dr. King is depicted in the movie "Talk to Me."  It was about Petey Greene.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now--
Speaker 2: That's a great movie.
Speaker 1: Did you hear Petey?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, absolutely, because at that same time I was working with a guy named Topper Carew, and Topper started the New Thing Art and Architecture Center.  And we really were there, you know, to largely understand, you know, what was community development.  What does that mean?  And we didn't have a contemporary idea of community development.  And Topper was really a guru to many of us in trying to wrap our heads and hands around that.  So we listened to a lot of popular culture.  We also watched the "Battle of Algiers," because what we were looking was what urban guerilla warfare was all about.
Speaker 1: That was shown at the Howard--on the Howard campus many times.  I know I saw it at Howard, I believe in '74 (1974).
Speaker 2: I think that Topper had his own copy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are the days here.  So, now you graduated from Williams in what year?
Speaker 2: 1969.
Speaker 1: '69 (1969).  Okay.  So really you were--most of the SNCC stuff was going on in '64 (1964) and '65 (1965), but you were, you know, part of the students that came sort of after that wave.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  After that wave, and we were there for--you know, a lot of the civil rights activity happening in Washington, D.C., was important to us because we were shuttling now between, you know, these huge events; March on Washington, and things such as that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you meet Stokely Carmichael?
Speaker 2: I never met him.
Speaker 1: I know he would have been (unclear) out--
Speaker 2: I was at rallies, but did I ever meet him, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So--okay.  So when you got back to Williams as a senior, what were your ambitions then, or what did you think, or where did you think that you could serve, you know, in a--
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in my senior year at Williams, I was then in a leadership position.  And I felt as if, you know, I was now living between these two worlds.  When I was a leader of an honorary society, that was probably the only type of thing like that because we didn't have fraternities at Williams.  And I was the president of this organization.  I had the responsibility to the entire student body.  At the same time, I was very active, you know, as a young black man in my own time and my own place.  My--the piece of this that's about me and about how I feel.  So I was again caught between these two worlds and having to arbitrate these two worlds.  You know, on one hand was a very strong sense of black power and activism and militantism and playing that out.  And at the same time, trying to bring other people along to understand why this even is a problem.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a formal black student organization?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  (unclear)
Speaker 1: (unclear)  And what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: The Black Student Union.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was it.  It was all generic at that point.
Speaker 1: Were you an officer or did you have officers or--?
Speaker 2: We might have had officers.  I wasn't an officer.  I was an officer of the larger honorary society of Williams.
Speaker 1: And what was that called?
Speaker 2: It was called Gargoyle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So how did you resolve--I mean did you--well, what did (unclear)
Story_ID: 1379
Speaker 1: You know, there's something like how time passes?  Something called graduation.  And, you know, the spring comes and flowers bloom, and you've taken over the administrative building, and you've made your statement, and then you're hoping that things will change; but in June of 1969, I walked across the stage, collected my diploma, and I was graduated.  And then, you know, my life then moves in yet another direction.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, where did you go after graduation?
Speaker 1: Well, right after graduation I was awarded a Watson Fellowship from the Thomas J. Watson Foundation.  And it was a fellowship that allowed me a license to do anything I wanted to do anywhere in the world.  And I had that fellowship for two years.  And so, I set off to explore the world again and to see, you know, what it looked inside East Asia; what it was going to look like on the Indian subcontinent; and to then spend the bulk of the rest of time in Africa.  But that didn't happen.  I was in Honolulu [Hawaii] and I got a call from my father [Daniel Andrew Collins] that I needed to pick up the telephone and call Whitney Young in Washington [D.C.]--I mean in--to call Whitney Young in New York.  So I made a time and arrangement to talk to Whitney, and Whitney told me to put down my ticket, to get on a plane and come to New York immediately because he had to tell me what my next instruction was going to be.  Well, what I was going to do now. And so, I had this whole, you know, great narrative, this great adventure, my odyssey, you know, to--I was going to all these places, some of which you can't go to now.  And I got on the plane, stopped in San Francisco [California].  And Dad said that, "This is going to be good for you."  And I met with Whitney for the better part of the day.  I guess it must have been in September of 1969.  And Whitney told me that I was going to go to Athens, Greece, to study with a guy named Constantinos Doxiadis; that he had just returned from Greece and what he had made arrangements for me to spend a year or two headquartered in Athens, studying under this great city planner.  And so, I reversed my direction, I got on the plane from New York, and I landed in Athens, Greece, in September of 1969.
Speaker 2: Okay.  To study city planning.
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 2: Now, you know, our notes were all mixed up.  But (laughter).  (unclear)
Speaker 1: Because there's a word there that you don't know what it means.  Because I was a place called The Athens Center of Ekistics.  And what we were doing there was looking at these large, scaled city planning projects, as well as looking at how cities form, and are there theories behind that.  Many of these theories are debated to this day.  But looking at the integration of all the elements of transportation, and sociology, and institutions, and climate, and environment, building materials; you know, all of the work that goes into developing and propagating cities.  And that was where I spent these formative next two years of my life doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So this is 1969, '70 (1970)?
Speaker 1: 1969 to 1971.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Nineteen--
Speaker 1: 1969, 1970.  Yes.  Those two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: '71 (1971) I was still on the fellowship, but I was then in South America.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, where did you go in South America?
Speaker 1: Rio de Janeiro.  I was married at that point.  I got married in December of 1970.  And Paula and I had been sent off to South America where we spent, you know, the bulk of the next year.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, tell us how you met your wife and a little bit about her.
Speaker 1: I met my wife in 1956 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, on the trip that you--
Speaker 1: When we lived in Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My wife is a Washingtonian.  And we were just little kids.  Our families knew each other and, you know, that was one of the nice things about Washington is that there was just so much going on.  And then when I went back to Williams in 1965, I dropped through Washington to see my family, but I took who became my wife to her sixteenth birthday party.  I drove her to it.  And then I would go back and forth to Washington, as you know I said that I was there in 1968 when King was killed, but I was there often for all sorts of holidays.  You didn't just run back across the country in those days.  When you're on the East Coast, you on the East Coast, go see your people.  You're not coming home until the summer.  So I spent a lot of time in Washington, and I was around Paula Robinson a lot.  Paula went to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts] in the fall of 1967.  And that was my senior--no.  It's 1967 as a freshman, that was my junior year.  But by the time that my senior had rolled around, I was dating her and we were married one year later.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Well, this is very--you know, that's a interesting story that you met her in (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I've been married to Paula for forty years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  And have known her even longer.
Speaker 1: I've known her even longer.
Story_ID: 1380
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.  So you all are in Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil] studying city planning?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and doing a piece of research on the big migration that's going on out of the Amazon, around the horn of South America--of Brazil, and creating now these rapidly developing new urban communities that are called "favelas."  And so, now we're going back forty years ago.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we're looking at, you know, what was that?  What was happening there?  Where are people coming from?  You know, what does mean in terms of the shape and form of the city?  What's happening with health and education and economic opportunity and jobs?  And so, I did a study on that and I learned a lot.  But this is a part of my--the last part of my fellowship because one of the bigger themes of my fellowship was looking at big intercontinental migration.  I was looking at the large migrations that occurred at the end of the British Empire--at the end of the commonwealth system of British rule.  And so, free commonwealth migratory capacity and status was given to people, so you saw these big populations moving out of the Caribbean into London [England].  And what was happening with, you know, Pakistanis and with Indians moving into London.  You know, these movements that were going, the kind of freedom that happened as a part of the commonwealth agreement meant that you were now seeing these exogenous populations in these homogeneous locations.  And I was fascinated by that.  And so, I developed a sense of method to study that, largely looking at what was going on in London.  And I wanted then to look at those same hypotheses, at the migration of people coming out because of the Trans-Amazonian highway, and because of what was going on with the early stages of deforestation in the Amazon; what was happening there, this next--this huge population movement, you know, into what became more urbanized Brazil.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I have several questions, and one I need to back to, Whitney Young.  Now, did Whitney Young recruit you for this because of a need for black city planners, and he saw this was a tremendous opportunity or what?  How did that--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, you know, Whitney is one of the great unsung American heroes.  He's one of the more important people in narrating the progress of black people in this country.  He was ultimately interested in creating economic opportunity.  Others were going to worry about political opportunity and educational opportunity or health; but Whitney was really concerned about jobs and businesses and education and money.  And so, that was a part of the reason for the National Urban League.  My father [Daniel Andrew Collins] was on the board of the National Urban League and was very close to Whitney.  And because of that, you know how dads talk and, you know, "And this is Chuck is doing, and he's going to go off and he's going to do his thing."  But classic to the black canon is, "Oh, he can't waste his time doing that.  He needs to come over here and do this."  So, you know, he had this very great conversation with me because when I was in New York with him, what his plan for me was that, I was going to go Athens and I was going to study at the foot of this greater thinker, but I was also going to be surrounded by a series of other, you know, brilliant people from around the world.  You know, Lambo from Nigeria, and Margaret Mead, and Bucky Fuller, and Arnold Toynbee.  I mean, these were all people that were centering themselves during the summers in Athens around this amazing think tank.  And I was just a twenty-one-year-old kid, kind of thrown into that.  So I got to sit at their heels and to listen to them, and then engage them in conversation, and to take their notes and talk to them about what they said.  So I just--I got marinated in this situation.  And what Whitney said were a couple things.  One is that "You're going to go and you're going to do these studies, and then after that, you're going to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and you're going to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because you're going to finish your city planning, formal city planning degree at MIT, and then you're going to go to Harvard Law School.  And when you finish with all that, you're going to come back here and work for me, because based on what you've done, I want to begin to think about how the Urban League is going to become an international and global movement, because you've got work to do, first in the Caribbean, and maybe we should be doing some work in Africa.  And what we're doing here in America, we're now seeing the potential of these relationships with economic opportunity and power, and what the Caribbean is, and what African can become.  And so, this is what I'm going to want you to do."  And so, when Paula and I were in Brazil in 1971, we got news that Whitney had drowned.  And that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he drowned off the coast of Africa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was a--that was devastating for all of us.  It was just--you know, he was just--he was just taken out of our lives.  But it didn't change what I did because I then, you know, finished my fellowship and I went to MIT, and I finished Harvard Law School.
Speaker 1: What a vision.  I mean, I just--it's just so, you know--it's just mind blowing, the vision of Whitney Young on this--on your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --life.
Speaker 2: I think it was a chapter that was never opened up.
Story_ID: 1381
Speaker 1: Then, now, Brazil.  I have another--we've seen--when I first saw the "Black Orpheus," you know, my first view of the favelas of Brazil.  These unplanned--
Speaker 2: And that's why I (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Really?  I mean, absolutely.  "Black Orpheus?"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that was the seed of the idea for me.  And my wife and I, you know, really shared a love for that movie.  And because it really was this place, and this music, and these people, and this culture.  And it just, you know, opening up and the possibilities of it were fascinating to me.  So I parked all of that.  You know, but then as I started studying these migratory patterns and keeping my reading alive and my understanding about what's going on, you know, I said, "Well, Paula, why don't we just get married and let's go to South America and let's go to Rio de Janeiro, and let's go study this?"  And we did.  And that's we could do, because we had no obligations, we only had opportunity ahead of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  but by the same token, favelas--by 1971, there was another movie called, "City of God."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about favelas in 1971.  And a it's much darker--more dangerous movie than (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yes, because that's what happens when opportunity doesn't manifest itself.  You know, when people can be in motion, and you're seeing this in India right now.  There's huge, huge motion going on with the urbanization of India.  And as long as people can have opportunity, as long as that opportunity can live in the present time, you continue to have the seeds of growing civil society.  But when you remove opportunity, and you have the dense mass of people, and opportunity has gone away, then it becomes nefarious; it becomes, you know, corrupt.  It becomes difficult and not a place where good things are going to happen.
Speaker 1: It seems kind of ironic in a the two movies.  You have one that shows the sweetness of the people, and a paradise; then ends with this lover's tragedy.  In "City of God," you have this beautiful setting where there's horror going on all around
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and this--finally, this kid becomes a photographer and sees hope.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Big break.
Speaker 2: But you know, "Black Orpheus" has to end the way it is because it's based on, you know, the--
Speaker 1: Like Greeks (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Greek play.
Speaker 1: It takes us back to (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: So--(unclear).  So, Orpheus and Eurydice.
Speaker 1: So how--so how did you, I mean, not--Rio is, I guess, like a lot of cities who experiences unplanned growth of people as you think of people coming out from the inner lands into the big city, with no plan.  Some people say Houston [Texas] really grew like that.  So what did you learn there?
Speaker 2: I learned a lot.  And one of the things that fascinated me was the fusion of African-European-Portuguese and native cultures.  And, you know, how that continued to play itself out with these wide ranges in the alfena-type (ph.).  And, you know, just, you know, the that people look in Brazil, it's just so diverse.  And you're caught by just, you know, what do Brazilian people look like?  You're also struck immediately by the natural beauty of the place.  In Rio de Janeiro, I think by anybody's estimation, is one of the most beautiful places on earth.  And how the city has formed itself around the natural landscape, you know, its limits, you know, what can go where because the big natural features, you know, carve out, you know, what it can be.  And so, the Rio that I experienced in 1971 was still somewhat compact.  It was still located in this major, kind of hubs and nubs.  And the broad expansion outside of that hadn't occurred.  But I've never been back.
Story_ID: 1382
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there in '71 (1971) and you came back same year?
Speaker 2: Came back and started graduate school at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] in the fall of 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay, in city planning?
Speaker 2: In city planning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was that like, the experience like?
Speaker 2: Well, the experience was mixed for me because I had had these two years in this pretty interesting way, in Athens [Greece], in London [England], in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil], and a lot of places in between; a lot of places in between.  I'm not going to go into that, but I did a lot of traveling in the doing--but those are the main pieces.  And I had been working with really smart people that were way above my pay grade, that again, you know, pushed me past my limits.  And I had to learn other languages and I had to think in other modes and, you know, I was working--I was studying with other students from other places in the world.  And so, we were now, another new kind of international village of students living in Athens, from all over the world, focused on these areas of work.  And, at the same time, [Constantinos] Doxiadis was plotting this concept of ecumenopolis, which is now what we're talking about is the global village.  And what does it mean, like, for us to be so connected?  What's happening in North Africa right now and in the Middle East?  And in the Arabian Peninsula or--it's all evident
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us just for the sake of those who may have missed it?
Speaker 2: Ecumenopolis?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ecumenopolis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's tough.  I could be wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that's good.  At least it gives us a ballpark and it refocuses us on that word, and that came from Doctor--
Speaker 2: From Constantinos Doxiadis, D-O-X-I-A-D-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the master you went there to study with--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --in the first place, and through him you met Buckminster Fuller, and Margaret Mead, and all these other luminaries, correct?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you were able to sit and learn from them.
Speaker 2: As well as two people who became my professors at MIT and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  So there were a whole nexus of people there.
Speaker 1: So who were the two?
Speaker 2: Charles Haar and William Doebele.
Speaker 1: Haar, H-A--?
Speaker 2: H-A-A-R.
Speaker 1: William Doebele.
Speaker 2: D-O-E-B-E-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So I had thought, I was going to ask you about that, if there were any of the MIT professors at (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And there were.
Speaker 1: It would make sense.
Speaker 2: They were there and, as you may know that, following Whitney's death, MIT endowed the entire program called the "Whitney Young Fellows Program," which takes mid-career people in urban occupations and allows them to have a mirror of reflective study at MIT.  So Whitney was a--was very involved with the institute, and he opened that door for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, what were the highlights of your study at MIT
Speaker 2: Well, you were asking the question, you know, how did I find it?  I took a little detour there, and the detour I took was because, you know, I had been used to working very independently, and I had a lot of work to be, you know, to do.  We had formal studies, we had papers to be written, but the papers were research papers in pursuit of your understanding certain of these global phenomenon.  So, I have a lot of instruction in transportation and energy policy.  A lot of instruction in political policy and municipal finance and, you know, all of these different things.  This is--we were working with these tools to explain things that were happening.  And then when I got to MIT, I felt in some ways out of sync with that, because now I have to, you know, refocus into a defined curriculum.  Though it was very broad and you could do a lot of stuff, but I had done a lot of the research methodology and had actually done practice, and now I was coming back and honing my ability to work back in the academy.  So I had to refocus.  I had to learn again, you know, how to be in an American university environment with a new set of expectations.  And I really struggled with it.  But I was a good student there.  In fact, I was an excellent student.  So it was just that the stakes had gone up, and my dilemma was whether I wanted to pursuit a Ph.D., or whether I wanted to go on to law school.  And I didn't quite see myself as being outfitted to be an academic.  But maybe I could make myself into a lawyer, and so, I went to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 1383
Speaker 1: So you're getting ready to go to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  How did--I mean, was it hard to get into Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Well, I had started cross-registering, and I took a couple of courses; I took labor, I took land use and things like that.  And so, I got a chance to get on the Harvard Law School campus and feel it out and see if it was a place that I wanted to go.  But in the meantime, my wife [Paula Robinson] had been working at Radcliffe College [Cambridge, Massachusetts] in admissions, and she had been looking over the fence at me and my colleagues at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she wanted to go to MIT.  So the decision was pretty clear that she would then do her graduate work at MIT, and she did.  And then I would then go to law school, and I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what did you think of--now, this is also--this is interesting that you're around when these movies come out (laughter).
Speaker 2: (laugher).
Speaker 1: Yeah, the movie is kind (unclear) of a paper chase of Harvard Law School (unclear)(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Because that was probably fictionalized but it was documentary as far as I was concerned.  You know, look left, look right.  The funny experience for me at Harvard Law School was that, on the first day of the first class, the first question came to me.  And the teacher didn't ask anybody else for the whole hour another question.  I was grilled in--it was like I was put in the crucible.  I was lit on fire.  And I had to stand up to it.  And so, like from day one it was like, buckle your seat because this is going to be really, really intense.  And it was.  It was, you know, forming your head, forming your brain to understand the law is organic.  And anybody who has been a lawyer and studied the law, it's not the only domain in which this happens.  But just, you know, my experience in learning, you know, the structure of law is that there's a reformation of your brain and you've got to be able to get these circuits in there, and you've got to be able to work with them.  So you--it was a big growth time for me.  I learned a lot.  My best friends that endure to this day are a product of that.  And I'm going to--next week, I'm going to go up to the mountains with Channing Johnson and Rod Hamilton and Chuck Hamilton and Charlie Shorter.  And these are guys that are--we're all in there solid, and either they were there or a product of that or some relationship to that period of time in Cambridge.  We all got--we're a little bit older now, right?  This isn't college.  We're young adults, we're married.  You know, we've got kids.  We're beginning to be independent, you know.  We've got these larger resources working for us, but now, you know, it's time to really focus because after this you're going to be in another frame.  So law school was as important in the classroom as it was outside of the classroom, because while the professors, you know, gave you the location of the information and lectured at you, we taught each other the law.  We had study groups, and we sat with each other every day.  And we made sure that we understood it.  We read the materials, we prepped ourselves, we studied together, you know, we worked through the problems.  And until study group was over, you weren't ready to go to class.  And when you ever missed study group, be careful because that would be the one day the professor was going to call on you.  But these were all just, you know, these informal ways that we got to know each other and how we think.  And to this day, these are relationships that are extraordinarily important.  They're indispensible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of your professors at Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Well, Charlie Haar, who I referenced, was the person that taught me land use law.  And he was the person that was right between that world of city planning and urban development; and then the more formal studies in property, and in land use.  Then Bill Doebele, who is another person who lived in the same world as between urban studies and the law.  And they were very, very influential with me because they had known me, you know, from my Athens days.  They knew me at MIT.  But now I was a student of theirs in law school, and I wasn't--there was no hazing or, you know, you're over here and we're over there.  I did research with them, and I enjoyed that.  I learned a lot.  And then there was Louis Loss, who is the great securities regulations professor who had studied law and then worked for the Securities and Exchange Commission.  And he taught certain principles about how securities regulation is important.  And I think a lot of the financial problems that we have today are by virtue of not paying attention to certain separations that we were taught were absolute and really necessary.  I had Clark Byse, who was, you know, the great professor that was themed for the paper chase.  But he taught us contracts.
Speaker 1: Clark Byse, could you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: B-Y-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was Derrick Bell.  And Derrick Bell was perhaps among the most important because Derrick taught us civil rights, and he was unabashed about the importance of understanding our Constitution, not just from the perspective of the Commerce Clause, but from the perspective of our Bill of Rights.
Speaker 1: And--okay.  So those are the ones that stood out the most--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you were there?
Speaker 2: It was interesting with Derrick because I never took a course from him.
Speaker 1: Did you have conversations--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  You know, I read his courses.  They were really valuable to me.  And Derrick, because he was a part of the community, this is where the real scholarship happens; with a Derrick Bell, with a Charlie Haar, with a Bill Doebele.  Because what they do is, they accept you in as a peer, and they raise your expectations as a scholar.  They're not badgering you as a teacher or a student.  They're not assigning you to an inferior or superior position.  They assume that you're a peer, and then make you rise to that point.  And that was why with Derrick, you didn't have to take his courses to study with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You could go to seminars.  You could sit in on his classes and write papers and have him discuss them with you.  That's where, you know, the best part of all of my graduate education lied (sic.).  Those are the professors, those are the teachers that got you to another level.  Because it was not psychological warfare, it was just pure intellectual growth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you received your J.D. degree in 1976?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 1384
Speaker 1: Right  Okay.  (unclear).  What was your intention upon graduation from Harvard Law School?
Speaker 2: Well, my intention upon graduation, because we had a young daughter, was that, "I'd better be a breadwinner."  So it was to return to California at long last, after eleven years of being gone, being married, you know, being in the broader world.  The coming back with this beautiful baby and my beautiful wife to San Francisco [California], I wanted a job in a law firm.  And my wife [Paula Robinson] wanted to live in San Francisco, and so, that was our goal; is to be back with our family here and to raise our children in San Francisco, you know, in the bosom, in the lap of their family, and with their grandparents around.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened to the--I know Whitney Young passed away in '71 (1971) in that swimming accident off he coast of Liberia, but what happened to his vision for what you would do with the Urban League [National Urban League] after you finished law school?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened with the Urban League is that I told you that my father [Daniel Andrew Collins] was on the board of the National Urban League, and then I believe that maybe in about 1987 I went on the board of the National Urban League.  My father retired and I guess I got his seat.  And I spent almost twenty years on the board of the League; fifteen, twenty years on the board of the League, and I worked with the great, you know, John Jacob, with Hugh Price, and with Mark Morial.  But a part of this whole, you know, lineage was that Dad, when he started the Urban League here in San Francisco in 1946, worked with Lester Granger.  And then after that, was Whitney Young; and then after that was Vernon Jordan.  So we have been--and the League has been with us for all these years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But you--so you went back and you got a job with a law firm.  Had you set it up already before you returned to the West Coast?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I interviewed in law school.  I had this offer from a great firm here in San Francisco, and I came here and spent a couple of years there.
Speaker 1: Well, we've got two different spellings of Steinhart.  It's Steinhart and Falconer, right?
Speaker 2: (Hmm-hmm).
Speaker 1: And how--is it spelled with a "t" at the end or a "d"?
Speaker 2: S-T-E-I-N-H-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what was your role in the firm?
Speaker 2: I was just a--like a buck private.  I was an associate doing whatever work they had me to do.
Speaker 1: What do they specialize in?  What kind of law?
Speaker 2: In mainly corporate law and real estate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And development; real estate development.  So they had a very, very active practice in the very area that I was interested in, which was building.  And whether it was on a regulatory side or whether it was developing the partnerships and financing structures of land use issues, regulatory issues or things such as that, you know, that was a very, very large practice there.  It was very, very interesting, and I learned an awful lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what areas of San Francisco were--well, what were they developing?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, at the time, and I think this is just a matter of public record, the "Gap" was also going public.  So, you know, this empire that becomes, you know, the "Gap" stores, and it's not just the, you know, the manufacturing of the apparel, but it's also the real estate and where they're going to have their stores and things like that.  So I learned a lot about leases.  There were big land tracks that were being developed around the Bay Area that I had an awful lot of time to learn about land use regulation, and about a lot of the underlying issues of water policy and conservation, and making sure that you're both developing to protecting your natural environment.  I learned a lot about partnership agreements, and about how money is structured and, you know, debt and equity, and all of the rights to decent obligations of people that hold other people's money, and they're expected to return it with a profit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were with them for two years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then you joined Berkeley and Rhodes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what--
Speaker 2: Well, because at that point in time, I wanted to get back more into the community.  I mean, I knew, you know, working in a corporate law firm, you know, is important.  You've got to have your chops.  You've got to be able to, you know, to practice the law.  And not that you learn how to really practice the law in two years, but I considered that I was probably going to have a fairly narrow window of time that I was actually going to practice law, because that was not going to be what I was going to end up doing.  So part of it is that I wanted to get over to Oakland [California].  I wanted to get over to the East Bay where here was a teeming black, you know, community; there was a court that was very active.  And I rolled up my sleeves and I learned, you know, what it was like to practice law in the community.
Speaker 1: So Berkeley and Rhodes is a black firm?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't know that.  We're not from around here.  (laugher)  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I wanted that experience, you know.  And I had enough of that experience after a couple of years.  And then I went to work for Jerry Brown [California State Governor Jerry Brown, 1975-1983] in the second part of his first gubernatorial administration.  I worked for him for four years.
Speaker 1: What was the difference in working for Steinhart and Falconer and working with Berkeley and Rhodes?
Speaker 2: Well, I think a lot of it had to do with resources.  You know, resources of, you know, a large corporate practice where you have great libraries and great infrastructure; you have research capabilities; you have a broad set of really fine lawyers across a whole range of competence.  You have people that know antitrust and litigation and business and banking, regulatory work, securities work.  All these different pieces; the commercial transactions.  So, you know, the corporate law practice is much more expansive.  That's a foundation that I think everybody is well to have.  But also, I wanted to know, you know, what's happening in our community.  And as a person who had finished, you know, law school and, you know, had my license and I had passed the bar, I felt like, you know, people that were looking at small businesses and trying to, you know, eke out some opportunity.  You know, I might be able to be of service to them.  So I was very interested in Oakland because that was where one of the real strong parts of a black community was.  And it was, you know, it was a law firm that I could work with.
Story_ID: 1385
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, around this time--this was around the time of the--I don't know if you knew anybody in this or had any repercussions of it affected you in any way, but this was about the time of the Jim Jones--
Speaker 2: Yeah, People's Temple .
Speaker 1: --People's Temple.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had huge impact because, you know, that's a part of the narrative of the community where I was born.  That was the Fillmore [The Fillmore District, San Francisco, California].  And what we were missing in the bigger story is told around redevelopment, and what the impact of redevelopment was or what was then this really teeming black community in San Francisco.  And redevelopment had a huge impact because it just literally physically tore the guts right out of the community and put it into a big dung heap called redevelopment.  And it displaced thousands and thousands of people that were living in the Fillmore as it just gouged out with bulldozers and wrecking crews, you know, to take down these buildings that were deemed blight, and the only reason they were deemed blight is they were occupied by black people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is what we call--I know you say this is urban renewal at one time, right?
Speaker 2: Or "Negro Removal."
Speaker 1: Yes.  So this is going on here under  (unclear) redevelopment plan.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it was devastating to the community.  And I think that it upset so many social patterns in the ecology of families.  It was a catastrophic event.  Because you've got to look back at People's Temple and say, something really bad must have happened.  Because this was, you know, an unusual event.  This is not something that is a drive-by killing or, you know, something that you see on the normal basis.  Not that a drive-by is ever acceptable, but it's not at the scale of close to a thousand people committing suicide, you know, in a place that's a long way away, larger coming from just a few little communities.  So there was a hunger for something that was not satisfied, and that was to try to create this new covenant.  We had lost everything here, now we are, you know, kind of, you know, a sea, we're adrift.  And Jim Jones gives a type of coherence to this and says, we're going to create the new Canaan.  We're going to create the new covenant in Guyana, and we're going to start all over again.  And then when he was threatened, because of the transgressions that were now becoming public, you know, these people, you know, committed suicide.  So it had a huge impact on all of us.  Yeah, to this day.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting interpretation of that.  I've never heard it expressed like that before.
Speaker 2: It's what I see.
Speaker 1: Did you know Jim Jones.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because he was out--
Speaker 2: Did I ever meet him, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But to know him it would be different from--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) meeting him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did--well, I don't know.  You've--so how was the community affected that they left behind?  I mean, are they--I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it created a, you know, a post-traumatic environment.  You know, when people are losing multiple members of their family in such a violent way at their own hands, apparently at their own hands, something wrong has happened.  And so, you develop--I think that they developed the type of community psychology around that.  Probably turned inward.  Probably not well expressed.  Probably no place to really take that and ultimately deal with it.  In some ways, history has to kind--has to play itself out as it kind of bleeds through, you know, how sad all of this was for so many people.  It's unresolved.  There are a lot of unresolved issues in this community.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: You think we should take a pause now?
Speaker 1: Probably. Yeah, we're past 11:30, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm looking forward to this next step.
Story_ID: 673335
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Charles Miller Collins [HistoryMaker Charles Collins], C-H-A-R-L-E-S, M-I-L-L-E-R, C-O-L-L-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 22nd, 1947, in San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the president and chief executive officer of the YMCA of San Francisco [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: All right.  And we are completing an interview we started back in 2010 [sic. 2011], I believe, right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 9th of November 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my living room here at 24 6th Avenue, San Francisco, California.
Story_ID: 673336
Speaker 1: When we left off we were discussing the impact of Reverend Jim Jones' Peoples--what do they call it--
Speaker 2: Peoples Temple [Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --Peoples Temple.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --right, and the massacre that occurred in Georgetown or outside of Georgetown, Gu- Guyana in 1978.  And you were discussing what--how that affected the people that lived in the Fillmore District [San Francisco, California], the district that you grew up in.  And I think we had finished that discussion, but do, do you have any other reflections on that?
Speaker 2: Well it certainly does make you think about events such as Waco, Texas.  The Branch Davidian--Branch Davidian [Branch Davidians] holocaust that occurred with so many people and the influence that a single individual can have, in some cases for great good, but also for great bad.  You know, when you think about just the, you know, the impact of trauma visited upon a community or among children or family members or friends or neighbors, I mean trauma is sometimes an individual experience, but sometimes it's a collective experience.  In this town, I think as long as there is a memory of Jim Jones we'll never forget the impact that collectively he had on all of us.
Story_ID: 673337
Speaker 1: Now in '78 [1978], you joined the law firm of Berkley and Rhodes.  Tell us about Tom Berkley [Thomas L. Berkley].
Speaker 2: Well Tom Berkley was a very, very bright, extraordinarily intelligent man.  You know, he had a real vision for a community.  He took his legal skills, he took his, his charisma, he took his height, he took his posture, he took his voice and he is a guy who built, not only a legal empire, but a publishing empire.  So he really felt strongly that the voice needed to be expressed, you know, through the media in terms of communications on a regular basis.  And so The Post [Oakland Post] newspapers that he built were very important in providing a voice for that community.  I mean Oakland [California] has always been an important part of the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California].  Its port is important because that's where the--one of the biggest economic engines of the Bay Area is the Port of Oakland [Oakland, California], and Tom Berkley really understood that.  He was a port commissioner.  He was a friend to many people, a confidant to many politicians, and gave a huge number of people lots of opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was--Tom Berkley was he, was he primarily--were, were his activities primarily centered in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were pretty much centered in Oakland.  That was his center of gravity.  You know, of course as a person with such influence that would radiate to Sacramento [California] to Los Angeles [California] to Washington, D.C., and he was a real player.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his name is spelled different from the Berkeley, California?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) K-E, Berkley, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--and--I don't have any information about Rhodes [Gene Rhodes].  Now was Rho- is, is Rhodes?
Speaker 2: Neither do I (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a long lost partner, but it was really about the Thomas--about Thomas Berkley as the attorney of law.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now you were with another firm before, Steinhart--Piper Rudnick Steinhart and Falconer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it became Piper Rudnick [Piper Rudnick LLP], but when I was there it was Steinhart, Goldberg, Feigenbaum and Ladar.
Speaker 1: Okay. And why did you decide to leave and join Tom Berkley's camp?
Speaker 2: Well I really felt, you know, given who I am that I was probably better matched with developing a career around community based law as opposed to corporate law.  I was always interested in how communities developed and I wanted to know better about the Bay Area.  And so having a chance to leave San Francisco, which is my home and what I was used to, and learn the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California] from the ground up through the practice of law would give me a firmer grasp, a firmer understanding of what makes the Bay Area.  And it felt better for me to take my skills and really apply them at the community level.  It was also a part of really thinking that, you know, there are many people who can serve the needs of the corporate sector, but who can take what I have and apply it at a more community base.
Story_ID: 673338
Speaker 1: In '79 [1979] you directed a comprehensive study for the city and county of San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Who was the mayor in '79 [1979]?
Speaker 2: The mayor in 1979 was probably Dianne Fein- no it was George Moscone [sic.].
Speaker 1: George Moscone, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was right in that transition of George Moscone to Dianne Feinstein.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  So did your--well tell us about your study?
Speaker 2: Well the study was something that was commissioned by the city planning department [San Francisco Planning Department].  They wanted to understand what the strategies and the patterns of growth would be in the most kind of dense commercial part of San Francisco, the commercial district, downtown [Financial District, San Francisco, California].  There was rapid expansion at the time, buildings were, were planned and going up.  But there was no real strategy for how the downtown would grow up.  You know, how would you link not only the economic development, but the necessary transportation, the relationship to housing, the relationship to other community services and goods.  And so it was an attempt to try and make sure that as the downtown grew up that it didn't grow over other significant issues or opportunities.  And out of that grew a larger study which was to think about how the downtown was linked to Union Square [San Francisco, California] where there are many historically significant buildings and a character that we really sought to preserve so that we didn't lose the charm and the effect of why many people come to San Francisco.  At the same time, there was a vast array of opportunity in the South of Market area [San Francisco, California], which is now, when we look at it from, you know, thirty years later, thirty-five years later, has rapidly expanded.  This is where the great expansion was in San Francisco.  And so under this study, we undertook a complete analysis of the South of Market area and plotted all of the areas of potential growth upon which, you know, plans were made and, and actually fortunes were made.  But we wanted to make sure that there was a public policy behind this growth that looked at how housing needed to be generated, whether there was going to be a connection to transit, to housing that would be for low income people, not just for people who could afford the market.  How would that intersect with recreation, pedestrian life, and it gave a, a larger holistic view of what downtown growth would be for the future of San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Every city reaches a certain crisis at a certain point or of--of time of transition, was this such a time in the life of the City of San Francisco, when he was making--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think when you look at it in retrospect, absolutely yes.  Because if you looked at, you know, where the growth was in 1979 and where it is in 2012, there have been huge and rapid changes.  You know, one of the largest changes has been just South of Market area where the expansion of the convention center [George R. Moscone Convention Center, San Francisco, California], of museums, of the transit hubs, you know, it is now the hottest area in San Francisco.  And we were looking, you know, twenty--thirty-five years ago at what the potential was in order for that to be a coherent picture and not one that was just chaotic and without planning.
Speaker 1: Okay. As a visitor to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], I think one is just struck by how dramatically different Oakland [California] and San Francisco are, you know, in terms of the weather even.  It would be eighty [degrees] in Oakland and fifty in San Francisco on any given day.  So, so you studied--study--your study was basically for the development of San Francisco, but--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but you were practicing law in Oakland?
Speaker 2: Sure, I mean, at this point I was, you know, doing things that were of interest to me.  You know, I had sort of left that I would be climbing the corporate legal ladder and I wanted to more define what I was interested in.  Because as you remember, you know, my background really fused both city planning and law.  I was always intensely interested in how communities develop and the, the picture of people in communities.  Not just, you know, the physical structures, but how people actually live and how do you have a livable city.  And so, you know, I was curious about those things and I just wanted this time of my life to explore, you know, where my potential lied as a--as a professional.
Speaker 1: As a graduate of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and as a lawyer, right, do you have a city planning philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well I do.  I think it, it becomes more in line with what the journey of my life is and I'm a humanist.  I believe that, that people really matter.  That at the core of everything that we do that is great is how sustainable we make, you know, our lives and our environments in relation to people.  Which means that you don't ignore the importance of nature, you don't ignore the importance of economics, but as a humanist, I put people in the middle of the equation.
Story_ID: 673339
Speaker 1: In 1980, you were selected as a deputy secretary of the Business, Transportation and Housing Agency for the State of California [State of California Business, Transportation and Housing Agency].  Now was this a gover- I mean, appointment by the governor or?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was an appointment by Jerry Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was first, you know, brought in as the deputy director of the Department of Housing and Community Development [California Department of Housing and Community Development].  But as things evolved and as then Governor Brown and Speaker Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], had a couple of other plans for me.  They took me out of this department and put me into the agency that many departments were under.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, what were some of your duties, I guess, with the department of business, transportation and housing?
Speaker 2: Right.  The Business, Transportation and Housing Agency is the agency of state government that oversees a lot of the infrastructure.  We oversaw all of the financial, financial regulatory, housing, real estate, insurance, Department of Motor Vehicles [State of California Department of Motor Vehicles], the highway patrol.  So it was a real nuts and bolts, but also financial regulatory department, and, and Caltrans [California Department of Transportation], you know, the biggest single expenditure of funds is maintaining this huge transportation system, that and education.  So, you know, having all of those departments within the Business, Transportation and Housing Agency gave you a real macro view of the impact of government on the lives of people in the State of California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the issues in those days in 1980 for the state?
Speaker 2: Well if we lo- if we roll it back, what's really interesting about this is that Silicon Valley hadn't even exploded at that time.  You know, the, the rapid expansion of the technology sector of the State of California was just in its infancy.  You know, things like Apple [Apple Inc.] were just barely being born and you know, how we were gonna move into computer technology, we hadn't invented many other ways in which technology then expanded.  So this was at the beginning of that.  And Jerry Brown really had a vision for the State of California that we were gonna create the type of infrastructure that could really support strong and sustainable economic growth, and so transportation systems were important to him.  The energy grid was important to him.  Also whether we were gonna have a proper jobs and housing balance so that we were not only creating jobs, but we were creating affordable housing in reach of jobs so that we could decrease the pressure on transportation.  He was looking at how we could use rail systems to better transport people, goods and services, you know, from one place to another.  And so the vision that he had to me was really brilliant.  And I'm not sure that history has yet recorded how important it was for him to really lay this foundation upon which so much growth could occur.  He was trying to look at how major public infrastructure could essentially support sustainable economic growth, and that was what we were, you know, we were lodged with, with executing both in policy and in programs.
Story_ID: 673340
Speaker 1: Now you were with the ag- this agency [State of California Business, Transportation and Housing Agency] from 1980 until?
Speaker 2: Until 1983.
Speaker 1: Okay, '80 [1980] to '83 [1983] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What would you see as your major accomplishments?
Speaker 2: Well I think that, you know, among the things that I could be associated with accomplishing was the Century Freeway [Interstate 105], which was a grand--but in some ways notorious piece of infrastructure in Southern California.  You know, there what we were doing was building from Los Angeles International Airport [Los Angeles, California] all the way out to Bellflower [California], you know, this freeway that cut a big flu- swatch of, of freeway through communities.  You know, it means that you were really disturbing communities and you were disturbing that same infrastructure that concerned me with Jim Jones.  You know, what is the impact, you know, of, of upsetting, you know, the fine grain of neighborhood and how families work.  And so I really worked to try and provide ways in which the communities could be knit back together though you never really fully knit back togethers--together communities that had been humpty dumptied.  I think among the other things that I look back on with, with pleasure is reinforcing our system of financing housing.  You know, housing is one of the great assets of this state and we have to have abundant and affordable housing in order to accommodate the needs of people who live and work here in this state.  And so our housing finance agency, the California Housing Finance Agency, was also at its infancy.  And looking at some of the more--I don't want to call them exotic, but creative ways in which we found procedures in which to take classic real estate markets with the financial industry and with the banking and investment banking industry and really beginning to create a whole new sector of public finance that has been in the long run, effective at fueling the need for affordable housing.
Story_ID: 673341
Speaker 1: Now in 1983, and I don't have it on the outline, so wh- what happened in 1983?
Speaker 2: In 1983, George Deukmejian became the governor of the State of California; and Tom Bradley, who was then the mayor of Los Angeles [California], but the contender for the governorship, lost the race.  And with that came the end of the Democratic administration of state government, and I was without a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, well, you were a partner in a law firm [Steinhart, Goldberg, Feigenbaum and Ladar; Piper Rudnick LLP]--no--not a part- well were you a par- a partner (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was just an associate in a law firm.  So the question is what did I do about that?  Well my choices were to take a lot of what I had been doing in Sacramento [California] around finance and move into a public finance career.  It would've been an absolute logical next step for me to go to New York [New York], and in fact, I interviewed and was give offers to go to work in New York in public finance.  You know, I understood the transportation world, I understood the housing world, I understood the community development world.  You know, I knew how to package both, you know, the demand for many and the supply for many into realistic documents and instruments that live, you know, and breathe and, and happened.  But my wife [Paula Robinson Collins] had a disagreement with that.  She didn't wanna move our family to New York.  She loved being in California, our daughters [Sara Collins and Julia Collins] were well positioned here.  You know, my family was here, my parents [DeReath Curtis James and HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] were alive, and so we made that decision not to move to New York and to start our own company.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now this is WDG Ventures, Incorporated?
Speaker 2: Right, it was called Western Development Group initially and we started that company with two other people and that eventually evolved into something called WDG Ventures, which my wife still operates to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Western Development Group, I wondered what the WDG stood for.  So it was formed in, in wh- what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1983, all right.
Story_ID: 673342
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the projects that you worked on with WDG [Western Development Group; WDG Ventures, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, our goal in WDG was to acquire or to develop a diversified real estate portfolio really for wealth acquisition.  You know, real estate in California tends to be golden over time and we were lucky enough to have many opportunities to both acquire and develop real estate.  We worked with certain pension funds that were now beginning to enter as--pension funds thought that real estate would be a good bet in a diversified pension trust portfolio, and we had access to some of that capital.  We also had good friends at banks and we also had a series of private investors, sometimes friends and family who invested with us in various projects that we did.  So we acquired properties in the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California], in the South Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California] and Silicon Valley.  We also began our development practice by taking properties that our family owned and developing them to a higher and better use.  They were medical buildings that we built in conjunction with Mount Zion University of California [University of California, San Francisco Medical Center at Mount Zion, San Francisco, California].  And those buildings are here today and they are, you know, very, very successful.  (Cough) The other--that we were interested in doing was building housing.  And so we built residential housing within the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California], Western Addition community [San Francisco, California].  And that was also something that we measured with success.  We then had the great fortune of working with a group from New York [New York], Millennium Partners.  They had done a huge amount of development around Lincoln Center in New York near the Lincoln Center--Cultural Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] and they built some visionary real estate, which mixed high rise residential with entertainment.  And this was what we called location based entertainment, and these were called entertainment centers now in kind of popular language.  And with Millennium, we set out to do a series of projects, the first of which was called the Metreon [San Francisco, California], which was a big box that had multiscreen cinemas and IMAX and retail, and it was grounded.  It was, it was the, the, the foundation of it was certainly in entertainment.  But the anchor tenant was Sony [Sony Corporation] and this was when Sony was really advancing a lot of their new technology, computers, screens, entertainment, PlayStations, you know, games and things like that.  So, there was a lot of excitement around the Metreon.
Story_ID: 673343
Speaker 1: We also then went about building what became the Four Seasons Hotel and Condominiums [Four Seasons Hotel San Francisco, San Francisco, California] adjacent to that [Metreon, San Francisco, California] right on Market Street.  And this was a really daring project because that scale of investment and that scale of, of market and the--and the level at which you're going to be building a Four Seasons Hotel on Market Street, it was unheard of.  This was really ground breaking pioneering work, because people fled from Market Street and there we were gonna put literally the most expensive ho- hotel and the most expensive condominiums ever built in San Francisco [California] right on Market Street and it squarely met with our philosophy about how it is that we grow a great city.
Speaker 2: Now Market Street, for those of us not from San Francisco, Market Street, I take it, was a pretty rough, rough town (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: It's a rough--a rough street, and a rough in almost every definition of it.  You could call it our Times Square, you know, and so tourists look at it and they say there're homeless there or there's a--there was a real disinvestment at this time, 'cause this was in, you know, in the 1990s.  So it was a very different picture when we look at that twenty years ago, what we were trying to do both in Yerba Buena--in the Yerba Buena area [San Francisco, California], South of Market [San Francisco, California] and also on Market Street.  But remember, going back to 1979, I had a--I personally understood and I had--and I would say shared a vision with Millennium [Millennium Partners, New York, New York] about what the potential of the South of Market area could be.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so.  Market at one time was it the, like the, the major--like I guess a commercial hub of San Francisco?
Speaker 1: It was, it wasn't and now it is again.  Market Street was the spine of San Francisco.  And it was a wide boulevard that was created essentially to create a fire block between, you know, that that was north of Market and that that was South of Market following the 1906 earthquake.  And so structurally it was really broad so the fire couldn't jump, right.  And it also set two different grids, one going in one pattern and one going the other pattern and along that was not only our surface transit, but below that, you know, the inner city, inner modal transit called BART, Bay Area Rapid Transit.  During the building of the BART system, Market Street was essentially torn up.  So for almost a generation it was under construction.  And so it was not a good place to put a building or to have a store.  Theaters that had been grand closed down and Market Street essentially died.  And so in rebuilding Market Street, you know, as what it became as a central spine of San Francisco, the fundamentals were always there and so it was only a matter of time that you could begin to connect the dots.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now--so now it's a thriving area?
Speaker 1: It is and that was where just, you know, couple weeks ago we celebrated the World Series Championship [2012 World Series] of the San Francisco Giants.  It went down Market Street, that's our principal street.
Story_ID: 673344
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about the Fillmore District in San Francisco [California], now that was a area uptown that was announced--it was popularized to the rest of black America by Lou Rawls.  And we didn't know what the black neighborhood was, I mean the rest of the country didn't unless you had been here.  But Lou Rawls talked about it so we said, oh well we know where to go in San Francisco.  We'll go to Fillmore we'll find some black people.  What is the story of Fillmore and whe- what was going on then in the early '80s [1980s] and what's going on there now?
Speaker 2: Well I think like with, you know, the conversation about Market Street [San Francisco, California] you have to look at where the Fillmore is relative to the whole city.  It's really right in the heart of the city.  It's right near our Civic Center [San Francisco, California], it's not far from the ocean [Pacific Ocean], it is near the Bay [San Francisco Bay], the Golden Gate [Golden Gate Bridge].  And so the Fillmore was always a very, very important residential location.  When I was growing up as a little boy it was the home of the white Russian community, it was the home of the African American community, it was the home of the Japanese community, it was a real melting pot.  It had a very strong Jewish community headquartered around Mount Zion Hospital [University of California, San Francisco Medical Center at Mount Zion, San Francisco, California] and it really hung together very strongly.  And that was certainly tested by the many waves of immigrants that went through the Fillmore and left their own pattern and their own story in, in, in what became the Fillmore.  But during World War II [WWII], as the Japanese community was taken out and put into concentration camps, internment camps or detention camps, however you wanna talk about it, they were removed from this same community.  At that very same time was a huge influx--a part of our great migration of blacks coming from the South and from the Midwest to work at our war machinery.  To build our munitions, to build our ships, to supply them and to make the, you know, all the munitions that it took in order to win the great war.  And so black people have lots of work, not only living in the Fillmore, but out in Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California].  And so it was a time when people could work two, three or four jobs.  There wasn't enough housing to, to let everybody have their own place, so people slept in, they called it hot bedding.  You know, you had a job in this shift and somebody came in and slept, and then you left and you know, and that was the way that that worked.  And so it was an absolutely thriving community.  And that was the community in which I was, I was born and raised.  And so, you know, as you look at the Fillmore, you know, for its music, you know, its entertainment, you know, and for all of the creativity that it spawned, it was really the Harlem [New York, New York] of the West.  It was a real defined place, because it was only a few blocks big, it was wide, but you know from, you know, California Street to Turk Street was a bi- you could walk that in, in five minutes.  So you know, it had so many layers that you could just be, you know, a young kid and your parents would open up the door and you'd just go outside and, and it was all there in front of you.
Story_ID: 673345
Speaker 1: We're talking about the Fillmore District [San Francisco, California], and so how, how has Fillmore faired now, you know, from the time--from its heyday, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to, to today?
Speaker 2: You know, there's a, there's always a tendency to romanticize things.  And maybe I have a romantic view of the Fillmore because the Fillmore of my childhood spawned, you know, the dreams and the ambitions of many, many people, many children.  You know, we became adults because we were surrounded by such a holistic community.  It wasn't defined by any single dimension, but it was really defined by how much of a whole it was.  I don't think that the Fillmore will ever be what it was, you know, it's, it's over, that history has been written and now it's on to another chapter.  And a part of it too, is, is I think a failure of redevelopment fundamentally, you know, and we've talked about this before, but a real fundamental failure of redevelopment in addressing what it takes to create a community that doesn't bust apart, you know, when you decide that you want to renew certain infrastructure.  So the Fillmore, you know, went through massive destruction of thousands and thousands of homes with the promise that it was going to be rapidly redeveloped and that people would have the opportunity to move back in their homes and their businesses, and that simply just didn't happen.  So it's been replaced and gentrified in a way that is in some ways really a tragedy.  Because a part of the real fabric of what people are now trying to create in an ersatz way was lost.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, was there, was there a, was there a community battle over this?
Speaker 2: Oh there was a huge community battle over this.  You know, Mary Rogers, one of the great leaders of the community, was vociferous about, you know, the impact of redevelopment on the community.  And she stood up and really made her voice loud and strong among other people, you know, in saying that what was going on was not right.  And I think that history would probably say that what went on wasn't right and those who have now developed, you know there--I really wish them the best because it is such a wonderful community.  It's a great location.  And though it will be different, you know, hopefully, you know, through other ways, you know, the Fillmore can, you know, be, and it is an important part of this city.  I work in the Fillmore right now in my role and responsibility as CEO of the YMCA [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California].  And I haven't lost my dreams or my hopes or desires, especially for the children in that neighborhood to be able to have really their lives reach their highest potential.  It's one of the reasons I left the de- the real estate development business and I went into working in direct services is because I really feel that there's a responsibility that my generation has to the next generations, you know, to really build up their potential and especially to create leaders who are able to find their way through the contemporaneous issues that always confront us.
Story_ID: 673346
Speaker 1: Now how did the--in '89 [1989], there was a, a earthquake, right, in San--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --San Francisco [California], how did that affect development in the area and--and now were you still in the--I know your wife [Paula Robinson Collins] was in, in the company [Western Development Group; WDG Ventures, Inc.] all along, but, but you at some point left.  Are you still with the development business?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, in 1989, I was at the ballpark.  I was with my mother [DeReath Curtis James], my brother, with our younger daughter, Julia [Julia Collins], and we were at Candlestick Park [San Francisco, California].  We watched that earthquake happen.  You could actually feel it and you could see the ripple on the, on the field.  Something big had happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Now was this the playoffs or the World Series (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: This was the World Series, right.
Speaker 1: World Series, okay.
Speaker 2: It was--it was the Bay Bridge World Series of 1989 [1989 World Series] with the Giants [San Francisco Giants] and the A's [Oakland Athletics].  And it was tough because when you--when you hear such a massive structure like Candlestick Park groan and move and you're there with your child and with your mother, with your brother, and you realize that the earth has actually shaken and that something bad has happened.  It took a while for all of us to comprehend what was going on or that, you know, what were you gonna do about playing this game.  And you know, we, we all left in an orderly way.  It's amazing what people can do when they share a kind of collective consciousness over something, and in this case I had never seen such order come out of potential chaos with people helping each other, responding to the crisis by directing traffic, all the transportation systems were gone, you know, the electrical systems were out, street sign--you know, street signs didn't work, street lights didn't work and so people, you know, got out and they self directed and self managed.  There weren't enough police or firefighters to be able to ensure the public safety.  And so something really good was born from that.  And then as the hours went on and you began to see, you know, fires erupting and, and the damage that the earthquake had, had caused, you, you were aware that something big, big went on.
Story_ID: 673347
Speaker 1: I don't know if it's time to ask you about the development of the book or not.  But the book came out in nine--1993, 'The African Americans' [Charles Collins and David Cohen].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--when did you start working on 'The African Americans'? (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's--you know, that's--this is one of the happiest chapters of my life, you know, me doing these books.  My neighbor, David Cohen, who lived literally next door to me, and his wife were very good friends of ours.  And David had just completed, you know, a great set of books and he and his wife and their kids were setting off to go to Bali [Indonesia].  And we were talking over the fence and they said, "Well why don't you come over to Bali and visit us."  I'd never been to Indonesia and Paula [Collin's wife, Paula Robinson Collins] hadn't either, and so we thought well what a great invitation, we--we're gonna go to Bali.  And so there we were, you know, we got on the plane, went to Hong Kong and then we ended up in Indonesia and--on this beautiful island of Bali where we stayed for a couple of weeks.  And in that type of space it's again amazing how creative your mind can be, when it's calm and what I always say sort of flat and horizontal and you get a chance to see new patterns.  And so David and I were out playing golf in an impossibly horrible rain storm, we were the only people on the golf course.  We just started thinking about, you know, books and you know, what would the shape of a book that we would do together be.  And so I said, you know, "Let's do a book that really celebrates the significant achievements and contributions that black people--that African Americans have made not only to the American landscape, but to the world."  And so we just committed right then and there, we said when we get back we're gonna do this book, and we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now there have been other such books way back, I mean not exactly like yours but, but similar in some ways. There--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Songs of My People' ['Songs of My People: African Americans: A Self-Portrait,' Eric Easter and Dudley M. Brooks].
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Songs of My People.'  Way back Langston Hughes and Milton Meltzer actually produced 'A Pictorial History of the Negro in America'--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --which a, you know, dealt with more, I think, historical pictures but then had a--had contemporary pictures done in black and white.  A couple others, I think Ebony had a set, 'Black America' ['Ebony Pictorial History of Black America'], you know, with black and white pictures.  Now were you--had you seen those and--
Speaker 2: Sure, I grew up with that type of literature.  I grew up in a household where everything, you know, that was published about black people was sitting there in the bookshelves or on the table or beside the chair.  So the idea of this type of ongoing celebration, a real storytelling was important to me.  But one of the reasons why this book became important to me was that it was also at the beginning of the hip hop generation.  And you know, young people were redefining themselves and, and brushing up against culture in really different ways and voicing who they are and what they saw and what they were concerned about, very powerfully.  And my daughters [Sara Collins and Julia Collins] are of that generation.  And I wanted, at the same time as they were developing their own voice and their own culture which is absolutely important for every generation to do, is to again self define and look at their own creativity and their own way that they're going to express themselves.  I wanted them also to know where they came from and who they are, and to make sure that they are grounded in pride and not working from a deficit.  So no matter how hard that you work, you know, as a parent to make sure that your kids feel good about themselves and they know about themselves, that they know that they're not unique, that they know that they're not really all that special, but they come from a long line of people that have been forging the story of America.  You know, this was a time to create a new book that would tell the story, you know, in new terms, and that was what 'The African Americans' was all about.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it's an idea that we've been working with for a long time, but this is a refreshment of that idea for another generation?
Speaker 2: I think that it's very much like HistoryMakers.  You know, if you don't tell your story, somebody else is gonna tell it or they're gonna interpret it or misinterpret it, or at least you have the opportunity to have an interpretation.  And in this case, I wanted 'The African Americans' not only to have the historical roots and references, you know, that we have been a part of the foundation of this country, that this country would not be the America that it is if it hadn't been for the blood, sweat, tears, labor, effort, intelligence, genius and vision of all of its people, including African Americans.  And so as, as you in this great project, you know, called The HistoryMakers are allowing people to tell their story, I wanted to put it in--in a book form.  I--I would've loved to have done it and there were many offers in fact for us to begin to tell the stories in other ways, but in a sense, you know, I'm really ultimately not a storyteller, I'm ultimately not a book maker, I happen to have done a couple of these things, but it takes that persistence to be able to really map it out and, and to see the future, you know, through story telling.  But this was my stab at it and I wanted it not only to be grounded in the historical matter, but I also wanted to tell contemporary stories so that people could see the new heroes and sheroes are being made every single day in all these different walks of life throughout our country, throughout the landscape in all these different dimensions.  That, you know, it's not over, that the best can lie ahead of us, but we need to be able to ground ourselves in the past and then also to see our way into the future.
Story_ID: 673348
Speaker 1: You were able to get the collaboration of [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on the book; now tell us about how that took place?
Speaker 2: Why John Hope?  Well John Hope Franklin was a dear friend of my father's.  When my dad, Dan Collins [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], was working on the State Board of Education [California State Board of Education], he was a member of the State Board of Education of California appointed by then Governor Pat Brown, Jerry Brown's father.  Dad was very concerned that our textbooks were not telling the inclusive American story.  And that it was a story that was really very Eurocentric.  It, it told that narrative, but it didn't tell that kind of Howard Zinn narrative of the--of the other parts of America.  Not the other America, 'cause that means they're over there and they're over there, but what is the inclusive story, you know, of, of America and how powerful is that for us to be able to knit other threads into this cloth and really tell it.  And so dad worked with John Hope Franklin, you know, to create a series of, of textbooks that were pioneering in--the State of California commissioned, you know, and John Hope Franklin was the--as the preeminent historian was in charge of that project.  I think it was called 'Land of the Free' ['Land of the Free: A History of the United States,' John W. Caughey, John Hope Franklin and Ernest R. May].
Speaker 1: Okay and when was that pub- published?
Speaker 2: I think this was in the 1970s [sic. 1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and so John Hope Franklin was a regular member around the Collins table.  And I remember many times, what he and dad used to like to do is get us up at four o'clock in the morning and go down to the pier and get on a fishing boat and fish for either salmon or bass.  And so when, when you get to si- literally, you know, sit pole to pole with John Hope Franklin way out there in the ocean you get a real chance to see, you know, how, how just open his mind is and to hear his stories.  I used to just listen to him endlessly.  One of the things that was interesting about John Hope Franklin and a Chicagoan was that he was a--he grew orchids.  And you know, that came up one time when we were out there and he was looking at a, at a, at a pattern in the water and he said, "You know, this reminds me of, of an orchid that I grow."  And I said, "Orchid?" I said you know, that seemed kinda odd to me, right, I don't know why but I was typecasting and limiting.  So he said, "Yeah I grow orchids."  He said, "I have a whole, you know, orchid establishment in our apartment in Chicago [Illinois]."  I said, "Well, what are the kind of orchids you like to grow?"  He said well the one that he really likes to grown is vanilla.  I didn't know that vanilla was an orchid.  You know, so you know, that sort of, you know, of, of just stewardship of a friendship with John Hope Franklin really lasted all of my life.  And so when I did 'The African Americans' [Charles Collins and David Cohen]--when we did 'The African Americans,' I could think of no better person to write the introduction then John Hope Franklin, and he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did he serve--did, did you have other historical consultants?
Speaker 2: He was my principal historical consultant.  In fact, he read the whole book for accuracy.  He was brilliant in terms of his commentary.  He, he said, you know, we have a duty to tell the truth and that, you know, historical misinterpretation is politics.  I mean there was a lot about that, you know, that he taught me about objectivity.  And so he went through the entire book and, and he--yes, he read it for historical accuracy.  He also looked at--listened to the voice that was being communicated and he wanted to make sure that it was, it was even and that anyone that would read it could actually not just look at pictures, but that they could learn from the text.
Story_ID: 673349
Speaker 1: Now yourself, now you are a historian of sorts yourself, this is, you know, in the conversation we had with you last time that--that became apparent, we were talking about William Leidesdorff and Mary Ellen Pleasant and some of the other black figures from San Francisco [California] in the 19th century.  I mean you know those.  So as--since we've moved forward with the book ['The African Americans,' Charles Collins and David Cohen], the book is full of beautiful color photographs, these are, these are really beautiful photographs, how did you solicit all these, and there's gotta be thousands of photographs and how did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well--yeah, there were thousands of photographs, but ultimately you have to select it down to just a couple of hundred.  A lot of this work was commissioned, you know, by photographers.  I--we created a story line, you know, how are we gonna look at history, how are we gonna look at different themes, you know, how are we gonna look at the clergy, how are we gonna look at intellectuals, how are we gonna look at artists, how are we gonna look at people in business.  So we wanted to make sure that we had--we had a kind of cluster of main themes, and then what we set out and did was to think about who would illustrate that theme.  And you know, when you write the book you get a chance to make those choices.  And so we would sit around with my great friend [HistoryMaker] Charles Ward who was a real principal collaborator.  And Charles and I would get up every day and we would sit down there and we would just map out names and themes, and thinking about, you know--you know, why that person really illustrates the point.  And so the selection of the photographers was, was probably the easier part of this book because what we could do is we could say, you know, you're on assignment, you know, to go and photograph, you know, such and such.  You know, an example of that was we wanted, you know, the youth to feel as if they could reach, you know, you know, for the stars.  And so there was a cluster of young African Americans who were at Oxford University [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], and I knew one of them personally because he had gone to Williams [Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] and I was always very proud of him.  And so I called him up and I said, you know, I asked him I said, "You know, would you pull your buddies together and would you, you know, pose for a picture."  And so he said yes and so we sent a photographer from London [England], you know, up to Oxford [England] and they were wearing their outfits.  But it really showed that we're not just doing this here, you know, in, in the United States, but also that these young people are making a dent in the larger world at a very special and a very high level.  So those types of stories were really fun to tell, because it just took our imagination to find them.
Story_ID: 673350
Speaker 1: Now there's a picture I saw just about a hour ago of Venus Williams with a tennis racket laying on top of some kind of a geodesic jungle gym or something and, and she's thirteen years old--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She's thirteen, right.
Speaker 1: --and she's not, not--she hasn't won Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England] yet, and but that--a beautiful photograph.  But you know, you know, you're looking--you say, "That's Venus Williams."  How, how did a picture like that come about?
Speaker 2: Venus Ebony Starr Williams, right.  Because we wanted to find out, we, we were looking for these, these prodigies.  And we were looking for, for kids that were coming from places that were sometimes improbable.  I, I don't think any of us knew that Venus Williams was going to light the world up the way that she did.  But we had an inkling that there was something really special about her.  She was already, you know, defining herself.  She was defining the, the play of tennis and she was coming out of Los Angeles [California] and she was coming--she was like this, you know, this lily coming out of the pond.  And you know, she, she was already--you know, I, I love that picture 'cause she just had little braids on her head and a tennis racket and she was a kid.  She was just a thirteen year old, she was still playing.  The, the weight of who she was hadn't even formed yet, but she was, but she was on her way.  It was a good bet.
Story_ID: 673351
Speaker 1: These photos are--some are more formal portraits (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, of course they are.
Speaker 1: --like Walter Massey [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] and others.  Then you got Shirley Jackson's [HistoryMaker Shirley Ann Jackson] working on a blackboard I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: There are people doing things, you know--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure. Well Shirley, Shirley Jackson was not a--she was a university mate with me when I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  She'd come out of Washington, D.C.  She became the first woman, African American woman to earn a Ph.D. in physics and she went on, you know, essentially to run the nuclear regulatory agency [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission].  And now she is the, the president of, of a great college in, in New York [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York].  And you know, so Shirley--yeah I knew Shirley and she was a friend.  And again, you know, looking at where she was at that time in her career, I think she was, you know, was doing research.  And you know, I, I wanted to show, you know, this, this contrast, you know, of, of this chalkboard, you know, or her lecturing, you know, but also this is a young woman, you know, who had grown up in the Washington, D.C. public schools [District of Columbia Public Schools], and, and where she would go.  You know, I, I didn't, I didn't realize, you know, the trajectory of her career, you know, but that--at that time she was already so fully formed and so brilliant, and she's also the sort of person--it was just always fun to sit down with Shirley.  She was never beside herself.  She was never off putting.  A very, very normal personality.  So like, you know, that was of great fortune to me, because you know, I got a chance with that book ['The African Americans,' Charles Collins and David Cohen] to make these sorts of personal selections.  You know, one of the others that was--that I, you know, I put in a full page, you know, with Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.].  You know, Vernon is, is a member of this family.  When my father [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] died, you know, Vernon called me up and he said, "All I need is twenty-four hours' notice and I will be there to give the sermon and the eulogy for your father."  And this was long before dad was ill and, and died.  And, and so, you know, Vernon is a person who I've always had the deepest respect for and I wanted to honor him with a full page.  And that meant a lot to me because, you know, he, he said yes.  Nobody had to say yes to this book.  You know, some people wouldn't want to be in that book.
Story_ID: 673352
Speaker 1: There were a couple of other stories that I'd, I'd like to tell.  And one was, you know, Arthur Ashe, you know, had many parts of his story.  And the significance of Arthur Ashe is still, still unfolding.  From growing up in Richmond, Virginia to playing tennis in South Africa.  You know, that journey alone in world history was really important.  You know, the transformative capacity of sports.  You know, to put a, a human face, you know, on really complex issues.  And so, you know, for him then, you know, to contract AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], you know, through the unfortunate blood transfusion and then, you know, at the early stages of the AIDS epidemic, not having the medicines that if he had today he would still be living.  And so, I put my toe in the water and I, I contacted his wife, [HistoryMaker] Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe, who is a photographer and a great photographer.  And I said, "Jeanne," I said, "Would you photograph Arthur?"  I said, "It's for this book and it would mean just the world to me and I think also to put him in the context of other great Americans, you know, for him to be included in this book ['The African Americans,' Charles Collins and David Cohen]."  And she said yes, right.  Little did I know that these would be the final photographs that were ever made of Arthur Ashe, he died two days later.  So the courage of the family of Arthur to pull himself together for these portraits that his wife would make of him.  And so when I got the call that Arthur had died, I called her up and she received my call, which I really appreciated in light of all the things that she was going through.  And I said, "Jeanne I think it's important for you to know that those photographs that you took are absolutely personal and they are private, and I give them back to you."  And she said, "No."  She said, "You know, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins] I took those pictures for you.  They were for this book, this was--this was a professional assignment that I had to be able to photograph Arthur.  I didn't know that he was gonna die so quickly and I honor the contract."  And imagine this, I mean this is, this is very personal, you know, and she said yes.  And that--those photographs in that book, you know, nobody would've ever known and that would've been a completely private matter, but she said, "No I want him to be in the book."  Imagine that for, you know, for that book.  The final one was a fun thing that happened.  And I was on a plane with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  I was bringing Quincy Jones up from Los Angeles [California] to see a tribute that many of us were giving for him, Valentine's Day of 2012.  And I had done this book and in the book was a double page of Quincy Jones and Michael Jackson.  And you know, if you know the relationship between the two of them, Quincy had never seen, he said he'd never seen the book.  And so I opened up the book and there he, he saw, you know, this beautiful portrait of himself and of Michael Jackson, juxtaposed.  And it told a lot of story about mentorship.  It told a lot of story about these two great artists and the type of understanding that only artists ultimately can have between and among themselves.  And it was special moment for me because I had commissioned all this work, and it was just by great fortune that I got a chance to give that book to Quincy and to watch him inscribe the book, you know, on his page.  So that, you know, it's just funny how these things happen.  I think they start with an idea that might just have some merit and then you just go after it and you work hard to have the right images, the right stories to see if it holds up over time.
Story_ID: 673353
Speaker 1: Now this is a large coffee table book ['The African Americans,' Charles Collins and David Cohen], how many pages?
Speaker 2: I think about two hundred--over two hundred pages.
Speaker 1: And how many photos are--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many figures are depicted?
Speaker 2: I--nobody's ever asked me that question, but I would say there would probably be a couple hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Everybody going back to the day of Frederick Douglass and all that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--well, the book was published in 1993.  Have you thought about, you know, updating the book or doing another one?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that book is, is completed.  That story, for me, you know, was then.  You know, it went on to another book which was 'A Day in the Life of Africa' [David Elliot Cohen and Lee Liberman].  And that book, you know, I had thought of how in the world could we get our arms around the continent of Africa?  You know, it's--a lot of people, you know, you talk about Africa that's a political statement, you know, it's a continental statement.  It certainly is a statement of, of thousands and thousands of, of, of differentiations and stories and, you know, there's, there's no way to tell Africa in one volume.  I said yeah, but you know, why not, why don't we do this?  And then also with David Cohen and his great collaborator Lee Liberman, a brilliant woman from Australia.  We jointly conceived of, of a book that in one day, 'cause this follows the day in the life series of David Cohen and, and just how brilliant that theme is.  One Day in the life of Africa, and that was gonna be a much more complicated book because now you have to go to fifty--over fifty different countries all throughout the continent and all of these geopolitical regions with all of this huge diversity in, in every dimension possible and you've gotta make it make sense.  How do you do that in one day?  And so the logistics of it were overwhelming, but again we chose photographers that really knew their groove in Africa.  A lot of these are pho- photojournalists that were covering wars and they wanted in fact a respite.  They wanted to be able to come in and do something different, something a little bit more creative as opposed to just, you know, telling the story of war.
Story_ID: 673354
Speaker 1: Yes, we were talking about the--'A Day in the Life of Africa' [David Elliot Cohen and Lee Liberman], how, you know, one of my questions is another quan- a quantity question.  Ho- how many photographers were employed on this?
Speaker 2: We had close to 100 photographers.
Speaker 1: And I guess you had to sit down and decide like where are they gonna go in Africa, right?
Speaker 2: You have to have an outline for such a big project and the outline was both geographic and thematic.  The thing about this book ultimately that made it important and the impetus for this book was the then looming AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] crisis in Africa.  Time magazine had put on its front cover, you know, the scourge of AIDS, and the decimation of the continent of Africa because AIDS had not been really focused on as a huge public health hazard.  And this is an epidemic, a pandemic, and you--you, you have to--sometimes you just have to get up and do something about things.  And our response and the impetus for this was that, you know, David [David Cohen] and Lee [Lee Liberman], you know, really felt that, you know, that something had to happen.  We had to shine light on this continent and really let people know how important it is, you know, that Africa is not expendable.  And it's certainly not expendable from the point of view of its people.  And so all of the proceeds from the 'A Day in the Life of Africa' went to support AIDS education on the continent.  So that was the cause, that was the reason, you know, for doing this.  That we needed to shine a bright light on Africa that people would care more, that they would see the face of Africa through many, many lenses and understand how, how much we all share in its outcome.  And so, you know, how you tell that story is, you know, to slice it and dice it.  North, south, east, west, central, different cultures, religious, you know, themes, and, and how do you--how do you then pull that together.  You bring in the best photographers in the world and you essentially ask them to go to their sweet spot.  These are photojournalists, they know how to get into tough spots, they know how to get out of it.  So they can go into places that would be remote or could be perilous or hazardous.  But, but their, their skills, you know, their social and professional skills, and their artistic vision would be able to render something really important.  They could find the moment and really define it.  And so we all met in Paris [France]--there was a huge amount of planning, but we all met in Paris for a couple of days and we briefed all the photographers, gave them their equipment.  Their equipment was all digital, and that was new then, you know, digital technology and photog- and photography were just beginning to fuse.  And so that was just a tremendous opportunity for a lot of these photographers that had been basically, you know, taking their pictures on film to learn digital photography.  And it was then gonna be a project that we could do electronically.  We worked with Apple Computer [Apple Computer, Inc.; Apple Inc.] also.  And so we could fuse all this technology now in the new way of storytelling.  The storytelling, itself, is, is still you know rooted, you know, in humans, but we would use new technology, you know, to get the output.  So we all met in Paris, we briefed them and then we sent them, you know, on planes, you know, to go to all of these different places in Africa.  We had to have lots of connections.  We had to have a whole command center.  We had to make sure that any situations that got tight, you know, we could work through.  We informed all of the embassies, all of the--all of the nations from which all of these photographers came to make sure that all of their visas and all of their, their basic needs could be met on the spot.  So there was an entire logistical and support unit, you know, in case somebody got into trouble.  So the photographers fanned out and they had about two days to get into their situation, two days to figure out, you know, what they were gonna do and then on the 28th of February in 2012 [sic. 2002], you know, they took those pictures.
Speaker 1: So, so they arrived four days ahead of time?
Speaker 2: They were--they were there probably, you know, yeah in some cases, you know, two to three days ahead of time just to get themselves on the ground and to get their logistics straight and how they were gonna go and what they were gonna photograph.  And then they went in and they took these pictures on that day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This--that must've been really expensive. (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was an expensive project.  It was a very expensive project because then we had to get them all back from, from where they were back to Paris.  They had to deposit all their film and then we had to get them back to where they came from.  So that, you know, that was just wonderful, you know, to think about, you know, getting a chance to see, you know, these, these just incredible people who wanted to co- make this contribution.
Story_ID: 673355
Speaker 1: Now was there a close call, I mean, some, some of the places they, they traveled to were dangerous--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, there were a few close calls (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --because of geography and because of politics?
Speaker 2: Well also because, you know, of insurgency.  You know, in one case in Central Africa, you know, there was a person who was labeled a traitor.  And a tire was put around him and he was lit on fire.  And the photographer had to get out of there 'cause the--it was ge- it got very dangerous just like that.  One of the great photographs in the book ['A Day in the Life of Africa,' David Elliot Cohen and Lee Liberman] is the reuniting of a soldier with his mother.  But the soldier had left home when he was seven years old, he was boy soldier.  And I believe it was in Cote d'Ivoire.  And we had wanted to find the story, you know, of, of, of the boy soldiers.  Movies had been made out of this but, you know, this, this was something that we wanted to record.  We wanted to be able to tell this story of what can happen to children that are unprotected.
Speaker 1: Now what about the Lost Boys of the Sudan, did you get--were any of those covered in the--?
Speaker 2: No they weren't, they weren't covered in that, you know, there's probably a limit to how many of these different stories we could tell.  But, you know, these boy soldiers were taken.  They were, they were stolen, you know, from their mother's arms, and they were put into situations where they were going to be programmed, you know, to kill and to, to do things that are really unspeakable.  And so there was an entire regime of people that were helping to try to find these boys and to get them reunited with their parents.  And so there is a photograph of the, of the reuniting of a boy and his mother.  It was a pretty powerful photograph.
Story_ID: 673356
Speaker 1: Now, let's see--wh- what was the reception of the book ['A Day in the Life of Africa,' David Elliot Cohen and Lee Liberman], you know?
Speaker 2: Well the book was well received.  It was published in several countries.  It sold, you know, a few hundred thousand copies.  You know, it was--it was a great success.  You know, it, it was a book that I was very proud to be a part of this project.  It--a part of my assignment in the whole project in addition to the type of story narrative was to get who would write the preface and the introduction to the book.  And in this case I wanted two really prominent individuals.  I wanted--I wanted the secretary general of the United Nations, his Excellency Kofi Annan, and he wrote the introduction to the book.  And that was great because here you have the secretary general, you know, who is African and writing about the importance of the continent as a part of our--of our global culture or part of our global society.  And then one of the great humanist, you know, of our times was Bishop Desmond Tutu.  And he wrote, you know, one of the opening pieces of it.  And it was just a great privilege to be able to work with these two individuals, these two men of epic proportions, and to have their words inscribed in this book, you know, to the tell the story.  So that, you know, like with [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, you know, honored you know, I think the work well more than honoring me, it really honors why this book was valuable.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: We also got to have an exhibition of the book at the United Nations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the stills from the book were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --does, does--is there--do these stills tour today?
Speaker 2: They don't--I don't think that they tour today.  You know, they live in--in massive crates in a storage facility.  They're all, you know, archival prints, you know, that are just stupendous.
Speaker 1: So for someone watching this now, if they were to inquire they would prob- you know, these, these, these are still frames and available?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: And they'd make a great addition to a college exhibition or you know, community exhibition.  Okay.  Well what about the photos from the, 'The African Americans' [Charles Collins and David Cohen]?
Speaker 2: I hope that they're still in storage somewhere.  You know, we certainly have all of the original negatives.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now 'The African Americans' were--that, that book was shot on--I mean the photos were shot on film?
Speaker 2: They were shot on film and over a long period of time.  It--they weren't all shot in one day.
Speaker 1: Right.  And--but the Afri- 'A Day in the Life of Africa' it was all digital?
Speaker 2: All digital, all filmed on the 28th of February, 2002.
Story_ID: 673357
Speaker 1: Now let's go back into--now, you said at one point you went back into--you wanted to go into social service and now, correct me if I'm wrong or I'm going too fast, but in 2002, you served as the president and chief executive officer of the Family Ser- Service Agency of San Francisco [Felton Institute, San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now was this the first position that you had since you--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know so much of, you know, what makes me who I am is that I just have, just this profound interest in people.  People just interest me, more than any- anything else.  I really like people.  And I had a chance for, for a number of years to sit on the board of the National Urban League, and I sat under the presidency of John Jacob [HistoryMaker John E. Jacob], of [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price and of Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial].  Truly one of the greatest aspects of, of my, of my life where I wanted to serve and where I really felt that I had some of my best years.  I made so many friends and I got a chance on a multigenerational basis to work with, with people that were in my parents' [DeReath Curtis James and HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] generation, but also to look at some of the young leaders that would emerge.  You know, there was the great Eleanor Gentry [sic.] who was a school teacher in Gary, Indiana, you know, who felt that reading was really important.  You know, Eloise [Eloise Gentry] was a mentor.  And so I, I, I think about, you know, why organizations like the National Urban League are important.  Yes, the Urban League is about fostering economic justice, it's really about making sure that black people have great opportunity.  And it also has a huge investment in the future through children.  And so when I was, you know, evaluating, you know, where, where I wanted to go in my own career, you know, what did I want to be, you know, when I grew up.  I made a decision that no matter what happened with my business in WDG Ventures [Western Development Group; WDG Ventures, Inc.], that I, I personally was going to let it go because time became more important to me than anything else.  Another real estate project would be great, but it wouldn't define what I wanted to do with the rest of my life.  And so given the service that I had had with the Urban League, I knew that direct service was really where I wanted to be, boots on the ground, making an impact with people every day.  And I was too close to the Urban League ever to be able to be on staff, because I had been in the governance position.  And so I put out the call to people.  I said, you know, Chuck Collins [HistoryMaker Charles Collins] would like to work for a nonprofit.  And low and behold, the leadership in San Francisco [California] heard that and they said well there was a nonprofit that needed some help, it was actually failing.  It was moving fast in the wrong direction.  But it was one of the oldest and most important nonprofits in San Francisco because it dealt with behavioral services, people that were mentally ill.  And you know, given our own family history and you know, our concern about, you know, mental health and such, I really felt like that would be a great place to put some time in.  And so I went and I worked there.  I was supposed to be on a six month assignment, I stayed for two years.  And fortunately, the Family Service Agency of San Francisco is thriving today under great leadership, under a great board serving a mission.  And that then sort of validated my own hunch, my own hope that I would be eligible to lead a significant nonprofit.
Story_ID: 673358
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your service there?
Speaker 2: Well I think one of the, the bigger aspects of working at the Family Service Agency [Felton Institute, San Francisco, California] is actually understanding, you know, mental illness and the responsibility that we share in providing services to people who are mentally ill.  You know, mental illness is one of those shadow areas.  You know, if you're physically ill, you know, then people can say well you're physically ill and that's, quote okay.  It might not be, you know, good because you may have a bad ending, but you know, a broken arm or cancer or heart--you know, people don't stigmatize any of those things.  Mental illness carries a huge stigma, because somehow we think that people are mentally ill, you know, just are acting that way and we confuse, you know, that with, with personality.  And it gave me a real deep understanding of, of what's, you know, of, of what our re- what we have to do, you know, about that.  There are people that are right before us, there are, there are people that are damaged that have experienced huge traumas in their life, you know, that's why we have homelessness.  You know, that's why we don't give enough service, you know, to the people that have fought wars for our country, the veterans.  And so, you know, it gave me a real appreciation for those who do that work and how much they care under almost impossible circumstances.
Speaker 1: Now, it just so happens I, I remember that President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], during his administration, David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] is--what do they call that?
Speaker 2: The surgeon general.
Speaker 1: Surgeon general, yeah.  He, he made--he emphasized to the black community in public speeches that we need to take care of our mental health.
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: He spoke all over the country about that.  He said that we--we're often ashamed of mental illness and relatives are--and just about everybody I know has got some uncle or somebody that lives in the attic or the basement or someplace, you know, and there's so many (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: People living in the shadows.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the shadows of--who are shell shocked or just sad or something else is wrong with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something happened, you know, to them.  And at the root, I think, of physical health is good mental health, you know.  And, and it's an idea that I think is coming as we better understand neurophysiology.  I think that the, that the, you know, this great future that lies in, in that type of, of brain research is putting a clearer light on very, very complex issues.
Story_ID: 673359
Speaker 1: In 2004 you became the president and CEO of the YMCA of Greater San Francisco [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now te- tell us how that came about and what you did in that position?
Speaker 2: Well in 2004 I had pretty much done what I set out to do at the Family Service Agency [Felton Institute, San Francisco, California] and was toying around with going back to my old business [Western Development Group; WDG Ventures, Inc.].  The market was moving pretty well.  I had stayed away for a little bit of time and, and probably was a good time to be out of the real estate market.  But I had several offers of people saying, "Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins] why don't you put your toe back in?  Why don't we--you know, why don't we do a couple more projects and, and take on some really interesting challenges?"  And I was tempted by that, you know, it was, it was--probably from a market perspective it might not have been a bad idea.  But I--but I had really more than that--I hoped that I had committed, you know, to what I set out to do in the first place.  And through some movement of the universe, I got a call from Eunice Azzani who is a great friend of my wife and my friend, and she was on the board of the Y.  And she talked to my wife and she said, "You know, do you think that Chuck would accept a call to consider being a CEO of the YMCA?"  Paula [Collins' wife, Paula Robinson Collins] said, "Well give Chuck a call, you know, he might, might be interested."  And so I got the call and I began to see how vast the YMCA is and how significant it is in virtually every community in America and how it has a global imprint and a global impact.  And so the journey, you know, from that conversation to becoming the CEO took some months, you know, as we explored each other and I got a chance to know them and they got a chance to know me.  But I started working at the Y in October of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now the headquarters located downtown San Francisco [California] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, our headquarters of the YMCA of San Francisco are right in downtown San Francisco.  Right, but we cover Marin County, San Francisco and the peninsula [San Francisco Peninsula].  We have fourteen principal branches of the YMCA of San Francisco, but we're in 120 other locations.  And so we don't just provide our services within, you know, our, our owned and operated facilities.  But we're in churches, in playgrounds, community centers, rec centers [recreation centers], in housing projects, and, and other places in partnership and collaboration serving about close to two hundred thousand people a year, half of whom are under the age of eighteen.  We serve between twenty and twenty-five thousand people every single day.  So, you know, people wake up every day and go to work and a lot of people are involved with the Y.
Story_ID: 673360
Speaker 1: Now the history of this Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], you know begins in 1853--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --it begins a long time ago (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, we're about to celebrate our 160th anniversary.  One of the founding organizations of San Francisco [California].  San Francisco and the Y have grown up together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now what was the condition of the Y when you became president and CEO, and where did you decide to take it?
Speaker 2: Well I think that, like with all organizations, when you get fresh leadership you get a new perspective.  But the Y was really in, in a great position, you know, to take its next step, the next journey.  It had a series of leaders that really were committed to our, our cities to growing our impact.  You know, like with anything else, you know, you don't wanna think that the foundation started just when you walked in there.  You know, an organization that now has been around for 160 years has weathered a lot of challenges, but it has constantly met the needs of a community.  Otherwise, it just would be declared invalid and go away.  But what it needed to do was to move to more of what I called an enterprise concept of business.  Instead of seeing itself as fourteen kind of independent and siloed branches, that it would work more in partnership and collaboration internally to set a model of being a collaborative partner externally.  And so looking at how programs could be better integrated, how we could establish more of our programs based on certain types of criteria that we have applied and to make sure that we were constantly addressing insurgent and, and chronic needs the community, you know, we, we needed to establish that.  So I undertook a needs assessment, established a new strategic plan and really set off in a direction that first and foremost largely was to raise the human potential of those people that worked in the organization.  How would they be better professionals, how would they be more equipped personally to meet the mission of the Y.  So that internal piece, you know, founded in human resources would be that--the greatest emphasis from the beginning to develop the new leaders that would then distribute their leadership throughout the organization.
Story_ID: 673361
Speaker 1: What kind of, I guess, programs did you launch to, I guess, develop the human potential of the Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] leadership?
Speaker 2: You know in a sense you could almost, you know, use any starting point, you know, to develop leadership, because leadership is more of an attitude necessarily than saying that, you know, you can, quote create leaders, it--it's setting a frame of mind.  Principally, what we, what we have been working on is developing our culture.  You know, what is that that we believe about ourselves, you know, what is our belief system.  What are we called to do?  Because if you set the DNA of the organization through its culture, then as that culture spreads, people are more--they're, they're clearer, you know, about what the output would be or what the objective would be.  But it first starts with creating an internal culture, and that internal culture is connecting yourself with a great mission, connecting yourself with a cause.  The why, not the how, but the why that we do the type of work that we do.  And that is a kind of asymptotic question because it's aspirational.  We always are--should be questioning why.  Why is this important, why do we make this choice, why is this our emphasis, why is this our road.  We should be questioning our relevance relative to the out- you know, the outcome, the impact that we wanna make.  And so, you know, developing culture is something that is ongoing and each generation has to bear into that harder.  What we find within the culture of the Y is that most people wake up to make the world better through the eyes of children.  The children are our greatest asset.  They're 100 percent of our future.  And the children don't have a big enough voice in America today.  And so we have to stand, you know, with and for kids in raising their voice as being important.  There are many other lobbies and interest groups that have louder voices.  You know, kids can't vote and so therefore they're marginalized.  You know, kids are vulnerable and kids are at the will and the whimsy, you know, of adults.  And so we, what we wanna do is to create really strong, positive adult relationships on behalf of kids so that they can reach their highest potential.
Story_ID: 673362
Speaker 1: Now are there, now you--you're still serving as dir- CEO of the Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes I am.
Speaker 1: And what, what--do you have a favorite program or favorite initiative?
Speaker 2: Well there are a few things that I would point to.  Early on in my career, if we recall December 26th, 2004, you know, the earth shook and the, the implications of the--of that great, you know, epic earthquake was felt all over the world.  The tsunami that hit the coast of Sri Lanka and India and then traveled along the Indian Ocean, you know, all the way and touched East Africa was massive.  And I, I, I question, you know, what the Y's response was gonna be to this.  You know, we're a global organization.  You know, we've been out there, you know, since 1844 in the broader world, and what is the Y going to do about this.  So I called our headquarters in Chicago [Illinois], the national headquarters [YMCA of the USA], and I spoke to the CEO.  And I said, you know, "What--what's our response?"  And he said, "Well, you know, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins] your response is, you're gonna get on a plane and you're gonna go to Sri Lanka and you're gonna go to India and you're gonna be a part of the American response to the global team that will develop the strategy for how we're gonna deal with this tsunami."  I said to my wife, "You know, Paula [Paula Robinson Collins], you know, we're on--I'm on my way to, to the aftermath of the tsunami," and she burst into tears.  She said, "You know, you just can't go.  You know, what are you doing over there, you don't have a dog in that fight."  And I, and I can understand what she was saying, that we were moving into a completely uncertain place.  I mean, you know, the, the war in Sri Lanka was unmitigated.  You know, the Tamil warfare was going on.  You know, there was civil un- unrest.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people were being kidnapped and (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: People were being kidnapped and killed.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And why do you wanna go over and do that?  Well, one of my great friends, Roselyne Swig, who had advised me before, you know, I called her up.  And I said, "Cissie, you know, what about this one?"  She said, "You know, Chuck you just can't be afraid.  You know, you have to go.  If you're called to do this, I understand you have to comfort Paula," and Paula ultimately embraced this.  But I can understand from a spousal perspective, you know, what she felt.  But Cissie said, "You know, Chuck get on that plane, you know, and be a part of, of what you can do to make things better," and I did.  And there I was, I landed in Colombo [Sri Lanka], I'd never been to Sri Lanka before.  You know, the streets were, were odd.  You could really feel it, it was palpable what was going on.  People were fe- in fear.  And I met my great colleague from the YMCA, Boon Chin Tan who came over from Chicago, and Boon Chin and I came into Colombo and there we were there in Colombo.  We, we traveled the full coast of Sri Lanka and we saw the decimation of what this great epic event had caused.  And you, you saw rooted in this many different narratives, but one of them was inexplicable sadness, and the juxtaposition of things that never should be where they ended up.  You know, the, the ocean lifted up tankers and they deposited them inland, you know.  Things were off the rail, you know, just areas that--you know, it was almost you couldn't fictionalize what the earth can do itself.  And so we set about creating a way in which the whole YMCA movement could bring resources into the YMCA of Sri Lanka [YMCA Sri Lanka, Columbo, Sri Lanka] and then distribute those resources to rebuild the infrastructure of the Y.  Why that was important, is because the Y has always been neutral, it's always been a safe place for kids to be, even during war, the Y was not taking sides.  The Y was a place that was focused on children.  And that--and when you can begin to understand that as a way of doing business, you know, you can go beyond politics, you can go beyond hate, you can go beyond fear, and you can think about things from a different, from a different perspective.  You know, from there we went to India and it was somewhat of a repeat in different terms, but India and Sri Lanka have an amazing ability to recover because they've seen so many, you know, big things happen.  That was the way I looked at the Y from the very beginning, that it was a global organization, that it could knit together things in ways that were extraordinary and that fit, you know, who I am because I'd been kinda raised on a global basis, on a global platform, and it just was there.  So from there, you know, I, I developed an appetite, you know, that was probably a little bit different within the Y.  One of the other, you know, areas that I can--I'm very, very concerned about is, as we've said, is the future of kids and, and what we'll do.
Story_ID: 673363
Speaker 1: Continue with what you were--
Speaker 2: Well, I was talking about the things that are important to me in my role and responsibility at the Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California].  And you know, youth need a voice in America.  They need a voice in the world.  And we need to help youth to achieve their highest potential.  Youth are at risk, and they are at risk from a number of things.  They are at risk from being separated out and not being educated properly or mal-educated.  They are at risk for their health, and so with the Y as, as an active partner with school districts, with communities, with our government, with our philanthropic and business sector, you know, the Y serves as the principal player in raising up the voice of kids and making their issues important.  Youth development is one of the principals upon which the Y is founded.  And that is again, you know, the restatement of youth development is that kids should reach their highest potential.  But they do that in certain, you know, kind of key ways.  One is that kids, you know, have to be on a value system.  You know, they have to be in a place that--that is fair and honest, and ultimately trustworthy.  And trust has to be earned every single day.  Because when kids feel in a safe and a trusted environment, they are more likely to reach their highest potential.  Kids also need to be in safe and trusted relationships between and among themselves.  You know, now we're talking about bullying.  We're talking about the other kid and marginalizing kids, and bullying, you know, is a proxy for a lot that's going wrong.  And we need to empower kids to be able to make healthy choices, to be able to root out the bully and to be able to stand with herself or himself with others and say, you know, stand up to the bully and not take this.  You know, kids also need to learn, but they have to be ready to learn, and so they have to be socially and emotionally available.  And so we have to make sure that in this trusted environment in which they have good relationships that they really do feel that they're ready to learn.  Kids also need to aspire to higher cause.  They need to connect to something bigger than themselves, bigger than that screen that they're looking at too many hours a day.  They need to know and to be involved in the big issues that are facing them and facing our community and they actually have the ability to speak out about.  And they also need to give themselves to something.  Need to--they need to feel that they are volunteering and that they are, they, they're helping something happen that will multiply in really important ways.  And that framework of youth development is something that has a high dosage of responsible environments and responsible adults.  And so that the more responsible adults that kids have in their lives, the better they do.  And that's essentially what the Y is.  The ry- the Y means to be the responsible adult in the lives of helping kids to reach their highest potential.
Story_ID: 673364
Speaker 1: Are there any stories of--have you developed any new facilities since you've been--?
Speaker 2: Yeah we have, yeah.  We've built some new facilities.  We've also worked on some of our old facilities.  I think among the two that I am the most proud of are the, are the rebuilding of the Chinatown Y [Chinatown YMCA, San Francisco, California], and also of the Bayview Hunters Point Y [Bayview Hunters Point YMCA, San Francisco, California].  When I got there in 2004, these were two projects that needed to be finished.  They were long stalled and money hadn't been raised.  And these are communities that really need a strong Y and that really are deserving of everything that a Y can bring, which is permanence, which is a sense of place, you know, a community center and a place for kids to, to go and also to, to become.  And so the Chinatown Y was at the founding of the whole YMCA of San Francisco [San Francisco, California].  The YMCA was founded where--in that same community in 1853.  So what more deserving community or place could we really put our intentions then to create, you know, a new vision for the Y in Chinatown.  This is a community where the density is higher than in Mumbai [India], where people are living in twelve by twelve, single room occupancy, share a bathroom, families living together with no cooking facilities.  So there is another side of Chinatown that people don't see beyond the touristic and that it's kind of culturally fun.  But there are real lives of people that are still immigrating from many, many countries who are trying to find their way into America through the portals of Chinatown of San Francisco [California].  So what we set out to do was to fulfill the promise of those people that had grown up in that community and had held that Y together for so many generations.  And I joined with them, these are great leaders.  And they needed, they needed the partnership of the YMCA of San Francisco, you know, to build a new building, to restore the historic building, to seismically retrofit it to make it assessable and to make it a great place, and we did.  And I'm really proud of that.  We opened it up in 2010.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Bayview Hunters Point Y sits in the middle of the other part of the black community of San Francisco in the southeastern part of San Francisco where the shipping--where the shipyards used to be, a military installation called Hunter's Point Shipyards [San Francisco, California].  And it was a, a community again in the 1940s and even until the closing of the shipyards where everybody had work.  When the shipyard closed, it was like factories closing in the rust belt, and our rust belt in San Francisco was the Bayview-Hunters Point community.  A high percentage of African Americans, but a growing and changing demographic and a real need for us as the Y to take responsibility there.  And so we bought a surplus Catholic church, the All Hallows School [All Hallows School, San Francisco, California], it was a K [kindergarten] through eight school.  And we have developed that into a facility that serves now probably eight to ten thousand people a year, and not just in the building, but in all the community programs that we operate.  So it's a, it's a hub and spoke in that community and one with great leadership with a great board of volunteers, and with program leaders that are doing extraordinary work in two principle areas, in the area of youth development and also of healthy living.  You know, at the Bayview Hunters Point Y, we look at this huge health disparities that live in that community.  High rates of asthma, high smoking rates, diabetes, pre-diabetes, obesity, you know, cardiovascular disease.  And the community is really coming alive, it's beginning to advocate for itself.  It's beginning to develop a self awareness where it knows what's going on.  The other is that in that community we have the highest rate of truancy.  The bulk of truants in San Francisco, fifty-five thousand kids in the public school system [San Francisco Unified School District, San Francisco, California], you know, 10 percent of them might be absent on any given day.  And that's not an acceptable population because who's, who's not in school are not the kids that, that can actually ultimately make it, but the kids that will become disconnected and are at risk of being in either of the two acute systems.  You know, either acute incarceration or acutely ill.  And that's just not acceptable.  And so our truancy program in the Bayview Hunters Point Y is one of the things about which I'm the most proud, that we are getting kids back into school with a map to graduation with a sense of their future, with a sense of who they can become and starting to connect the dots of their lives so that they're empowered, you know, into something that might be really truly impactful.  So we're changing lives with those kids and they're changing us too.
Story_ID: 673365
Speaker 1: Now in 2010, you--I'm not sure how to even frame this, but somehow you published this sort of a profile of the Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] in the San Francisco Business Times?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, periodically, you know, the press catches up with me (laughter).  And they sit me down and they say, "You know, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins] it's time for you to tell a little bit more of the story."  The San Francisco Business Times, Mary Huss, Tom Van Ess [Thomas Van Ess], they are just a wonderful organization.  They are an extremely important channel for their telling, you know, the business side, you know, of what San Francisco [California] is.  And 2010, you know, was a great year for us to be able to talk about what we're doing and so I was profiled in the Business Times, yes.
Story_ID: 673366
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know what year it is, but the National Urban League created the Charles Collins Award 'cause you'd volunteered for the Urban League for many, many years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That puts a smile on my face.  Yeah, my dad when he came out here from the South in the early 1940s was a part of--he was the person who founded the Bay Area Urban League [San Francisco Chapter of the Urban League; Bay Area Urban League], it was started in 1946.  And HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] has been so generous as to record dad's story and so that will be in his part of this archive.  But I got passed on the DNA of the love of the Urban League.  And when dad retired, I went on board the National Urban League.  And you know, serving under John Jacob [HistoryMaker John E. Jacob], he was the president then, I got--I, I got shifted certain responsibilities and the thing that I really liked the most about the Urban League is the same thing that I like about the Y [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], and that's what we do in the field.  You know, there's a great National Urban League, that's the headquarters, that's where a lot of the governance is controlled.  But wh- what happens is in the field, it's in all of those affiliates that are out there in all these cities and communities changing lives every day.  So I was a part of the w- the New York [New York] apparatus, the National Urban League and through John Jacob and then through [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price.  You know, the league expanded and Hugh--to really think about how do we invigorate the youth movement.  How do we get new young Urban Leaguer's on board that they're gonna carry the mantel of this organization forward and, and remake history, and adapt to what the times need.  And then, you know, when Hugh retired, we brought in Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial].  And Marc has a great political history, the Morials of Louisiana and the leadership that they provided in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so Marc had a kind of decidedly institutional building, you know, part of it where he really wanted to strengthen our endowment.  He wanted to strengthen our relationships with, with Corporate America.  He wanted to build, you know, the, the infrastructure so that it was a strong national organization that then could deliver really good services.  So each one of these leaders had their own imprint on the organization.  None was better than the other, but they each responded to what the times needed.  I got a chance to be the senior vice chairman of the board of the National Urban League.  It is a position that lasts legislatively for eleven years.  We see through the terms of the presidents.  We see through the terms of the--of the chair of the board, that rotates much more rapidly.  The senior vice chair is the person that holds the institutional memory of the organization through, through all of its transitions, and I happened to have had that--that great honor to serve that role for many years.  And then the unfortunate intersection occurred, that I became the CEO of the Y and I didn't have the time to both devote to the Urban League movement in my role and responsibility of senior vice chair and also be the CEO on a really active basis in San Francisco [California].  Too much transcontinental traffic.    Too many times that I would be needed in--in Washington [D.C.] or in Atlanta [Georgia] or in Chicago [Illinois] or St. Louis [Missouri] or Los Angeles [California] or New York in my role as a senior vice chair.  And that was gonna conflict.  And so unfortunately, I ended my service with Urban League.  Little did I know and completely of a surprise to me, was that they would honor, you know, my service and I think that I have to say my father's service, though the award is made in my name, I've kinda renamed the Collins award, because I don't need to own all of that.  But they--they've honored, you know, our family by creating an award that they give every single year at its national conference.  One of the principal awards that the Urban League gives is for outstanding voluntary service.  And so the Collins award is for that individual who in that year has been the most outstanding in serving the mission of the National Urban League.  And the other part about it is, is that through the generosity of my parents [DeReath Curtis James and HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins], there's an endowment that backs this up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now wh- what year was the Charles Collins Award established?
Speaker 2: Boy you're really stretching my mind, maybe 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, well it ge- it puts us in the ballpark as (unclear) dates, so that's good.
Speaker 2: The only things on my wall in my office was the parchment that talked about this.  I work at the Y, but I don't--my heart will always be, you know, between the Y and the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And fortunately I don't have to make a choice.
Story_ID: 673367
Speaker 1: In 2007, you were awarded the Silver SPUR Award by the San Francisco Planning and Urban Research Organization [sic. San Francisco Bay Area Planning and Urban Research Association; SPUR] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: That was my wife.
Speaker 1: That's--oh that's your wife, oh I'm sorry, okay, all right, all right.  And that's for the business basically, right, her work with this business [WDG Ventures, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, that would be--Paula [Paula Robinson Collins] in 2007, was awarded what's called the Silver Spur by the, I'd say the most prestigious civically minded organization in San Francisco [California].  Ironically, my father [HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] had also received that award and the sadness of when she got it was just a month after my father died and he wasn't there to watch her receive that award.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You've also served as a trustee of Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts], your alma mater, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You've been a member of a pol- a social policy advisor committee of the Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Became a member of Lambda Alpha [Lambda Alpha International] at some point, when was that?
Speaker 2: Well it's a, it's a real estate organization, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Trustee of the San Francisco State University Foundation [San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You're also a member of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] and Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity]?  And any other organizations or did you wanna comment on anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well I, I would, I would remiss in, in some of the great love of my life and that's the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, from being a little boy I've always loved to look at pictures.  I love art and I like the story where the feelings are what communicates through art.  I also like the fact that people find their own voice in art.  And that artists help each other to, you know, to see some--to help us all to see something in a different way.  And so, you know, I've always looked at pictures, and I think with that comes a great love for museums.  That museums are the repositories of so much information, that museums have to be active, they have to make sense to people, they have to continue to retell the story.  And the Museum of Modern Art as being a contemporary museum, is looking at the art of the future and helping to make the future have a place, you know, through its walls and its programs and its voice and the way that people see and become involved in art.  And so for a long part of my career I've been a trustee of the museum and it's a place that I find is one of my most comfortable homes.
Story_ID: 673368
Speaker 1: I know earlier in the interview back in 2010 [sic. 2011] we talked about your lifelong friendship with Romare Bearden--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --bringing him to Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] and you know, the program.  And there--his works are around us as we speak.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite modern, modern artist?
Speaker 2: A favorite modern artist, that's a tough one.  You know, one of my favorite--I have two favorite modern artists, all right.  One of them is Alonzo King.  Alonzo King is a choreographer and what he does in interpreting, you know, the human journey through dance is transformative.  Also what I love about Alonzo's work is how he collaborates across so many different lines.  How he fuses cultures and, and peoples and makes something that is better than would be left alone.  And so Alonzo King is a, is a, I think a--an artist for the--forever.  I also love Kara Walker's work.  I think that Kara Walker's interpretive capacity to narrate the American story is in many ways unparalleled.  She uses the device of silhouette to put in bold relief, sometimes the most unpleasant, the most ironic juxtapositions of things that seem impossible, but are rooted in the history of slavery, and the, and the story of women and inequality.  I think it carries a bold, exciting, daring, ferocious artist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you have--you've amassed a pretty decent collection yourself here, I know, in your house.  Have you--have you pulled together--do you have a significant collection of art that you have shared wi- with the community?  I know some people do, you know, we have some people that are able to do that?
Speaker 2: Every now and then these pieces go somewhere, and I'm always happy for that to happen.  You know, art to me is like the way I feel about museums, if it's just sitting on the wall it's just stuff.  You know, art needs to be animated by people appreciating it.  Art is always meant to be seen.  And so it's like a book that's never opened.  If it's not read, then it's just, you know, it's just weight on the table or its taking up space, it's collecting dust.  So, you know, art has to be seen, experienced, it needs to move around; it should never be held too tightly.
Story_ID: 673369
Speaker 1: Now as, as the CEO of the YMCA of Greater San Francisco [YMCA of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], do you have, I guess some, a future vision you're trying to work out right now that you're, you know, that you'll be, you know, you--you're working towards before you retire or?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what is that--that vision that I've have probably and hopefully share with others?  I think that the vision is one of collective action towards having a significant impact on healing people in, in our country.  One of the greatest things that I would like to pull together is a collaboration that would make the Bay Area the home of the healthiest children in the United States.  San Francisco [California] and the San Francisco Bay Area [California] is full of creativity.  It's full of innovation, it's full of science, but there are massive disparities between and among people.  But there is a great potential and if we could help to realize a part of our potential by charting a path that our children would be the healthiest children in America then I think that we would've made a difference.  We will have done something about ensuring that America will have a brighter future.  That we can, through the lens of kids, really change the shape and the course of what we are as a country.
Story_ID: 673370
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, today being the dawn of the second administration of Barack Hussein Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], I hope that African American children, all children regardless of their background, can see that they in fact can achieve their highest potential.  You know, this is a great metaphor and it's probably a little scary for some people to see through the lens of race, you know, what transformation in the world really looks like.  But the day after Barack Hussein Obama was reelected to a second term as the president of the United States, I received emails from Israel, from France, from Italy, from Greece, from Spain, from England, from Taiwan, from Hong Kong, from Shanghai [China], and others who said that this means a lot to me, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Collins], we know that, but this means a lot to them.  Why is that, you know, what is alive in the world, you know, that all children and black children in particular should embrace and that is that we are bigger than our fears, we're bigger than these divisions, we're bigger than those that would seek to defeat the possibility of what we can be collectively together.  That we can borrow from each other, that we don't have to hoodwink, you know, the democratic process.  We shouldn't ambush our system, but we should lean into it and believe in it, because we had a fair election and this election produced a result that is resounding in this world for the second time.  This wasn't an accident of history.  And we have to--we have to embrace this.  We have to take the responsibility and that is not as fait accompli, but as a challenge for the future.  And I think that, that our president's, you know, victory speech in Chicago [Illinois] is one for all times.  It's right up there with the very best words that have been articulated about the potential that we can become.  And so I think that black kids, in particular, should take pride in this, but that should be that--if we elect a woman, when we elect a Hispanic, when we elect an Asian, when we elect a white man, we should all take pride in that.  We should be as generous then as we expect people to be now.
Story_ID: 673371
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too.  When you look back on your career to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm actually not a believer in that.  I'm more a believer in that, like what Kelly Clarkson says, "What doesn't kill you makes you stronger."  The, the challenges that we have are only wrong if today we're not living presently.  If today we're not doing something that we're meant to do.  You know, if today is a sequence of bad days, then we can look in the past with regret.  But if today we're doing something that, that validates that we are engaged, that we're involved, that we're, we're taking this rare moment that we have to be conscious on earth, then everything in the past brought us here, even those things that we might have quarreled with, even those holes that we stepped in or when we were broken.  Those are what made us where we are today.  And so my challenge in living is to make sure that all the todays that I have I can honor what happened in the past.  You know, we--the, the sad part, I think, is when people really do feel that those mistakes were insurmountable.  That's, that's, that's a different place to be, and I can honor that people can be there, but it's not a place that I want--that I--that I wanna, that I wanna be and to the extent that I do believe in free will.  I wanna take even the most difficult times of my life, the most significant challenges that I've faced and use those as my springboard for today and tomorrow.  I believe in that.
Story_ID: 673372
Speaker 1: We always ask this, this question too.  When you look back at everything you accomplished to this point in life, what today do you think your legacy is?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy is in my family.  It's deeply rooted in my family because there's nothing that I have accomplished that is in some ways in nearly the proportion that preceded me.  I am clear about that.  My ego is not at stake in being able to do that.  And that's not even humility, I think that's just the raw truth.  And what it took for people to, you know, to advance a family over multiple generations has largely been because we've really anchored ourselves in our children.  And I'm most proud of the family that Paula [Paula Robinson Collins] and I have created.  You know, we've been married for forty-two years and that we've been through, you know, life together, we've grown up together.  And we have been each other's best friend through all of this.  And we have two great daughters [Sara Collins and Julia Collins], they are ultimately what I'm most proud of, but I have to be careful about saying that because it can be either, you know, an act of pride or it can be undue pressure.  But when I look at what our daughters do in the time that they are active and where they put their efforts in their work.  You know, they, they come from a line of people that have connected some dots and their connecting dots in new ways and in new frontiers.  So that's, you know, more than building buildings or building an institution.  You know, what means something to me is that human connection and there's nothing that I could say that I am more lucky or fortunate to have than a family that carries this on.
Story_ID: 673373
Speaker 1: Now, well you ha- well tell us about your children, wh- what are they doing now and?
Speaker 2: Well, okay, puts a smile on my face.  The older, Sara Collins, is an interventional cardiologist.  She is a great friend to her friends.  She's the--she's the person who collects people, you know, she's where--I need--can we stop for a second.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay, continue please, you were--
Speaker 2: So I was talking about Sara DeReath Collins.  When Sara was born in 1975 and when I first saw her, that song, Roberta Flack, 'The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face,' is like that's the way her--she's been all of her life.  She's just a person who--I could go on and on about.  But what I really like about Sara is that, you know, growing up in San Francisco, you know, in the privilege of, of this household and with a really wonderful inclusive family and with loving parents and a loving sister [Julia Collins], and doting grandparents.  Sara went off to Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] and finished her pre-med and biology there.  And then she went to Meharry, you know, she--she wanted--she wanted to go to the school where my parents [DeReath Curtis James and HistoryMaker Dr. Daniel A. Collins] met.  So you know, a child of San Francisco, you know, spawned of this family, she goes to Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee].  And that was a--that was a big statement for her 'cause she wanted to move into the cannon, she wanted to move into the tap root.  And when she got out of Meharry, you know, she decided to go to Baltimore [Maryland].  She wanted to go to Baltimore because that's where a high density of population that she was concerned about was.  She wanted to follow quote, the disease.  Well low and behold what she had done between Brown and Meharry materialized in getting her a fellowship to do interventional cardiology at the Washington Hospital Center [Medstar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, D.C.] under one of the most competitive set of teachers and programs in the United States.  And they taught her what she does now, which is to do extremely complicated heart procedures and she wants--and she does it in Washington, D.C.  I don't think she's coming back to California.  You know, she really wants to work with, with people in that community because that's what makes sense to her as a person.  The comforts of California are many and what we have here, we would love for her to come back home and I wouldn't reject it if she said she was coming back here.  But she's made a life for herself in Washington, you know, where she's got great friendships and a practice that is really helping her to reach her highest potential.  And I--I'm really proud of her.
Story_ID: 673374
Speaker 1: Julia Collins, the younger of the two, went off to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; and then when she finished Harvard, she lived in New York [New York] for six years.  And she worked in private physical security.  Not the securities industry or the securities business, but physical security, guarding buildings and property, and people.  And she wanted to be independent and wanted to live in New York.  And she found a job where she could do that.  Julia would've done what was necessary for her to be able to develop that sense of independence and she did it in a tough business because when she arrived in New York, it was on Monday before 9/11 [September 11, 2001].  So, when that Tuesday hit, this young, freshly minted Harvard graduate was there in New York locking down buildings and banks and embassies and museums, and in the midst of all of that in New York City.  Utterly and completely unprepared for it, side by side with firefighters and with, with police and public safety people, you know.  And that moment for her, that moment for her was I think grounding, because it, it, it centered her in New York and this twenty-one year old--twenty-two year old kinda masterfully, flexible and smart and inventive, and you know, sh- she's--creative person found solutions and it ended up for this company that she was director of operations for New York City in six years.  And she was working with all manner of public safety and security, and, and forces, you know, moving goods and services across lines.  And she got a chance to work with--she was to--the director of eight hundred security officers living all over New York.  She was just a girl and there she is interacting with people that are living in one part of the city or the other and public transportation and this, that and the other, and using those skills to operate a complex network that protects people's property, and you know how people feel about their property.  So, you know, at some point she was ready to move on.  So she went to Stanford business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] and there on the opening day when all the students were assembled, I was there, I had driven her down there.  The dean of the school highlighted five kids that were entering into that class and asked them to stand up and tell their story, and one of them was Julia Collins, where they introduced Julia as, you know, as being a young woman who was running one of the most complex private security forces in the world when she was twenty-five years old.  And that's what they're talking about at Stanford, you know, as people understanding what it means to be a leader in a complex situation.  And so she had a wonderful time at Stanford and then she went to New York, and she's been developing food businesses in New York.  And something interesting happened during the course of all of this, and that was Hurricane Sandy.  And on the front page or one of the front pages--sections of The New York Times today is a picture of Julia's food truck that is delivering food to the boroughs of New York for free to help people get through this crisis.  So that's, you know, that's what I'm proud of, yeah.
Speaker 2: So children are the reward of life as they say.
Story_ID: 673375
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that we have not discussed--
Speaker 2: Have we left anything?  I think it's like somebody just said, we put it all out on the field.  You know, I think, you know, we've run through a whole range of emotions and history and time, and I think we're, I think we're complete.  But I would like to say the greatest love of my life is my wife Paula [Paula Robinson Collins].
Speaker 1: Okay, there's actually one more question (laughter), but there's one more and this is--it's like legacy, but it's a little, it's a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  As a person who had a lot of fun.  You know, if it goes down tomorrow, was it a good day, yeah whatever it was.  You know, were you a good friend.  You know, were you true to your values.  Did you fight the fight, were you honest, did people trust you?  So maybe that would be it.  Maybe that I was trusted and trustworthy.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
