Story_ID: 29167
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Carruthers, we're gonna get started, and we begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton.  And I am the interviewer, and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  And this interview is taking place on the Tuesday, July 27, 2004 in Lock Hall on the campus of Howard University in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would, please, for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My name is George Robert Carruthers.  That's G-E-O-R-G-E, R-O-B-E-R-T, C-A-R-R-U-T-H-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And could you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, October 1, 1939.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: Space scientist.
Story_ID: 29168
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions though are some 'People Magazine'-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better.  And if you could just please give me short answers to those, that would be great.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Actually, that took me by surprise.  I really haven't thought about that.  I don't really have a particular favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, there again, I've never really thought about that.  I guess it would be blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Maybe Southwest.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine, no problem.
Story_ID: 29169
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Carruthers, let's begin talking about your mother.  Would you please share with us your mother's name, where she was born and where she grew up and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Okay, I don't know really know all of the details of that.  I know that--
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is, was Sophia, S-O-P-H-I-A, Barbara, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Singley, S-I-N-G-L-E-Y.  That's her maiden name.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: Saint Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a little girl?
Speaker 2: If she did, I've forgotten them because that was quite a long time ago.  And, in fact, she passed away back in the early 1980s.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: I felt that she was a very pleasant person.  I really don't have any particular description.
Speaker 1: Was she a talkative person?  Was she kind of quiet?
Speaker 2: I would say intermediate, not to any extreme.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your father, starting with his name and where he was born?
Speaker 2: I believe that, well, I'll--his name was George Archer Carruthers.  And I believe he was born in Chicago [Illinois], but I'm not absolutely sure of that.
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about life as a little boy for him?
Speaker 2: He probably did, but there, again, it's been a long time.  In fact, he passed away when I was in the last year of elementary school.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe him?
Speaker 2: He was, well, I would say that he was a person who made sure that we did the right thing.  I guess that's what I would say.  He encouraged me to study mathematics, for example, which, of course, is very important in my discipline, and we also follow that kind of training when we talk to other students.  And his occupation was a civil engineer.
Speaker 1: What about your mother?
Speaker 2: I don't remember what her occupation was.
Speaker 1: Was she a homemaker?
Speaker 2: Yes, until my father passed away.
Speaker 1: And then what, do you remember what she did then?
Speaker 2: Well, she, after my father passed away, the family moved back to Chicago.  Actually, I should mention that we, us children, except my sister who was the youngest, were all born in Cincinnati.  But the family moved to Milford, Ohio which nowadays is a suburb of Cincinnati, and we lived on a farm at that time.  Of course, it's no longer a farm these days, but at the time, it was considered rural country.  And I went to elementary school in Mulberry, Ohio which was a little bit east of Milford, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Could you spell Mulberry?  Is it--
Speaker 2: M-U-L-B-E-R-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29170
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if you came from free people or slaves?  Can you trace it back at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any information about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, what can you tell us about your grandparents?  Did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I was young, especially on my mother's [Sophia Barbara Singley] side because, as I mentioned, the family moved to Chicago [Illinois] after my father [George Archer Carruthers] passed away, and I was still in the eighth grade at that time.  And we stayed with my grandmother and my aunt when we moved to Chicago, until we got our own place to stay.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember for sure.  I know that her last name was Singley.
Speaker 1: And what kind of--can you describe her a little bit?  What kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: She was very nice and she was somewhat like my father in that she made sure that we did the right thing.  She didn't, as we say in colloquial, "they didn't take any bull."  So I would say that they sought to make sure that we did things right, that we went to school and did our homework and those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 29171
Speaker 1: And let me ask you this, Dr. Carruthers, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My very earliest memory that I can think of was, I think I was about age four.  At that time, we had been visiting in Chicago [Illinois], and I remember being dressed up for the wedding of one of the family's friends.  And I remember that they made a special suit for me that was sort of like silver in color, and I don't remember anything before that.  That was even before we, before I started in elementary school.
Speaker 1: And can you share some other memories with us like what were holidays like in your house, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Not very much, except that, of course, we celebrated Christmas and Thanksgiving, but I can't remember the details.  I don't think that we did anything significantly different from the norm.
Story_ID: 29172
Speaker 1: And could you please give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm the oldest of four.  The next after me is Anthony Carruthers.  He lives in Chicago [Illinois], and he's about three years younger than me.  And my next one down is Gerald Carruthers, and he's about five years younger than me.  And he currently lives in Huntsville, Alabama.  And the youngest is my sister, Barbara Carruthers, and she lives in Chicago and she's about, oh, let's see, I would say nine years younger than me.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about, can you describe your community in Ohio?  Do you remember the name of the street that you lived on and what was your community like?  I know you lived on a farm.  Can you kind of tell us a little bit about the community?
Speaker 2: Well, when we were living in Cincinnati [Ohio] itself, I remember that it was in a region of Cincinnati.  I don't know whether it was a suburb or whether it was just a region that was called Madisonville.  And we moved to Milford, Ohio when I was, I think maybe third grade, second or third grade.  And I went through school in Mulberry, Ohio.  And then I left there when my father [George Archer Carruthers] passed away when I was in the, just starting in the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: And what was the farm like?
Speaker 2: It was a pretty big farm, maybe about ten acres or so.  I remembered my father raised hogs, and we used to get meat from them when they were slaughtered.  We had cows at one time.  And we grew things in the farm.  My father was always interested in agriculture.  That was one of the reasons why he had moved to Milford in a rural location as opposed to Cincinnati.  And he also got a job at Wright-Patterson Air Force base so he commuted between Dayton [Ohio] and Milford for a while, which, of course, was a fairly long distance, further distance than Cincinnati.
Story_ID: 29173
Speaker 1: And when your father [George Archer Carruthers] died, what impact did that have on you at that age?
Speaker 2: Well, it was something that, of course, it was very sudden.  And it was something that was, we just couldn't believe that had happened at the time.  And I didn't remember specifically what the details were in terms of what we decided to do, but since we were living on the farm and it was a very large distance from any of our relatives, my mother [Sophia Barbara Singley] decided to give it up and move to Chicago [Illinois] where her relatives were.  So that actually happened within a few months.  So I actually finished the eighth grade in Chicago.
Story_ID: 29174
Speaker 1: And what was life like in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Chicago, I found, was a very interesting place.  I had been to Chicago a few times before that on vacation trips, visiting our relatives there.  But one of the things that impacted me most was the fact that they had so many facilities that were not available in the rural [parts of Ohio where Carruthers spent his early childhood], like they had libraries.  They had museums, all kinds of things that I had never participated in as a child on the farm.  And that was one of the things, I don't know if you want to talk separately about how I got into astronomy as a subject, but--
Speaker 1: When did you start developing an interest in astronomy?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I got interested in it when I was in elementary school.  And the way I got interested in it was by reading Buck Rogers comic books, which, of course, was not legal in school, you know, coming to school with the book open and the comic book inside, the kind of thing that teachers frown on.  And, of course, everybody said, well, you know, that's science fiction.  And, of course, in those days, it really was nothing but science fiction.  But what really got me started was that I came across some books that my father [George Archers Carruthers] had on the book shelf, one of which was on the factual subject of astronomy which I had not heard of prior to that.  And when I read some of those astronomy books, then I really got interested because then I realized that what the Buck Rogers comic books were illustrating was something that was in the future only because we didn't have the capability to go there, not because it didn't exist.  So the fact that there were other planets besides the earth and other stars besides our sun was so, such an overwhelming discovery on my part that I said, "Wow, I really wanna get into that" because that was something that was really very interesting.  So I didn't have very much to read out there in the country except whatever books they had.  But perhaps the next step that occurred relatively a short time before my father passed away was that when I was at one of the big stores in Milford, Ohio, I came across 'Collier's' magazine [Collier's Weekly].  And that was really a turning point too because in the early 1950s, Wernher von Braun [German rocket scientist] who is one of the primary leaders of the space program and Fred Whipple [American astromomer] and several other eminent scientists had written a series of articles in Collier's magazine' about space flight which, of course, is not existent at that time.  And since Wernher von Braun was one of the German scientists who developed the B2 rockets and came to the United States at the end of World War II with those rockets, they were the leaders in developing space flight in the United States in the 1950s.  So that, of course, enhanced my interests even more because I had gone from Buck Rogers comic books to astronomy to something that was promising to be real space flight.  So when my father passed away and the family moved to Chicago [Illinois] where there was a much greater quantity of resources available in the libraries and museums, stuff like that, I used to patronize the museums and the libraries quite a bit.  And I went to high school [Englewood High School] in Chicago as I mentioned.
Story_ID: 29175
Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit, Mr. Carruthers.  Let me ask you this.  Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I can't really remember, and the reason being, of course, that it was so long ago and also because in the early 1980s, I went to a conference in Cincinnati [Ohio].  And I took the opportunity to drive out to Milford [Ohio], which I hadn't been to in thirty or forty years prior to that time.  And I was really taken aback because what was country when I left was shopping malls and fast food stores and gas stations.  I just didn't, totally, it was just totally so different, I didn't even recognize it.  I did find some of the roads that I had remembered from when I was there.  But as far as the buildings and everything, what was definitely country was city almost or at least like a suburb of D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] where they have shopping malls and things like that.  So I think that was one of the things that was totally different from what I remembered when I was actually living there.
Story_ID: 29176
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years.  Tell us a little bit about the early time when you lived in Ohio.  What was the name of your school?  Who were some of your teachers?  Do you remember some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Not when I was in Cincinnati [Ohio] because I only went through first grade there.
Speaker 1: But when you moved out to the suburbs?
Speaker 2: Okay. When I moved out to there, I went to a school called McCosh which was in Mulberry, Ohio, and I went there from second grade to the beginning of eighth grade.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember a whole lot about it.  Of course, what I see kids doing nowadays reminds me to some extent of what I did when I was their age and got my butt kicked for doing it.  But, you know, it's, looking back on one's childhood helps one to understand what you see now, except nowadays, they have a lot more resources.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers that influenced you there?
Speaker 2: I probably wouldn't remember their names or exactly who.  I could probably remember being chewed out more than by being praised (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Why?  What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I would say that I was probably not at the top of the class by any means, but not at the bottom either.  I would say that I was sort of maybe a little above the--
Speaker 1: And you say you got chewed out a couple of times.  What, for what kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Maybe just for doing things that I wasn't supposed to do in the classroom, talking to somebody, you know, the kinds of things that kids do all the time anyway.  In fact, I probably was not the only one, by (laughter) any means.
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: At the time that I, before I had become interested in space flight and astronomy, I really don't remember what my aspirations were.  And like I said, that wasn't until maybe about the third grade that I got those science fiction books or magazine, comic books.
Story_ID: 29177
Speaker 1: And at that time, what were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, when I read about the space flight, things of Buck Rogers, I said, well, that would really be nice.  But then, of course, nobody encouraged that kind of thing because it really was science fiction in those days.  But when I got hold of the books on astronomy, now I may be jumping a little bit ahead, but even when I moved to Chicago [Illinois], I was not encouraged by most of those who I knew there in my last year of elementary school in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Was it because this wasn't a realistic goal or it wasn't realistic for an African American child?
Speaker 2: I don't think it had anything to do with African American.  I think it was just that they thought that it was something that was not really a realistic goal because in those days, we didn't have a space program.  And although Wernher von Braun [German scientist] and those people had already proposed space flight, nobody was taking them seriously.  It was sort of like the same reaction to the [George W.] Bush initiative of sending men to Mars, you know, and say, well, you know, that's something we would do when we got the money to do it, but not right away.  So the thing was that most people, including teachers, did not encourage me to do that.  In fact, I even remember that I used, before I moved to Chicago, I ordered lens to make my own telescope, and I used it to observe the stars and planets and things like that on my own because, of course, I couldn't afford to buy a telescope.  And when I came to Chicago, I remember that my uncle, my uncle on my mother's [Sophia Barbara Singley] side--on my aunt's side actually, was not very enthusiastic about my interests in astronomy and space flight.  And I remember one day I was using my telescope that I had made, and he said, well, let me see this telescope that you're always using.  So he picked it up and looked through it, and he put it down.  And he said, now, I know you're crazy.  Everything's upside down.  And, of course, the fact of the matter is that in all astronomical telescope images are produced upside down, but most people don't know that because they don't look through astronomical telescopes.
Speaker 1: How did you know how to make a telescope?
Speaker 2: I read it about it in magazines and books.  And the Edmund Scientific Corporation which still exists was in its early years in those days, and they were one of those that sold the parts to make your own telescope.
Speaker 1: And what about junior high?  Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, they didn't have junior high school in those days.  It was first through eighth grade, elementary, and then ninth through twelfth was high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but during the junior high school years, did you still have dreams and aspirations of becoming an astronaut or someone who flew into space?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was always interested in it from the time that I moved to Chicago.  And, in fact, one of the resources that they had in Chicago was the Adler Planetarium.  And they also had the museums that I was able to visit.  And I took advantage of all of those.  They also had a much better library than the, that I had been able to access in Ohio.  So all of those things really helped me along.  I don't think there was any particular person in my family who encouraged me to do that though, but I did meet some people in the planetarium and other places who helped me build my own telescope and things like that.
Story_ID: 29178
Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you in junior high school?  What kind of young man were you developing into?
Speaker 2: I would say that I was probably maybe just a little bit above the average because even though I was interested in science, I really was not as good in mathematics as I should have been.  And although people had told me that you really need to know math in order to do science, it hadn't sunk in at the time.  And so I really wasn't at the top of the class in math, although I was pretty good in science.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: I really couldn't remember their names nowadays, simply because of them I have not heard from in a long time because after I finished my education, I moved to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and lost contact with them.  I've heard from a few of them by e-mail on occasion, but I've not actually met them in person for a long time.
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you at this time?
Speaker 2: I would say that there were a number of people who were involved in museums that helped me.  They had a group that I found out, called the 'Chicago Rocket Society' which I met some of the people who worked in.  So I would say that it really wasn't the schools.  It was really more the informal education kinds of things like the museums and the [Adler] planetarium and these societies.  In fact, there was, the Chicago Rocket Society was one that had been developing some proposals to do the kinds of things that von Braun [German scientist, Wernher von Braun] had been proposing to do.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite museum in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I would say that it would be equally the Adler Planetarium and the Museum of Science and Industry.  I think they complement each other very well, at least in the subject matter that I was interested in.  One of the distinctions between my interests and those of professional astronomers, and which was actually an influence too, was that I found much to my dismay that most of the professional astronomers at the Adler Planetarium had negative ideas about space flight.  Now, nowadays, that may seem kind of strange, but in those days there was not any connection between rockets and space flight, the kind of thing that von Braun was doing.  And astronomy which in those days was done with ground-based telescopes almost entirely and therefore, I was sort of like unique in the sense of connecting the two.  And the professional astronomers at the Adler Planetarium were very helpful in terms of building telescopes and doing astronomy, but not very helpful in terms of space flight and the kinds of things that would be engineering aspects of space flight as opposed to the science aspects.
Story_ID: 29179
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Carruthers, did you and your family attend church? And if so, what were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: I remember that we went to church, and since we moved around a lot during the time period that I was in elementary and high school, basically, it was whatever was in the neighborhood that we were able to access. So when we lived in Milford, Ohio, we went to a Baptist church simply because that was the only church there was. In Chicago [Illinois], we went a Christian Science church because the rest of the family was into that. And--
Speaker 1: What were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: I can't really remember anything specific. I have to confess that I wasn't overly enthusiastic (laughter) about any of them, but--
Speaker 1: But was your mother [Sophia Barbara Singley] a Christian Scientist? Did she practice those beliefs?
Speaker 2: I don't remember if she was really particularly involved in it other than on Sunday mornings.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she practice the, not necessarily going to the doctor, that kind of thing? Were those kinds of things practiced in your home?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no. I don't think they were that much into it that they didn't go to the doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that that denomination did have some things about it that, about you shouldn't need to go to a doctor. But that was a long time ago. I don't remember the details.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29180
Speaker 1: Now, at this time in your life, like around the junior high school years, were you being encouraged by your mother [Sophia Barbara Singley] and other adults around you? What did they think about your fascination and your interests in astronomy and space and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that my mother was supportive. I think most other people were neutral about it. And as I mentioned, my uncle on my aunt's side, was somewhat negative toward it because he felt that you can't really make a living out of astronomy or something like space flight. You should really be learning to do something that will make you able to do a trade, some specific kind of occupation that we know about that you can make money. But at that time, I really wasn't paying that much attention because I knew what I wanted to do (laughter).
Story_ID: 29181
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school. What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Englewood High School in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: I think that I had a reasonably good time there. Some of the experiments I did in chemistry and physics would probably be highly illegal nowadays, especially with all the new safety regulations and so forth, but--
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite experiments?
Speaker 2: Making rockets and the materials to produce rockets. And, of course, sometimes, they have different results than expected.
Speaker 1: Do you remember one that was particularly disastrous?
Speaker 2: Well, not really disastrous but we made some fireworks for the fourth of July and my brother got burned with one of them. And the police came and busted me, and it took me a while to get out of that because in Chicago, fireworks were totally forbidden. In fact, they still are totally forbidden except for licensed displays.
Speaker 1: And so what happened to you?
Speaker 2: Nothing really except that I knew that I wasn't supposed to be doing that. And I didn't do it anymore in Chicago at least.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in any clubs or sports in high school?
Speaker 2: Not sports specifically. I was involved in some science activities, like science fairs and things like that. And, in fact, that was one of the things that the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] was the site of, was the science fairs we did each year.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite science fair exhibit?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember. I know I did a variety of them. Not all of them were about rockets, but I do remember doing a science fair project which could have gotten me in trouble. And what it was, was a demonstration of how electricity is transmitted over long distances on power lines. So what we had was two neon sign transformers. And we had wire going up from the, one neon sign transformer, along a bunch of wires and then back down to the other neon sign transformer. And then that transformer was supposed to step it back down to 110 volts. So there were actually two things that reminded me that it wasn't a good idea. One was when I put my elbow on the terminal of the neon sign transformer and burnt a hole in my shirt (laughter). And that wasn't very pleasant. But what might have been a problem was the principal came over to see the exhibit, and rim of his eyeglasses touched one of the wires (laughter), and he wasn't pleased. And he--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was just the electric shock. So you, it wasn't--
Speaker 1: Did it shock him?
Speaker 2: Yes. Here again, the good news is that these transformers don't produce a lethal voltage, a lethal amount of current. So it's not likely to kill somebody, but it does give you--
Speaker 1: Just wake 'em up.
Speaker 2: --it's definitely a shocking experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No pun intended, huh?
Speaker 2: Right. Nowadays, of course, those would be forbidden in a science fair project, anything that had to expose high voltage would be forbidden.
Speaker 1: Did you do any of the traditional volcano-type experiments, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Not that specifically, although later on I can tell you about some of the things that we've done more recently with high school students here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] in which I helped them do that. But back in those days, the safety regulations were not nearly as strict as they are nowadays. And building rockets and things like that, as long as it didn't hurt somebody, nobody really bothered you if you wanted to do it.
Speaker 1: So while you were in high school, were you still thinking that you wanted to, were you still as interested in astronomy and space and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, being in Chicago where there were much more resources than there were in Ohio, and going to the planetarium and the museums and talking to the professional really was a tremendous incentive. And also the public libraries in Chicago were much, I could go in there and find books on astronomy and physics and space flight and all those kinds of things that I didn't have access to in the country.
Story_ID: 29182
Speaker 1: And while you were in high school, what were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: One of the things that is perhaps unique about what I did in college and in fact, my transfer from high school to college was that I couldn't make up my mind as to whether I wanted to study astronomy or aerospace engineering.
Speaker 1: But when you were in high school, did you know that you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: I knew that I would need to go to college, yes, and the University of Illinois was the logical place to go. And, in fact, my father [George Archer Carruthers] went to the University of Illinois when he was living in Chicago [Illinois]. Of course, he studied civil engineering. But they also had aerospace engineering at the University of Illinois. They also had an astronomy department at the University of Illinois. So that was the logical place to go.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking? While you were still in high school, what were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I was, wasn't sure whether I was going to do the engineering aspects or the astronomy, science aspects, so I decided to study both. That way, I could be prepared for both. And it turned out that even though it was a, not a conventional way of doing things, it actually worked out very well for me in terms of after I got out of college.
Story_ID: 29183
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about the college years. So you decided to pursue those [astronomy and aerospace engineering]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at the University of Illinois?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I experienced, and I'm sure that most students do, is that there is a tremendous difference between high school and college in terms of what you have to do, okay. What gets you an A in high school, gets you a C in college (laughter). And the professors don't go out of their way to help you to the extent that high school teachers might if you're having trouble. So, and of course, one of the things that I should point out was that even in those days at the University of Illinois, I did not really incur any outright racial discrimination. Of course, the high school I went to in Chicago [Illinois] was mostly black. But when I went to the University of Illinois, there was, only a minor percentage of the students were black. I don't recall any time that I was overtly discriminated against at the University of Illinois. I think all of the professors were relatively neutral. I think that I was, who wasn't--the only thing that I might have suffered from was that most of the white kids got together and worked together on solving problems whereas I had to do them on my own.
Speaker 1: Because were you the only black in your discipline?
Speaker 2: In most of the, at least in the junior and senior years of college, the technical ones. I was usually the only black person in the class whereas in the elementary, in the first and second year, there were quite a few [blacks], maybe 10 percent.
Speaker 1: And so while you were studying at the University of Illinois, were you active in any organizations or clubs?
Speaker 2: I don't remember specifically any specific clubs because it was in Urbana [Illinois], in a basically rural area. And so it really wasn't a whole lot that you could do. It was quite a different place than Chicago.
Speaker 1: Were the classes hard?
Speaker 2: The, some of them were, yes, like calculus and things like that which I had not been fully prepared for.
Speaker 1: And were you still struggling with the math aspect of your field?
Speaker 2: I would say to some extent for the first two years. But then as I came to the realization of how important the math was to science, then I was able to get my act together, so to speak (laughter), to a greater extent than when I was in high school in the early years.
Speaker 1: So, when you graduated, what year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 19--well, from my undergraduate or--
Speaker 1: Undergraduate.
Speaker 2: Undergraduate in 1961.
Speaker 1: And what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: I went to graduate school after that.
Story_ID: 29184
Speaker 1: And what did you study in graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I studied several different things. My undergraduate degree was in aeronautical and astronautical engineering with minors in physics and astronomy. They didn't really have very much in the way of astronomy although I did take whatever courses they had. And then I went into nuclear engineering because that was one of the things that people talked about as a means for the space propulsion. And then I went back to aeronautical and astronautical for the Ph.D. [degree].
Speaker 1: And so, and you got your Ph.D. in 1964?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, but during that time from 1961 to 1964, you did work as a research and a teaching assistant--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --University of Illinois, where you kind of studied plasma and gases. Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: That was an interesting thing because what we did was to develop in the laboratory some of the techniques that are used in space flight, for example, rocket propulsion. We didn't actually do rocket propulsion in the sense of having anything really big, but we did do some, what we called plasma jets or electric propulsion in which you heat gas to high temperatures using an electric arch like we use in welding. But instead of using the arch in welding, we used it for heating gas to a high temperature which allows you to use gases that are like, like hydrogen and helium without having to add oxygen which makes it heavy. So those are the kinds of things that we did in the laboratory as well as the conventional kinds of things that are adjuncts to the classes in aerospace propulsion and aerodynamics. And my thesis research for my Ph.D. had to do with the upper atmosphere and the hot gases that exist in the upper atmosphere.
Story_ID: 29185
Speaker 1: And at this time, what were you thinking you were going to do career wise? What kind of career were you gonna have with this background in aeronautical and astronautical engineering?
Speaker 2: Well, the objective was to be prepared to both develop instrumentation and to actually use the instrumentation for scientific purposes.
Speaker 1: Did you ever want to be an astronaut or a space traveler like Buck Rogers?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, and in fact, I applied, after I got out of school, of course, a couple of times. I didn't quite make it. Also, one of the things that was significant was that when I was at graduate school at the University of Illinois, was the time that I had been reading a lot of books in the library. And even before I had gotten to graduate school, I had read about what was going on in the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory. And just for purposes of information, back in the nineteen, late 1940s and early 1950s, the Naval Research Laboratory was the primary organization in the United States for space flight. And the reason for that was that they had gotten hold of some of the captured German B2 rockets at the end of World War II and had initiated the use of them for scientific purposes. Dr. Herbert Friedman [American pioneer in the application of sounding rockets to solar physics and astronomy] who was the first director of the Space Science Division of the Naval Research Laboratory was one of those who was instrumental in using those German B2 rockets to study the sun and outer space after World War II. And they also developed the Viking Rocket which was the follow onto the B2. Another thing that was an important aspect of my career was that the Russians launched the first Sputnik, the very first semester of my studies at the University of Illinois in 1957. And that was a tremendous incentive to me to keep going the way I was going because that made it clear that it was really going to happen. We were going to have space flight and do things in space.
Speaker 1: Did you ever doubt it?
Speaker 2: No, but a lot of other people doubted it.
Speaker 1: Like your [maternal] uncle?
Speaker 2: Yes, and even some of the people at the Adler Planetarium [Chicago, Illinois] doubted it. They said, well, you know, if you gonna do astronomy, you do it on the ground with telescopes and observatories. You don't do it in space. That's all science fiction. But when the Russians launched the Sputnik, that's when the rest of the United States really jumped on it too, as NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was actually created as a, was created from the space science division of the Naval Research Laboratory after that Sputnik launch. And that's the reason why the Naval Research Laboratory was involved to a high degree in the space program before NASA was created.
Speaker 1: And that's where you got your first job after you completed your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 29186
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about some of your work there [at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory] with far ultraviolet astronomy. What is far ultraviolet astronomy? What does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means that you observe stars and other objects in space in the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum. And what's unique about that is that the far ultraviolet region of the spectrum cannot be observed from the ground because the earth's atmosphere absorbs over the far ultra violet. In fact, if it wasn't for the oxygen and ozone in the atmosphere, we would be roasted by ultraviolet light from the sun. So people are concerned about the depletion of the ozone layer causing sunburn and skin cancer and things like that. It would be much worse if we did not have the ozone layer at all, but it also inhibits astronomical observations in the ultraviolet. So the only way you can study stars and the sun in ultraviolet is to go above the atmosphere.
Speaker 1: And when we hear talk of UV rays, that's what you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So in 1966, while you were at the Naval Research Laboratory, you did some work with rockets lights?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, back in the 1960s, the primary method that was used to study stars and the sun in ultraviolet was sounding rockets which began with the German B2s and then the Viking rockets. And then they developed some smaller and less expensive rockets called the Aerobie rocket. And the Aerobe rocket was simple and small enough that we could fly experiments on in relatively short time periods, relatively low costs compared to the big space missions nowadays. And I would say that one of the big advantages that I had was that I had studied both engineering and science. And I think that was probably one of the things that helped me from that time on because I was not just an astronomer. I was not just an engineer. I had studied both so I could actually develop instrumentation to do space astronomy without having to have a whole crew of engineers or scientists help me out. I think that was one of the important things in my early career. Nowadays, projects have gotten so big that one person can't do both anyway. So that distinction is not so important nowadays.
Story_ID: 29187
Speaker 1: How did you like it at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory and how did you like Washington, D.C.? [District of Columbia]
Speaker 2: I think I liked it very well. At the Naval Research Laboratory, they had much better facilities than the University of Illinois in terms of equipment, facilities to get things made. Money was not as much a big issue as it was at the universities. And they were very helpful and supportive of what I was trying to do.
Speaker 1: How did you like Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: I think I liked it very well too.
Speaker 1: And how did D.C. compare to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: It was, of course, a smaller city, which meant that some aspects of it were not as available, there were some aspects of things I was interested that were not as available as they were in Chicago. That was before the Air and Space Museum and some of the other, Smithsonian Museums were even built. But on the other hand, you didn't have to travel as far to go from home to work and back. At that time, they didn't have the Metro so it wasn't quite as convenient as the subway system in Chicago at that time. But since I lived close, I could actually ride my bicycle to work when the weather allowed.
Story_ID: 29188
Speaker 1: And let's talk about 1969. I think that was your first patent for an image converter?
Speaker 2: Actually, the patent was granted--one of the things that's true of almost all patents is that the date of the patent is usually much later than the date in which you applied for a patent.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the patent was granted in 1969?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was for an image converter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us exactly what that was that you created and how it worked?
Speaker 2: Okay. That was the device that was the basis for all of the instrumentation that I had developed for sounding rocket flights and for the Apollo XVI and Skylabs programs that you've probably read about in some of the shuttle missions that we've had. And basically, it was an idea that I had even before I came to the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory from reading articles in 'Scientific American' [magazine] and other places. There was a technique called electronograpy which had been developed in France and which had been used with ground-based telescopes shortly before I got to the Naval Research Laboratory. It did not reach good favor among astronomers in ground basis simply because it was very difficult to have a device that had the film that was recording the image in the same device that had the electron-emitting surface, what we call the photo cathode because the photo cathode of an image tube, as they were called, is very sensitive to oxidation and it had to be used in a perfect vacuum light. Photo multiplier tubes and other devices nowadays have very high vacuums. Television camera tubes have very high vacuum (unclear). So it was not compatible to have that kind of electronic imaging device recording on film because film (unclear) gives out water vapor and degrades the sensitivity of the electronic imaging device. But what I realized from reading was that if we were going to observe the ultra violet part of the spectrum in space flight, we could use a different kind of coating that was not so sensitive to the out gassing of film, what we called the alkali halides, like maybe this is too complicated for the audience. But we have the, on the periodic table, the alkali metals, sodium, potassium, rubidium and cesium. And on the alkali (unclear) of the periodic table we have fluorine, chlorine, iodine and the alkali halides are things like sodium iodide or cesium iodide or cesium chloride where you have the two ends of the periodic table. And all of those can be used as photo-emissive substances, give off electrons when you shine radiation in the proper wave length. Now, the big advantage was that you could make a device that used an alkali halide photo cathode that would be not so sensitive to water vapor which would be one good thing. And also sensitive only to ultra violet light which was also a very good thing. So the combination of those two was the basis for my patent. And also was the device that I used in my early space flight rocket flights to observe stars and the spectrum of stars in ultra violet light.
Story_ID: 29189
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Carruthers, let's talk a little bit about your work that you did in 1972, how you contributed to the Apollo XVI mission [manned mission to the moon under the U.S. Apollo space program]?
Speaker 2: Okay, actually, I probably need to go back a few years before that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to the time that the Apollo missions first began. One of the things that was unique about the Apollo missions was that they had to come up with a lot of things very quickly because it was a race against the Soviet Union to get the first. And as a result of the very short time scale, they didn't have a huge number of experiments ready to fly. Prior to that, as I mentioned, we had developed this electrographic camera that we used in sounding rocket flights to observe in the ultra violet. So we proposed to use the same technique in an instrument taken to the moon since they were looking for experiments to be taken into the moon, to look back at the earth and observe the earth in ultra violet light which was something that had not been done from a large distance previous to that and also to do some astronomy of stellar objects as a side line to that. And I wasn't the only one involved in that proposal. There were a number of other people who were involved with me on that. But I was primarily responsible for developing the instrument for it. And we, that was the first time that we had really massive bureaucracy and a large team of people as opposed to what we normally did for sounding rocket flights. But everything went pretty well. In fact, I think that the Apollo missions were still being classified as a record in terms of the short time between the time the experiment is proposed and the time it actually flies. Nowadays, it's several years between the time that an experiment is proposed, is accepted and actually gets out into space.
Speaker 1: And how much time for the Apollo mission?
Speaker 2: It was less than two years from the time that our proposal was accepted until the time that it flew. And, of course, since there was a race against time, money was not really an issue. So we really worked very fast to get that done.
Speaker 1: And it was a moon-based observatory?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was intended to look back at the earth primarily from the moon, but also the unique feature of doing it from the moon is that we could observe the entire atmosphere of the earth which was expected to extend out to several times the size of the earth. Even from something in orbit like the space shuttle, we would not be able to do that because you're not far enough away from the earth to observe the extent of the hydrogen atmosphere. Hydrogen, being the lightest gas, extends out to the greatest distances from the earth, and observing it in the ultra violet gave us the capability to image that outer atmosphere of the earth, not only hydrogen, but helium and other gases as well.
Story_ID: 29190
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about the climate at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory during this time? We're talking about late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s]. Were you one of the few African Americans working there on these space projects?
Speaker 2: Yes, at least in terms of science, I was almost the only one that I knew about. Of course, I didn't know everybody at the Naval Research Lab which has several thousand people. But in our division there was one other black scientist who was a chemist by trade. Besides that, basically, all white. There were oriental people too.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about, you know, just what a typical day was like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there ever was a typical day (laughter) because every day was different. One thing that I would say is that we were, we had a lot of freedom to do things on our schedule as long as we met the deadlines, of course. Nobody said you have to be here at such and such a time. The typical day is eight to four-thirty, but of course most of us spent a lot more time than that (laughter) working on the project, especially during the time period that we were close to being the time that we had to deliver. Also, I had, it was a new experience to me to be able to go on travel on government expenses to other NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] facilities and places that I'd never been before.
Speaker 1: Where were some of those places?
Speaker 2: Well, the, what is now the Kennedy Space Center [Florida], what is now the Houston Space Center [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: And what did you find there? What were those experiences like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting to see the kinds of facilities at other places besides the Naval Research Lab had that were in the aspects of space and exploration. Of course, the different NASA facilities are as different from each other as any of them are different from the Naval Research Laboratory, but the thing that's unique about the NASA facilities is that space science and space technology was their only field, whereas the Naval Research Lab has a lot of other fields besides space science and space technology.
Speaker 1: So can we, tell us some of the other work that you did in the mid to late '70s [1970s]? What were some other significant projects you worked on at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, we still did some sounding rocket flights for special projects. In fact, the, one of the things that people have probably heard about in my biography and other things is that in 1970 which was just two years before the Apollo flight, we made the first observation of molecular hydrogen in space. And that was with a sounding rocket, using one of my instruments.
Speaker 1: Why was that significant?
Speaker 2: Because although astronomers had predicted that the molecular form of hydrogen, H2, which is the common form here on the earth, existed in space, nobody had been able to observe it. They expected it to be there, but to observe molecular hydrogen requires observations in the far ultra violet. You can't do it with ground-based telescopes.
Story_ID: 29191
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what your family's thoughts were about what you were doing around this time? I mean we were in the height of space mission. You know, it's in the newspapers. It's on television. It's something that everyone is quite aware of. What were your family's thoughts?
Speaker 2: That I don't recall specifically because, of course, they were in Chicago [Illinois], and I was in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. And of course, in those days, we didn't have the internet, and long distance calls were expensive. So when I went home for vacation, Christmas or whatever, I would tell 'em about it.
Speaker 1: What did your [maternal] uncle think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he had actually passed away when I was still in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So let's talk a little bit about the ultra violet image of the Comet Haley in 1986. Why was that significant?
Speaker 2: Because they, scientists had predicted that atomic hydrogen would be a major constituent of the atmospheres of comets. And atomic hydrogen, like molecular hydrogen can only be observed in the ultra violet. Now, I wasn't the principal investigator for the Comet Haley. I was a co-investigator in the sense that I, they used one of my instruments. But I wasn't the chief scientist in that one.
Speaker 1: Which instrument of yours?
Speaker 2: It was the same type of instrument that we used for the Apollo and the molecular hydrogen.
Speaker 1: So you were a co-investigator in capturing that image?
Speaker 2: Right, co-investigator primarily from the standpoint that I was responsible for the instrumentation.
Story_ID: 29192
Speaker 1: What were some of the changes you were starting to notice in the '80s [1980s] at the Naval Research Laboratory?
Speaker 2: This was still before the Space Shuttle had actually come into existence. In the mid-1980s, no mid-1970s, actually, we also had the Skylab mission. And we had to experiment on that as well. But after that, there was sort of like a hiatus. In the mid-1970s, the Space Shuttle had already been proposed and in view of current events, it probably takes nobody by surprise that it took a lot longer than people expected.
Speaker 1: Was it an exciting time for you?
Speaker 2: Yes, but not as exciting as the Apollo in the sense that the big thing about the Apollo was it was a race against the Soviet Union. The Space Shuttle was not in that category, and so basically, things slowed down a lot after the Apollo missions.
Speaker 1: And were you starting to find that the agency was becoming a little bit more bureaucratic?
Speaker 2: Yes, because of the fact that things were not really in such a crunch time wise, the requirements and documentation and things like that tended to build up more. And, of course, since the Space Shuttle flights are manned, the safety aspects of the instrument was also important. And after the [Space Shuttle] Challenger accident [January 28, 1986], even more so and after the [Space Shuttle] Columbia accident [February 1, 2003], you can imagine what it would be like.
Story_ID: 29193
Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about the [Space Shuttle] Challenger accident [January 28, 1986]? Where were you when that happened, and what was your reaction?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And that was 1985?
Speaker 2: Right. First of all, I'll back up and mention that we had been busy developing with the Air Force Space Test Program an instrument to fly along with the Space Shuttles. And this was actually planned to be on 1985. We were a little bit behind schedule in being ready for that. Of course, we had to train the astronauts on how to use it. And I was down at the Cape [Canaveral, Florida; Kennedy Space Center], no, not at the Cape, in Houston [Texas; Johnson Space Center] working with some of the astronauts. And they gave me an office to work in. And the reason why it was vacant was that Christa McAuliffe [one of the seven crew members killed in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster] was using that office. And she was at the Cape. So after that, we were planning for launching our flight maybe two Shuttle flights later, I went back to the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory. And we were working on another project, the sounding rocket to look at Comet Haley which is also on the list of things that we were doing. And one of our partners dashed in the room and said, "The shuttle blew up!" And we said, "What?" And, of course, the rest of the day was a total loss. And I will always remember being in Christa McAuliffe's office two days before she flew. And, of course, that meant a major delay in our project which actually flew in 1991 with Guy Bluford [Guion Bluford; also a HistoryMaker; first African American to fly to space]. So that's something that was sort of a unique experience.
Speaker 1: And was it just something that no one really thought could happen?
Speaker 2: I guess plane crashes happen, and so if plane crashes happen, space shuttle flights could, in principle, happen. Nobody really doubted that something like that could happen because there'd been a lot of close calls, even with the Apollo missions.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of just describe the mood of the office for us? You know, here were, you know, you with your colleagues, and your colleagues on the Space Shuttle as well. Can you just kind of describe the mood of the office? What was the mood of the office like on that day?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody, of course, was shocked by it. In a sense, people really didn't expect it to have any effect directly on them because none of the experiments on that Shuttle were from our laboratory, but one of the persons who was working with us was what we called, had been selected to be a payload specialist on a later shuttle flight. And she was the person that came in and told us that the Shuttle had blown up. And, of course, the rest of the day we spent sitting in front of the TV listening to the news and reruns of the launch.
Speaker 1: So a highly emotional time.
Speaker 2: Right. Now, the thing is that in the days that followed that everybody was saying, well, you know, this was a bad thing that happened, but we're still going to proceed with the shuttle program. And nobody should stop working on their projects. But as was also true of the [Space Shuttle] Columbia accident [February 1, 2003], the time to return to flight was grossly underestimated at the time of the Challenger accident. It turned out to be three or four years for the Challenger just like it's turning out to be three or four years for the Columbia before they were able to fly again.
Speaker 1: Was it hard for you to go back and work on your project?
Speaker 2: No, simply because we knew we had to do work on the project anyway regardless of when it flew. But after a while, when the shuttle delays kept building up, we had other projects to work on. So we spent most of our time working on those until we finally got a manifest on the STS-39 mission that Guy Bluford [Guion Bluford; also a HistoryMaker; first African American to fly to space] flew in 1991.
Story_ID: 29194
Speaker 1: And Guy Bluford [Guion Bluford; also a HistoryMaker; first African American to fly to space] was the first African American in space?
Speaker 2: Right, he flew in, I think it was '82 [1982] or '83 [1983] [Guion Bluford's first mission was in 1983]. And he had actually enhanced some of the pictures on that CD we showed you. He actually came, he and the other astronaut came through the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory, and he trained on how to use our instrument. And so we had a good working relationship with him and the astronauts because they actually came to our facility to be trained and things like that. And we got to go down to the Cape [Cape Canaveral, Florida; Kennedy Space Center] a lot. And one of the things that that flight was unique was it was primarily a [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD] mission.
Speaker 1: This is the Shuttle mission in 1991?
Speaker 2: Right. Even though NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was responsible for launching the Shuttle, the payload was a Department of Defense mission. And I got to do a lot of things that I never anticipated I would be able to do, like that was the one and only time that I had actually been on the launch pad with a Shuttle actually on it, to actually go into payload bay and work on our experiments on the shuttle on the pad at the Cape. We've never had that opportunity since. Well, that was unique, and actually watching the launches, of course, you had to be a very large distance away so you don't really get to see it quite as well as the TV does.
Story_ID: 29195
Speaker 1: What year did you begin working with students when you produced a series of videos, 'Earth and Space Science'? What year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, those are two separate questions. Working with students is something that I started in the mid-80s [1980s] because they had a program called the 'Science and Engineering Apprentice Program' at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory where you could have a high school student work for eight weeks during the summer and get free help without having to pay for that student's salary. And that program still exists. I have a student this summer under the same program.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the program again?
Speaker 2: Science and Engineering Apprentice program.
Speaker 1: Did you see a lot of yourself in many of the students who were coming through?
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, one of the very first students that I had under that program whose name is William Glasgow has come up quite a ways since then. He's now a major in the Air Force Reserves, and he works in Arlington, Virginia as a professional in the aerospace industry. And I've had several other students in later years who have also become professional engineers and scientists. So it's really a very rewarding experience because when I was their age, I would never have had an opportunity to work with space flight hardware, much less actually go down to the Cape [Canaveral, Florida; Kennedy Space Center] and participate in things.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of black students who came through that program?
Speaker 2: There were a fair number. Now, of course, some people might say that there is such a thing as inverse segregation in that I choose, of course, students that I think will benefit most from working with me. So it's probably no surprise that the only blacks students were those who were working with me. There were some exceptions though.
Speaker 1: And what do you think that's like for them to have a mentor who looks like them because you didn't have that growing up? What do you think they gain from that?
Speaker 2: I think they gain a lot because that shows that they can do the same kind of things. Certainly, I didn't have that opportunity when I was their age. In fact, the only job I could get in high school was delivering newspapers and telegrams from the Western Union. I couldn't get anything even approaching a technical job.
Story_ID: 29196
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the 'Earth and Space Science' video, video series.
Speaker 2: The Earth and Space Science video series is an aspect of our education and public outreach which is not directly related to the [U.S.] Naval Research Lab. It's actually related to the D.C. [District of Columbia] Space Grant Consortium which is actually associated with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And, in fact, there is a space grant consortium for every state as well as D.C. [District of Columbia]. And also, some of the technical organizations that I am involved in, besides the Naval Research Laboratory, like the National Technical Association and a group called SMART, which stands for Science Mathematics Aerospace Research and Technology, these are all non-profit organizations outside of the government and outside of the classroom that are involved in education and public outreach. One of their main objectives is to get more African Americans involved in science and technology and to seek careers in science and technology because this was something that I got involved in also in the late 1980s, well, actually in the early 1980s when I was invited to a National Technical Association conference in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And I've been with them ever since. And the group called SMART, I've been involved in that since the late 1980s. Both of these are non-profit organizations. The National Technical Association as the name implies, is nation-wide and has chapters throughout the United States. And one of the things that we do is to try to get more students of color involved in science and engineering and technical fields.
Speaker 1: Why is that important?
Speaker 2: Because they're under-represented in the workforce. In other words, the percentage in the technical workforce is less than the percentage of the population as a whole.
Speaker 1: Why do you think African American students aren't as interested in science and technology careers?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that they're not interested. I think it's to some degree a residue of segregation in that a lot of the teachers and schools when I was their age, probably didn't think that blacks would really be good in science or math and therefore, didn't encourage them. So what we try to do is to encourage them and encourage the teachers too for that matter because a lot of the teachers don't have the background to teach science and math properly. So we actually work on both the teachers and the students to try to get them involved in technical fields, mostly informally, not in terms of giving courses specifically, although I did teach a course in Earth and Space Science for teachers specifically through the D.C. Space Grant Consortium a few times in the late 1980s, no, it was the early 1990s time period. And we are still pursuing that through the D.C. Space Grant Consortium. But the main focus is the informal activities, and NASA is very supportive of education and public outreach because they know who's paying the bills. And, in fact, NASA is probably the government agency that is most active in education and public outreach. And we have gotten several grants to do videos and other activities for students related to NASA topics.
Speaker 1: And one in which you are teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: That's a separate, that's separate from the video series--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the videos are intended for the lower grades.
Speaker 1: But it's a NASA grant though that enables it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Aerospace Workforce Development Program grant is the one that is sponsoring our current classes in Earth and Space Science here at Howard University. And that differs from courses that were already in the books in that they had a general astronomy course which was really intended for non-scientists because they had a requirement that non-scientists take at least one general course in science. It doesn't have to be astronomy because astronomy was the one that I was involved in. So I taught that course a couple of times, but we also had the Aerospace Workforce Development Grant which was intended to encourage science, students in science and engineering curriculum and also teachers who want to teach science where they get their degrees.
Speaker 1: And have you found on the collegiate level since you've been teaching that there are more and more African American students becoming interested in this particular discipline?
Speaker 2: It's hard to tell how many have become interested. Actually, in terms of what I have seen, the percentage is not as high as we would like. And it's really a matter of advertising to a large extent because a lot of people get their information about space from Star Trek [science fiction series], which, of course, is not scientifically accurate. And as long as they are associated with the space program only through science fiction, they're not gonna really seek a job in it because what they see on television is not the real thing.
Story_ID: 29197
Speaker 1: And you said that there's a big distinction now, opposed to when you were younger between science fiction and science fact?
Speaker 2: Right. The actual science fact nowadays is catching up with some of the science fiction when I was a child. But one of the interesting contrasts is that in those days we didn't really know very much about the other planets. So, for example, we now know that there, that on Mars, for example, it's not likely that humans could exist without special equipment.
Speaker 1: So, no such thing as Martians you believe?
Speaker 2: Right. One of the science fiction movies that I saw when I was a child was 'War of the Worlds' in which the Martians invaded the earth. And now we have a special program for kids which is called 'Science Fiction and Science Facts', and we show 'War of the Worlds' on one side and the Mars rovers exploring Mars on the other side. And the vehicles look very similar, which is a coincidence, I'm sure.
Story_ID: 29198
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Carruthers, let's just talk briefly about the [Space Shuttle] Columbia [February 1, 2003] crash.  It happened again in 2003.  What was that like for you, and do you remember where you were when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was at the laboratory and one of my students who was working there had surfed the internet, and he said, "Hey, come look at this.  Did you hear about this?"  I said, "About what?"  He said, "The Columbia apparently crashed."  And I said, "What?"  So I came over, and he had on the internet screen the video of the shuttle coming in and breaking up in a ball of fire.  And they were saying that the Shuttle had broken up over western Texas, and they anticipated that no one survived.  And, of course, at the time there wasn't really much more detail.  And so they kept playing the same thing over and over again.  And, of course, President [George W.] Bush came on and expressed his sorrow and said that we're going to make sure that the Shuttle is fixed and can fly safely.  And like I was saying before, whenever these kinds of accidents happen, the predictions on when they will be ready to fly again is always grossly underestimated because they go back and find out what the history was, and find out that the problem had existed long before they actually had the accident.  And therefore, they had to do major modifications and redesign to make sure that it was going to be safe to fly again.  So in that respect, the Columbia accident was no different from the [Space Shuttle] Challenger accident [January 28, 1986], even though the actual cause was quite different.
Speaker 1: And what was the mood, once again, throughout the organization?
Speaker 2: Of course, everyone was shocked and saddened by that.  And after that initial shock was over, of course, everybody was predicting that it was going to be flying again real soon.  And then as the days passed, the predictions went out to longer times as they studied more about what had actually happened.  I guess the cliche of it all was when they did a test in which they took a piece of foam and fired it out of a gun at the Shuttle wing and it broke a hole in the wing just like it did in flight.  Well, they knew that they had a problem that had been existing all along.  It's just that they were lucky it hadn't happened before then.  So that was when they realized that they really had a lot of work to do to be ready to fly again, like a total redesign of the system.  And the same thing was true of the Challenger accident.  At first, they said well, maybe it was just a freak, but then they realized after material was studied that they really had to redesign the seals on the booster that was allowing this hot gas to leak out.
Story_ID: 29199
Speaker 1: One of the things that we're seeing now to our collaboration between the Russians and the United States when, like you said, when you began your career, that was not the case at all.  It was very competitive.  Do you think that that collaboration has been more of a help or a hindrance?
Speaker 2: I think it's been a help because I don't think that we would have built the International Space Station by ourselves.  And I think the Russians probably would not have gone much further than their Mir Space Stations for a long time without collaboration with others.  The European Space Agency has also been a partner in some of these missions as well although not to the same extent that the Russians have.  So the more that is involved in these missions and can be benefited by these missions, it makes it more efficient in terms of how much money each partner has to pay.
Speaker 1: And what do you think of the future of space?  Do you think we'll see, you know, in our lifetime, regular people living on space stations, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't think it will ever be cheap enough for a regular person to live on a space station because the laws of physics require an enormous amount of energy to get into space.  And that's never going to change to our knowledge.  And that's why it cost twenty million dollars to go to the space station now.
Speaker 1: Just to get a ride.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What do you think the future is?  What do you see?
Speaker 2: I think the future for science and those programs that really require access to space, those will proliferate.  But I don't think tourism, as such, is likely for a long time, unless somebody discovers a much cheaper way of doing things.
Story_ID: 29200
Speaker 1: And what about for African Americans in space, astronomy, science?
Speaker 2: I think that we've come a long way.  As you may know, the deputy director of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is Fred Gregory who is one of the first black astronauts and the first black astronaut to be a commander of the Space Shuttle mission.  And also, we have a number of others, for example, Dr. Julian Earls [also a HistoryMaker], who is one of the members of the National Technical Association and has been active at the NASA Glenn Research Center [Cleveland, Ohio] is now the director of that center.  We've also had other African Americans as directors of NASA centers as well as being astronauts and scientists.
Story_ID: 29201
Speaker 1: What's been your most proudest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: I don't really know of any specific thing that I would say is a specific accomplishment.  But I would say that the two that are most publicized are the first measurement of interstellar molecular hydrogen in 1970 and the Apollo XVI camera in 1972.  But the technology that was used for those, were used for a lot of other missions before and after and still to some extent.  One thing that was different in our most recent space mission which was an Air Force satellite called the Air Force--I take that back.  The most recent satellite that we have been involved in was a Department of Defense [DOD] satellite called the Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite or ARGOS.  That was the first long-duration, unmanned satellite mission that I have been involved in.  And we developed a new version of the camera that was publicized that we had used for the Apollo mission in which we replaced the film with a solid-state read-out device called a "charge-coupled device" [CCD] which is also used nowadays in digital cameras which everybody can buy and use.  But even as recently as fifteen years ago, those charge-coupled devices were very expensive and hard to get and were not available in a form that can be used to study the ultra violet part of the spectrum, which was what we were interested in.  So we used a version of our camera in which we replaced the film with a charge-coupled device and we called that device a electron-bombarded CCD detector.  And that was flown on the ARGOS satellite mission which was a long-duration mission.  So I would say that that is probably the most recent new advance that we've had.  I don't know that we are likely to have anything really new for a while.
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, is there anything that you've already done that you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are.  Of course, one can never predict these things in advance except to see what the consequences were afterwards, and they say, well, I wish I had done something different.  But I would say that to a large extent, things that I had not predicted would be on the good side have almost equaled the things that I might have done better.  So I really couldn't predict right now what I would have done differently.  So it was largely a matter of chance (unclear).
Story_ID: 29202
Speaker 1: And what advice to you have for those who are interested in a career in astronomy or aeronautical engineering?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the most important things is that you have to start out with a broad curriculum.  You can't just take a course in astronomy and become an astronomer.  You have to study the basic math and science courses, especially when you're still in high school and the first few years of college before you specialize in a field that you're interested in.  But on the other hand, it's also important to have goals.  And if you don't have an idea of what you want to do, you're not going to be, you're not going to have the incentive to study those courses when you're in early school.  So it's important to have both an objective, but also a broad basis of learning so that if you do not reach your primary objective, you can do something that is closely related to it.
Story_ID: 29203
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I guess to some extent, I don't consider myself finished yet so--
Speaker 1: But when you are gone from here, what is that you hope people say about Dr. George Robert Carruthers?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I would say that I was one of the earliest space scientists in the African American community, not necessarily the first, but, in fact, Benjamin Banneker was the first black astronomer.  And that goes back quite a while.  But I would say that in terms of space science, I was probably one of the first.
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy is, Dr. Carruthers?
Speaker 2: Basically, the students who have followed me, worked with me, or heard about me over the years.
Story_ID: 29204
Speaker 1: And is there anything else you'd like to share that maybe we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: Not really, except that I still feel that, to a much greater extent now than back when I was working on Apollo and Skylab [space missions], that education and public outreach by all scientists and engineers is something that they should not only do but be interested in pursuing because I have to admit that education and public outreach was not my goal when I was working on Apollo and other things.  It was only in the last twenty years or so that I've really gotten involved in that.  And I feel that all of us have a requirement to help those who follow in our footsteps.
Speaker 1: Great, thank you very much, Dr. Carruthers.  Thank you, Carey [videographer for this session of the interview].
Story_ID: 29205
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Ms. Debra Carruthers.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's George Robert Carruthers.  That's G-E-O-R-G-E, R-O-B-E--sorry, I forgot.  Robert is R-O-B-E-R-T, Carruthers, C-A-R-R-U-T-H-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 1st, 1939, and I'm not sure whether it was in Chicago [Illinois] or exactly where--no, maybe it was Cincinnati, Cincinnati, I think it was [George Carruthers was born in Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, I think so, I think so.  Cincinnati, Ohio.  And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, I'm retired, but my previous, most recent, was Space Science and Engineering at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], where I used to teach part time.  And I worked at the [U.S.] Naval Research Lab which is the south end of D.C. [District of Columbia]
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were a research scientist for the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory?
Speaker 2: Naval Research Laboratory, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Sorry, I didn't look at the calendar, but I know that it's early in September.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you see it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: October 1st--no, that's my date.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I wrote it.
Speaker 2: I didn't know the date for today.
Speaker 1: It's, I believe it's--if you can confirm, it's August 26, 2012?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) government workers.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It's actually the 27th.
Speaker 2: 27th, okay, all right.  I'm back a day, it's actually the 27th, okay.  We're all wrong.  August 27, 2012, and we're in the offices of Skadden, Arps law offices in downtown Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 29206
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George, A, letter number A [Archer], Carruthers.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I don't know for sure, but I think it was probably in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, I know about his Uncle Ben, who lived in New York, and I had gone to visit him on many occasions.  And I don't really remember any others on his group.  Ben Carruthers and George Carruthers were the only ones that I really knew about when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Uncle Ben his brother or was it--
Speaker 2: His brother, yes.
Speaker 1: That's your uncle--
Speaker 2: My uncle.
Speaker 1: --yeah, okay, all right, okay.  All right, his brother, Ben, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Uncle Ben was a little bit older than my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29207
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Sophia Barbara Singley and George Archer Carruthers] met?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.  There's probably some in some history, but it's been such a long time ago that I really wouldn't be able to find it here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia]
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now when you think about their personalities and their talents and their looks and, you know, dispositions, who do you think you take after the most, your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly my father was the one who got me interested in science and engineering because he was an engineer himself and also I got my rear end kicked if I got bad grades in school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so he kind of pushed, he pushed you, I guess, in some ways to do--
Speaker 2: In some cases, 'cause there was a time that I didn't like math, you know, and those kinds of things.  And if I didn't get good grades, you know--
Speaker 1: You would encouraged, huh?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I see, all right.  Okay, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us who your brothers and sisters are and where you fit in the lineup?
Speaker 2: Well, Gerald Carruthers is the one that's closest to me.  Now, he lives in Huntsville, Alabama, just to the southwest of here.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, is he the oldest?
Speaker 2: No, he's the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, who's the oldest?
Speaker 2: Robert, let's see, Anthony Carruthers.  He was the second one after me, and Gerald Carruthers was the third, and I have a sister, Barbara Ann Carruthers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, you're the oldest.
Story_ID: 29208
Speaker 1: Well, what did you like to do when you were growing up?  What kind of things did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked to go outside and see a lot of things that you can't see in the city.  And that was one of the times when I got interested in astronomy, was seeing stars in the sky and things like that and reading Buck Rogers comic books which teachers don't like (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, who was Buck Rogers?  Tell us who Buck Rogers was.
Speaker 2: Buck Rogers was a comic book person that I got, and he--that was back in 1950 which is before there was really any space science, real space science, that is, but science fiction, you know.  And I was doing some things that the teachers didn't like when I looked Buck Rogers in the book, instead of this, what I was supposed to be doing in class because they thought that there was no such thing as going out into space.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I read here that you built a telescope when you were ten years old, 1949, right?
Speaker 2: Roughly around that time.  And the reason why I got into that kind of thing was because--I know this may seem a little strange too, that Wernher von Braun, who was a German astronaut from World War II, had come to the United States, and he had put in a paper that I saw a movie about flying in space, which was exactly the kind of stuff I was looking for.  And I actually got a opportunity to talk and (unclear) get something.  I didn't expect to do it, but I sent him a letter saying I really liked this stuff.  And he actually sent me a letter, telling me that, in person.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the famous German rocket scientist, Wernher von Braun--
Speaker 2: Um-hum--
Speaker 1: --who--
Speaker 2: --came to the United States.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I saw him on a Walt Disney television show, you know, explaining rocket science, you know, and he was, he worked for the beginnings of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], right, in the early days of NASA.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, how did you know how to build a telescope?  I mean did you have a, did you go to the library and get a book about how to do it or--
Speaker 2: Yes, books, was really part of, and also science fiction books too.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were inspired by science fiction, but--now, did your father [George Archer Carruthers] help you build your telescope?
Speaker 2: To some extent because he was an engineer.  Of course, he didn't really think that science fiction was a good thing for me (laughter) to be doing, but the fact that Wernher von Braun who had come from Germany right around that time was showing that there really is such a thing as space flight.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was building rockets that--
Speaker 2: Of his own.
Speaker 1: --yeah, may one day have the capacity to go into space.
Speaker 2: Right, 'cause they, he was, he got out of Germany at the end of World War II and came to the United States.
Story_ID: 29209
Speaker 1: Tell us about school, when you were out in Milford [Ohio].  Do you remember what school was like there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the names of the schools, but actually, the schools were not actually in Milford where I lived, but further down the road [Mulberry, Ohio].  So I had to go down the road a bit, closer to Ohio.
Speaker 1: Closer to Cincinnati [Ohio], you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: But, you know, they had buses and stuff like, I didn't have to walk all the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you have a special, I mean a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Well, science and engineering were because my father [George Archer Carruthers] was an engineering, and I'd read all the stuff about space flight.
Speaker 1: But did they teach any science and engineering when you were ten [years old], I mean in--
Speaker 2: No, but they had some of the basic topics of science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, astronomy was something that's been around for a long time, so I did, on occasion, get some astronomy books.  But, of course, nobody flew into space in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you know the order of the solar system when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: After reading books, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, the teachers didn't teach courses like that when I was in elementary school, but books that I had were, had Buck Rogers [comic book character]--even though Buck Rogers is fake, there still were books that I could find on real astronomy which is really what got me up to speed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember because that was a long time ago, back in 1950s or less.
Story_ID: 29210
Speaker 1: Well, the family moved when you were ten years old, right?  You moved back [from Ohio] to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was, about 1950, my father [George Archer Carruthers] passed away, and my mother [Sophia Barbara Singley] went back up to Chicago, and that's where I lived until I came to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, what did you father pass away from?  What was wrong with him?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the details of it, but I do remember it was a rather sudden thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, did it kind of really shake the family up a little bit?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and since my mother didn't know how to, you know, take us places--we were out in the country.  And she had to even get up to speed on driving a car much less going long distances.  But since she had relatives in Chicago, what we did was to go down to Milford [Ohio] and get a bus or something to get to Chicago--
Speaker 1: Okay, it sounds like a really--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --because all of her relatives were in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like really a bad situation to happen so suddenly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and have to move.  Did you have a hard time adjusting to life in Chicago after, you know, after this sudden move?
Speaker 2: Well, not really because as I guess there was a little time in finding out what kind of school to go to and get used to the school in Chicago.  But aside from that, I don't think there was anything different except it was a little bit bigger than Chicago [Milford].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29211
Speaker 1: When you were in Milford [suburb of Cincinnati, Ohio], was your school like mostly black or white or what?
Speaker 2: It was middle, it certainly wasn't all black, and it wasn't all white either, but I think the whites outnumbered the black, but I don't think that we had any problem with segregation or anything like that when I was in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any black teachers in school?
Speaker 2: A few, yes.
Speaker 1: In Milford?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, not many, but I've seen a few.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you went to Chicago [Illinois], you went to McCosh Elementary School, right?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember McCosh as such 'cause I've forgotten all the suburbs of Chicago.  But since our relatives were in Chicago, we spent most of our time with them and whatever school it was, that was close by, is where I went to.  I don't remember the exact place in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember your address in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Not right off hand, but I probably have papers that--.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not that--I'm just trying to get a fix of where you lived.  Do you know what neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: It was South Side, but not out in the suburbs 'cause the reason why I know that is because I used to go down to the South end, just like you go down to the South end in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you lived in the city of Chicago, right?
Speaker 2: Right, but it was in the South part of it.
Speaker 1: What near 63rd Street or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 63rd Street was the main street.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, there we go.  So that sounds like--because I had a note in here about McCosh, and that's where McCosh, like 65th, you know, west of Cottage Grove, I think.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, so, now, do you remember teachers at McCosh that were helpful or especially helpful?
Speaker 2: I don't remember them by name because it's been a long time ago--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you don't have to--
Speaker 2: I was only there for a few years before I went to college at the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Well, you had to go to high school first though.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So I was talking about grade school first, and you were ten [years old], like--
Speaker 2: Oh, grade school.
Speaker 1: --when you moved back, right?  You were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ten or eleven [years old]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Grade school was almost finished when I left Ohio, coming up to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, you had three years to go.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 29212
Speaker 1: So, you went to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you get pretty good instruction at Englewood?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you were going to Englewood, there weren't that many black students, were there at Englewood?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Englewood was one of the few black students that I knew anywhere else.  So I think Englewood was one of the few in Chicago that a large number of black people, not a huge amount, but certainly more than in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, did you, so you took--were you able to take biology and chemistry and physics at Englewood?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Of course, science and engineering were my topics, but, you know, I wasn't really into biology, but I was science and engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you take a lot of math at--
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, every course takes the math.
Speaker 1: Right.  How, do you remember how much--how high the math went?  Did they teach calculus--
Speaker 2: That's the highest level, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they teach you calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: They just started it before I went from high school to college, 'cause when I finished high school, I went across the street to, toward D.C., and there was a school, just to the east of Chicago--I forgot the name of the school, but it was sort of like halfway between D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] and Ohio--I mean Chicago, east and west.  So, it's, you might say it's a middle school (laughter), just east of Chicago.  I'd have to show you the poster before I could really say for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you went to college at the University of Illinois, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now, when you graduated from high school, were you an honor student?  Did you get--
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what courses it was.  My science and engineering was really my favorite, but mathematics by itself wasn't always my best.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do your remember, did you conduct any experiments at Englewood High School when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, some legal and some illegal (laughter) because--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about--
Speaker 2: --the police didn't like people using fireworks in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do with fireworks in, at Englewood High School?
Speaker 2: Illegally (laughter), I mean, outdoors, like on the 4th of July 'cause in Chicago, they had a law, you're not supposed to have fireworks.  And a lot of times, the police come by and say, you're not supposed to be doing this, even though it was the 4th of July 'cause other places you, 4th of July, you can use fireworks, but not in that place.
Story_ID: 29213
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's one other thing I wanted to suggest if you're interested, which was right around the time that I left from Chicago [Illinois] to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia], there was a magazine that I got from Wernher von Braun who was the German astronaut from Germany--
Speaker 2: Hold on, are we rolling?  Okay, all right, I'm sorry.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I came across a book about Wernher von Braun who was the first African--I mean German astronaut who came to the United States [after World War II].  He was the first person in the United States who really was interested in space flight as opposed to just pure astronomy.  And I saw this movie, newspaper or whatever it was that I had, and I sent a letter to him about that, about--and I never expected this.  But he actually sent a letter back to me saying--he even showed me his picture.  So I was really up to speed on that because I knew that what they were doing in Germany were actually helpful to the United States in turning things up into space.  Nobody had actually flown in space at that time back in 1950.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's how I got really up to speed on space science.
Story_ID: 29214
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were in high school, the Russians launched Sputnik, 1957, right?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that and what did that mean to you?
Speaker 2: Well, with, the thing that really showed to me was that the people here in the United States needed to get their asses in gear, you know.  And that's how I got better into space science and engineering as something that people don't say, oh, that's not stuff you need to be worried with because now they knew that the Russians were ahead of the United States, and that we needed to get up to gear.  So that was one of the things that actually helped me to get up to speed in space science, which I wanted to do anyway.  So I think that's one of the things that--it wasn't just me.  It was other people who helped me get up to speed too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29215
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us what an image converter is?  I think you--
Speaker 2: That's something, it converts air into other types of gas, like shock tubes, like in a shock tube--it's a long tube that you put inside of a--and pump up the vacuum.  And this was more for airplanes, more than space, at that time because they wanted to see what supersonic airplanes do.  So one of the jobs I had to do was to make sure that we pumped up the gas up to a certain temperature, and then the shock tube, which, when they say shock tube, they mean you have something over your ears when it's on because it's like a big gun.
Speaker 1: A sonic boom?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it says here, in 1969, you received the patent for the image converter, a device that detected electromagnetic radiation in short wavelengths and served as the basis for all the instrumentation for sounding rocket flights in the RO-16 in the Skylab programs, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I wouldn't say that it was all, that I did all of it.  It's just, it was one of the things that I did.  But there were other people who did that kind of stuff too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It says in addition--
Speaker 2: Well, shock tubes at the University of Illinois was one of the things that got me started on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so working with the shock tube is, led to the patent on the image converter?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, because that's the only way you can get supersonic speed.
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here also the image converter was used to observe stars and the spectrum of stars in ultraviolet light from space.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so you developed the idea for the image converter before starting work at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I have to say that Wernher von Braun [German space scientist] was one of those who got me interested in that kind of thing 'cause the Germans, at the end of World War II, he came over to the United States and worked with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  And he sent me messages, and I sent him messages, and a lot of stuff from him helped me out too.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you ever get a chance to meet Dr. Wernher von Braun?
Speaker 2: Not in person, but on many occasions on TV and paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you never met him in person?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29216
Speaker 1: You earned your B.A. [Bachelors of Arts degree] in '61 [1961], master's [degree] in '62 [1962], Ph.D. [degree] in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, those were all in D.C.--I mean Chicago [University of Illinois].
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--oh, I'm sorry, you began working with the Naval--, with the Space Science Division of the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory as a postdoctoral student in '64 [1964], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you became an official part of the Naval Research Lab in '66 [1966], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I came to D.C. permanently.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  So, okay, and this is when, in '69 [1969], you filed the patent for the image converter for detecting electromagnetic radiation, especially in short [wavelengths]--
Speaker 2: And ultraviolet light.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?  Did I--okay, I'm sorry.  What--
Speaker 2: The work that I was doing was for ultraviolet light.
Speaker 1: Ultraviolet light, okay.
Speaker 2: Because what we did was we had a shock tube which is a globe about this wide, and open, a lot of which I had done further, before I got to D.C.  And we used to set those up.  And the thing that I always remembered was that the shock tube as they had in Illinois, had a tube about this big and wide and a tube about the length this whole area here.  And one of the things you never dared do is go in front of that 'cause that's an enormous blast, when you turn it on.  So that's why you can't be anywhere close to those shock tubes.
Speaker 1: So did you have to wear something special on your ears or something or--
Speaker 2: If you were working close to it, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 29217
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1970 you received the Arthur S. Flemming Award which recognizes outstanding federal employees at the [U.S.] Naval Research Lab.  Now, in '72 [1972], now, you invented a camera, right, an electrograph ultraviolet camera?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And it takes--how many photos does that take in--
Speaker 2: Well, ultraviolet, it's just a different range of radiation, but the actual size of the pictures that you take would be the same.  But the main thing is that you have to do it in vacuum.  You can't do it in air.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry.  It says here that you, that the camera took about 200 photos on the Apollo XVI mission, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was one of the things that went up on the space station to the moon with astronauts.  See, I couldn't go up myself, but the stuff that I had was given to the astronauts because the equipment that I dealt with was for ultraviolet light, not visible light.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what I found out after the pictures were taken was that the, with the equipment that, the ultraviolet camera was pointed to the Earth, has a huge cloud of atomic hydrogen, which is much bigger than the Earth.  And you can't see that from the ground because the atmosphere blocks out ultraviolet light.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But going to the moon, you can do it because there's no air.
Speaker 1: Okay, so these are pictures they shot, you know, they shot some of these pictures from the moon of Earth.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So it enabled us to learn more about the Earth's atmosphere by shooting pictures with electro-violet light, I mean ultraviolet light.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, that's Apollo XVI was in 1972.  The commander was John Young and the assistant pilot, I guess, was Charles Duke.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 29218
Speaker 1: Now, I hear, in '73 [1973], it says here, another version of your electrograph ultraviolet camera got images of the Comet Kohoutek, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is, for that, is that the gas that comes out from a comet covers a lot of ranges of temperature and pressure.  And by having something that you can do in the ultraviolet, 'cause you can see a lot more things that you can't see just looking with ordinary visible light because the gas that comes out of the comet that's--you're looking at, not just the head of the comet.
Story_ID: 29219
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977], you were on the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] Starlab Spacelab Ultraviolet/Optical Astronomical Telescope Facility Definition Team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was mostly ground-based discussions of things.  We didn't actually fly anything.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know, I know, yeah.  So, what were you all doing?  You were trying to, you were developing another imaging device for the mission?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, one of the things that, around that time, that had not been up to speed previously, was that the Russians were getting ahead of the United States on some of this, and so that's why they wanted to get more people working on things like ultraviolet and infrared that we hadn't been doing in the past, in the previous times.
Speaker 1: Okay, in--so, do you remember what kind of pictures you were able to take with Starlab, with the ultraviolet optical camera on the Starlab.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, in fact, that's the reason why they asked us to do it, is because we had the ultraviolet camera which nobody else had at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were taking pictures, again, of the earth or all the whole solar system or--
Speaker 2: Well, comets too.
Speaker 1: Comets and--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So a variety of things, right?
Speaker 2: Right, depending on what's out there at the time.
Story_ID: 29220
Speaker 1: Can you remember anything that you learned that was the most startling thing that you learned from these pictures [from space, using cameras that image in the ultraviolet light]?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that we did later on, about 1970 time period, when the astronauts went to the moon, they took one of our cameras and pointed it back at the Earth.  And I saw something that I never thought that I would have seen, a huge cloud of hydrogen gas around the Earth's front end because hydrogen is the lightest gas, and it goes much further out than other gases in the earth's atmosphere.  And as far as I know, that was the first time that anyone had seen hydrogen outside of the Earth's atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what does it mean scientifically to have that much hydrogen outside of the Earth's atmosphere?  I mean does it--
Speaker 2: It gives you information about how much atmosphere there is in the hydrogen, which you can't see from the ground 'cause everything else, like nitrogen and oxygen, it takes up more heat and energy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it--
Speaker 2: Of course, hydrogen is everywhere, but hydrogen became present when you get out of the Earth's atmosphere where everything else is down in.
Story_ID: 29221
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in the '80s [1980s], you started the Science and Engineering Apprentice Program at the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, in part, but also Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] as well, because what we were trying to do is education and outreach for students who might be interested in science and engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so were you working with the high schools?
Speaker 2: High schools primarily, but also we did some elementary schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, so trying to get young people interested in science and space exploration?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is the program still going on?
Speaker 2: That I don't know because I haven't been directly involved in it for quite a while.  I know that there are still some people who are doing it, but I don't know exactly who and exactly where.  But nowadays, we can do it by e-mail and that's a different thing 'cause we can actually send ourselves to teachers by e-mail and we don't have to go to all the schools and everything.
Story_ID: 29222
Speaker 1: Now, in '86 [1986], an ultraviolet image of Halley's Comet was taken, and you were a co-investigator.  So what did you find when you investigated the photos of Halley's Comet?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think there was anything that was unusual that we didn't expect, but it was really just a matter to see, since ultraviolet light requires more energy than ordinary light, I guess you would say that ultraviolet imaging can see more than just visible ground light.  But I didn't really see anything that was vastly different in the shape of comets or that sort of thing.  Of course, nobody else expected anything different either.  So I wouldn't say that that was something unique.
Story_ID: 29223
Speaker 1: In '87, 1987, at age forty-seven, you received the Black Engineer of the Year Award.  It was given by the 'Black Engineer and IT Magazine', right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, well, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the details of it.  I was thankful for (unclear) have that opportunity.  And I maybe give a short talk about what I was doing, but I don't think that I changed anything to any degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess one of the things that I did find out later on when I worked part time at Howard University was that we needed to spread out things, not only to the students, but also for their parents and for other students who were in younger grades to get into science and engineer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which, of course, we always do in the NTA, National Technical Association.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the major organization for black engineers is the National Technical Association, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you start becoming involved in the National Technical Association?  Do you remember and how you became involved?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't until I was living in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] that I found out about it, as being one of the first places where black scientists and engineers worked together in those kinds of things.  I had never seen anything like that in Chicago.  And I worked with them for quite a few years too.  I've been a chapter member and part-time, other topics in the NTA as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: 'Cause the D.C. chapter is here in D.C. in (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in--and you're still a member, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In fact--are you the president of the--or were you president of the local chapter?
Speaker 2: Yes, the D.C. chapter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, are you still the president or are you--
Speaker 2: Yes, but I haven't been able to find enough people to really do a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's one of the things that we have, you know, do some looking up for.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1989, you're on the Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee.  Now, this is a committee of the [U.S.] Naval Research Lab or is that, what is it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was just something that the government asked or--not D.C. itself, and really I've, you know, saw a lot of stuff, but I don't think there was anything unique about it.
Story_ID: 29224
Speaker 1: Okay, in '92 [1992], now, you were on the review committee for the space telescope imaging for the Hubble space telescope, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what did you do on that committee?
Speaker 2: Well, I just worked with the people who were doing the equipment for the space telescope, and also to some extent on the spacecraft that they had to put up in orbit in order to be used on the space telescope.  I don't think there was anything that was particularly unique about that except that it was the first time that anybody had flown anything on a telescope in space, at least of that level.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's unique, I think (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: First time it's ever done.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did the Hubble, what were you able to see through the Hubble that you couldn't see before?
Speaker 2: Well, there're actually two different things.  One is a capability to see short wavelengths and long wavelengths that you can't see from the ground.  And also being outside the earth's atmosphere, which makes it a lot easier to see stars and planets better.  In fact, that's one of the most important things.  Even going to the moon nowadays, you can actually view better if you're outside the earth's atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm often--I asked this question once, and I was surprised at the answer, but I want you to try to answer it for me.  What are we really looking at when we see the pictures of the Nebula, and they're all different, beautiful colors and, are those the true colors or those Nebulae or are they--through the Hubble telescope or are they, the colors enhanced by some ultraviolet process or something or--
Speaker 2: Well, actually, all kinds because the thing is that the thing that the Hubble Space Telescope does that you can't do with a telescope on the ground is to see far ultraviolet light and other types of light besides ordinary air because a telescope on the ground can be bigger than the one on the Hubble space telescope, but they can't see certain gases that the Hubble space telescope can.Hubbell Space Telescope, but they can't see certain gases that a Hubbell Space Telescope can.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it can see 'em because of the technology that you developed, right, the--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't particularly a part of that, but I certainly knew about it because I was in the list of people who were in charge documenting--not actually doing it, but the astronauts, the engineers who did it were working for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and my area, which included, not just myself, but a lot of other people, was about what we're gonna do with it after it gets up in space.
Story_ID: 29225
Speaker 1: Now, you were--in 1993, you were on the advisory board for the Center for the Study of Terrestrial and Extra Terrestrial Atmospheres at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].  And you served from 1993 to 2000 on that advisory board.  Now, what--can you explain what that was about and what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, basically, it was the physics department program that it was based on.  I think that what we had was good, but the problem we had or at least what I thought was not the world's best, so we couldn't get enough students.  We just couldn't find enough students who were interested in space science to get a good class.  Of course, we can always tell them what they can do.  So it's not that they don't know that.  It's just that it's hard to get kids, I don't--for whatever reason, are not interested in science and engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have any scholarship money for students?
Speaker 2: Not specially.  Of course, everybody has to pay dues, but I don't know of any special amounts except for special occasions, that we would give to the students.
Story_ID: 29226
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in, so we were talking about the advisory board for the Center for the Study of Terrestrial and Extra Terrestrial Atmospheres at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia].  And you were there for seven years.  Now, so the aim of this center was to do research into the atmospheres here on Earth as it relates to the atmospheres on other planets in our solar system?
Speaker 2: And also further out in space.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The problem that we had was we couldn't get enough students who were interested.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the funding sort of dried up then--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --because you couldn't get enough--
Speaker 2: 'Cause we're still trying to get things going up to speed at our end.  It looks like things are getting worse rather than better, at least from what I've been seeing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this was, you said, was a program of the physics department at Howard [University]?
Speaker 2: Yes, because I used to work part time and teach part time at Howard University's physics department.  I haven't done it for quite a few times, but the whole program in physics at Howard University seems to have faded away to a large extent.
Story_ID: 29227
Speaker 1: Now, in 1994, you were on the council of the Smithsonian Institution.  Now, what were you working on, at the council at the Smithsonian?  Were you an advisor to the Smithsonian?
Speaker 2: To some extent. One of the things that we did was work the [National] Building Museum, which is up the road from here and other places where the general public can see things in space because you can't just send astronauts into space and tell them to teach all the kids and adults.  We have to have people who can be, things that you, general public can see without too much problem.  So that was something that NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] provided for the Air and Space Museum as well as others.  And I was just a part of it for a while, and I actually got paid for it for a while.  But that sort of like faded away too because the Air and Space Museum even doesn't look like the same thing to me.
Story_ID: 29228
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1999 you were the principal investigator for the Global Imaging Monitor of the Ionosphere or the GIMI, GIMI experiment or GIMI experiment and co-investigator for the High Resolution Airglow/Aurora Spectroscopy experiment.  So, well, tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, most of that work was done at the White Sands Missile Range [New Mexico] because we could shoot rockets up into space, not all the way to the moon, of course, but just enough of the atmosphere that you can see ultraviolet rays and other things that you can't see from the ground.  In fact, we used to fire a lot of rockets at White Sands, which we don't use most recently, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were conducting experiments out in White Sands--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did--do you remember, what are your--did you discover anything that you, anything surprising?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of things that I hadn't seen before because the ultraviolet light was not something that you would expect to see.  In fact, one of our flights, in 1970-time period was when astronauts were on the moon, and we sent something up that was taken up by the astronauts to the moon and pointed it at the Earth.  And that was the thing that I remembered the most because the hydrogen atmosphere, which is the lightest gas, goes very much further out from the Earth's surface than the ordinary air.  Even astronauts out in space with ordinary air, only goes up to a certain altitude before you don't start seeing anything except darkness.  But in the ultraviolet, and especially with hydrogen, we found pictures that were twice the size of the Earth pointed at the sun because the sun is what produces that ultraviolet.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see.  In, now, what is the high-resolution--or you might have explained it, but if you did, just try to re-explain it again for a second, the High-Resolution Airglow Aurora Spectroscopy experiment.
Speaker 2: Okay, what that is, is basically the same as the others except that it's in a form of a, like a calendar, you know, where you have the different wavelengths all the way across and things in the laboratory which have different spectroscopy wavelengths.  So by, in a spectrograph, you split the short wave into the long wave, and see the difference so you can see how much of each kind, whereas if you're just taking a picture directly, like an ordinary camera, you can't tell which is ultraviolet and which is not.  So, the main thing was that we were able to see the difference between ultraviolet and regular.
Story_ID: 29229
Speaker 1: In 2000, I mean you were teaching at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] in the department of physics and astronomy part time. Now, you've done that a lot over the years.  Did you, would you like teach a while at Howard and then leave and then go back again or what?
Speaker 2: Well, there're a lot of different things that go on.  For a while I was teaching part time, but after a while, I basically got out simply because we couldn't find enough students who were interested.  And, of course, if they--, if the Howard University wanted some students to teach in this kind of stuff, I'd certainly be willing to help out, even if I don't have to get paid for it.  But I haven't heard anything.  In fact, I haven't heard from anybody at Howard University in quite a while.  I don't know what's going on there, but none of the people that I used to work with seem to be living there anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29230
Speaker 1: You were inducted in 2003 into the National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yes, but basically, it was really just an advertisement for me, but I didn't actually go back to Ohio to do that.  They just sent me--they sent this to me as a degree that they thought I was a former of, or at least something that they felt was--
Speaker 1: Well, this award honors Americans responsible for great technological advances that make human, social and economic progress possible.  So, you are one of the members of the National Inventors Hall of Fame--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and along with some very important, other important people.  And you were included for the far electrograph ultraviolet camera that--
Speaker 2: Right, that's what I was, built for rocket flights.
Speaker 1: Right, now, this is a piece of equipment that was essential on those flights--
Speaker 2: Right, because you had to get above the atmosphere.
Speaker 1: Right, so this is an essential piece of equipment from which people gained a lot of knowledge about the atmosphere and about space.  So, and it was in 2003.
Story_ID: 29231
Speaker 1: When did you retire from the [U.S.] Naval Research Laboratory?  Do you know when?
Speaker 2: I think it was relatively recent.  Now, when they say retired from the Naval Research Lab, that means that basically, they don't pay me anymore (laughter), but other than that I still go there from time to time.
Speaker 1: Oh, do you?  Okay, all right, so you're still involved with the--
Speaker 2: To some extent, yes.
Speaker 1: And what other activities are you involved in right now?
Speaker 2: Well, the education and public outreach activities of the National Technical Association [NTA] is one of my activities.  I'm chapter president of the United--of the D.C. chapter of NTA.  And that's been around for a long time.  And Debbie [Carruthers; wife] also knows about that.
Story_ID: 29232
Speaker 1: When you think about the black community today, what are some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, the only concern that I have is we can't find enough who are interested in science and engineering, but aside from that, certainly, we try to help the students and the teachers the best we can.  Education and public outreach is what the National Technical Association [NTA] is about, and as you may know, the National Technical Association was the first black organization in the United States, which included as far as California.
Story_ID: 29233
Speaker 1: Tell me now, when you look back on everything you've done in life to this point, up until today, what today would you consider yourself to be most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, I really couldn't say specifically.  Of course, the fact that we sent something to the moon is probably one of the obvious ones, but other than that I don't know of anything that's specific about anything that I built or provided or taught.
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be our legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Of course, as I mentioned at the beginning, some of the people like Wernher von Braun [german scientist who influences Carruthers' interest in space science] back in the 1950s were one of the things that got me up to speed, but as far as African Americans are concerned, most of that was mostly in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] that I was involved in.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back at your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of right now because, the problem, of course, is that we needed help from other people, not just ourselves because the bigger and better things are, the more people that's needed to keep them up to speed.  And they advertise things over a broader area.  So basically, most of what we've been doing is in local schools, rather than trying to do over a very broad area because the National Technical Association [NTA], D.C. chapter is primarily a D.C. chapter organization, with few suburbs around it.
Story_ID: 29234
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have children?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, none, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and you recently remarried, right, or you got married again recently?
Speaker 2: Well, quite a while ago, my former wife was, passed away, so I hadn't done anything since then.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you just got married four months ago, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it's more than that.  It was 19--it was 2001, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Story_ID: 29235
Speaker 1: What advice would you give young people today about being a scientist?  What advice would you give them?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, they have to know that science and engineering and mathematics are important topics that they can do at grade level as well as at higher levels, and also to show them what those particular topics are for, and why it's good to do things that they might be interested in.  But we also have to show them some pictures and other things because just telling somebody something in school is not capable enough because they can always go to sleep (laughter) and talk to others, all that kind of stuff.  But if we have some good pictures to show something flying in space, they spend more time looking and seeing what it does.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that we need more visual and more stimulation, more physical stimulation to teach--
Speaker 2: Right, and things that they can do by themselves to--
Speaker 1: Okay, hands-on activities and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, of course, we can't use them with rockets because that's hazardous to kids.  But we've been taking them to White Sands Missile Range [New Mexico] to see some of the stuff that we launch at White Plains Missile Range from a distance, in the past.
Story_ID: 29236
Speaker 1: Now do you have a scientific philosophy you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, science and engineering are things that are topics that have a very broad usage and something that even the general public should know something about, you know, like when you drive a car too fast or look at the sky--at the sun too brightly or you know, those kinds of things that the general public don't know about unless you tell them.  And also, getting students to get interested in science and engineering at lower grades than in the past.  They can start out with elementary school as well as high school and college.  So the National Technical Association really includes a lot of different things in education and public outreach.
Story_ID: 29237
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that I haven't asked you about that you think we ought to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, one of the things that I feel is important and most of our members of the National Technical Association [NTA], including the person here, we all work together on trying to get parents, teachers and students in the education and public outreach.  Those are our topics of education that we work on.  So science and engineering are very important topics.  Not everybody wants to do them, but at least we want to make sure that students have the opportunities to make use of them if we can.
Story_ID: 29238
Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly, not by the police (laughter), but I don't know of anyone that I would say that, except my family members, of course, I want to keep them, but I don't really know of any particular thing that I need to, you know, put in that topic (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I think you'll be remembered as an inventor, I think, and as a contributor to science.  So thank you very much for-
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29239
Speaker 1: Tell us about the International Space Station and what you think of its significance?
Speaker 2: Well, the International Space Station is a relatively new piece of equipment which is about 300 miles above the Earth's surface, but goes around the Earth every day.  And it works in a way that you can see almost everything in space, to the same degree as you could much further out into space because you're outside of the Earth' atmosphere.  But on the other hand, you're close enough to the Earth that it's easier to get things in and out from other spaces.  And it's very broad in topic.  It includes not only the United States, but also the Russian space program as well, working together, and if you look into the program that's in the, programs that are on TV, you can see that it's almost like a big city, almost--not quite as big as D.C., but it's certainly big city now, with--in the space station that's above 300 miles above the Earth's surface but going around every day.  In fact, they even had some programs in which they talked to the students in high school and middle schools during the daytime when they flew over schools.  So even the teachers and the students can have information, not just scientists.
Speaker 1: Okay, so schools can actually communicate directly with the space station?
Speaker 2: Yes, if they fly over the right school, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the schools would have like a schedule, a way to contact the, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of knowing when the station is flying above.
Story_ID: 29240
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit more about National Technical Association [NTA] too.
Speaker 2: Well, the National Technical Association is the first African American organization in the United States, and it was first started out quite a long time ago.  It covers all of D.C., not just--all of the United States, not just D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia]  We have chapters from California all the way up to Florida.  And, of course, it was originally planned for black students in science and engineering and, because back in the old days, they didn't have that kind of support from white people.  And now the National Technical Association is broadly covered.  We have meetings here in D.C. the last quarter of each month.  And we have a chapter right next to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and we talk about education and public outreach for the teachers as well as the parents and the students.  The National Technical Association itself has been around for a long time for African Americans everywhere in the United States.  And we're in the D.C. chapter which is up at Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29241
Speaker 1: You wanna tell us about SMART [Science, Mathematics, Aerospace Research and Technology, Inc.; non-profit organization]?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, SMART is actually very similar to the National Technical Association [NTA].  Dr. Valerie Thomas is the head of that, and I've also been part in that as well.  And actually, the two organizations work together to a large extent.  There are some differences between them, but I think that what Valerie Thomas with SMART and what the National Technical Association at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] work together, to make things good for the students and their parents.
Story_ID: 29242
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Venus Transit Program that took place at Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] in 2004.  That's in conjunction with the physics department at Howard University with Dr. Venable in the physics department, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Well, actually Venus transits are something that have been more than just once.  In fact, there have been Venus transits more recently as well as 2004, and there were some that were much older that crossed in D.C. as well, even before that.  But for the general public, they might want to know it was a transit.  And what that means is that there's a planet, Venus, which goes around the sun, just like the Earth goes around the sun, but Venus is closer to the sun than the Earth is.  So every once in a while, Venus transit means it passes in front of the Earth, with the sun on the other side.  And you see the big ball as the sun, which is bright, and you see a small black ball, which is Venus.  Venus is almost the same size as the Earth, but not nearly as big as the sun.  So that's why you see this big white ball with the dark little ball, going across.  And those, the general public can see that if they have the equipment to do it.  You don't wanna look at the sun directly at any time with your eyes, but if you equipment that keeps you from getting sunburn in your eyes, you can also see this planet crossing over.  So that's one of the general public kinds of things you can do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually set up a telescope at Howard [University] to observe this Venus transit, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so was it broadcast so the students could see it or--
Speaker 2: Well, we tried to send the public, and especially to the university, we didn't get a whole lot of people who came, but in any case, it was something that anyone who was interested could have seen because this Venus Transit was not the first one.  We've had previous ones as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so whenever Venus makes that transit from, between the sun and the Earth, you're able to observe, you know, at Howard, the students are able to observe it?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the things that I'm interested in seeing, as you probably have heard, they sent a spacecraft to Mars recently--not with astronauts, of course, but they had robotic vehicles on their spacecraft, which could do almost everything astronauts could do.  And they could take pictures that they send to the Earth on radio.  And it would be interesting to see one of those transits go between the Earth and Mars, which nobody has done yet.
Story_ID: 29243
Speaker 1: All right, now, tell us about NTA's [National Technical Association] annual mathematics contest?
Speaker 2: Well, that's something that we do each year, usually, the last Tuesday of--
Speaker 1: [Voice of Debbie Carruthers; wife]: The math contest, you know, the contest where we have the students come in and take the math contest and Lester Clemmons [member and past president of NTA] is the chairman of it.
Speaker 2: And that's usually held in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia]  We used to do it in the suburbs, but we decided that we--best to do it focused in D.C. itself because it was kind of hard to, you know, get all of these different schools and teachers to come together.  And these are from all grades of students and also the teachers as well and parents too can participate in some of this.  But this, the program where we have inner--contests for students who get high grades.  They get money either for being the highest grade in whatever course they were in and things like that.  So that's something that the NTA does every year.
