Story_ID: 312491
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, our videographer today is Scott Stearns, and we don't have any observers, but we do thank you for allowing us to come into your space and talk with you about our program.  The HistoryMakers was launched in 1999.  It's an African American video, oral history archival project.  It's the brain child of Julieanna Richardson.  And her base is in Chicago [Illinois] and that's where the permanent archive is right now.  But we hope through the use of the most modern of technologies to make the collection available to a wider audience using the world wide web at selected research centers across the country, so it won't just be the folks in the Midwest who benefit ultimately, it'll be folks in the global community, so thanks for being a part of that.
Speaker 2: I'm honored.
Speaker 1: Just would like to get started by asking you to please state your name, your first, middle name, if you have one, and your last name, and spell each of the three.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Johnny Wesely Coleman, and Johnny is J-O-H-N-N-Y, Wesely W-E-S-E-L-Y, and Coleman C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And, [HistoryMaker] Professor [Johnny] Coleman, would you also state your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor of art and Afro-American studies at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And where is Oberlin College located?
Speaker 2: We are in northeast Ohio about forty minutes west of Cleve, Cleveland [Ohio].  I was about to say Cleburg [ph.] from an old buddy (laughter).  Just west of Cleveland and about fifteen minutes south of the lake, Lake Erie.
Speaker 1: And would you state also for the record today's date?
Speaker 2: January 12, 2005.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 312492
Speaker 1: Now we like to get started by asking several People magazine-ish type questions.  So, well I'd like to ask first of all, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red (laughter).  So I love your hat I weren't kidding, red (laughter).
Speaker 1: For the record, I'm wearing a red hat.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Gosh, probably summer 'cause summer is when I get to play, (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how about a favorite food?
Speaker 2: From the West Coast, it's gonna be between Roscoe's [House of] Chicken and Waffles [Los Angeles, California] and downtown at La Luz Del Dia [Los Angeles, California].  So between soul food and Mexican food it's all soul food to me.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: God, my studio, (laughter) the ocean, anywhere I can find the ocean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how about a favorite saying or motto?
Speaker 2: What just jumped into my head is, son, experience is an excellent teacher but a lousy surgeon.  It leaves too many scars.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you, very much.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 312493
Speaker 1: But would you please tell us the names of your parents and also spell their names as you did your own?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My pop is John Hoover Coleman, and it's J-O-H-N, and Hoover is H-O-O-V-E-R, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.  And my mother is Florence Wilma McCoy, and Florence, F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, Wilma, W-I-L-M-A, McCoy, M big C, little C, my mistake, M, little C, big C, O-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was home?  Where'd you grow up?
Speaker 2: I grew up just east of Los Angeles [California], about forty minutes east of Los Angeles by the way we drove, at the base of the San Bernardino Mountains in a little town called Redlands, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I suppose before we let you grow up we should allow you to be born.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Would you like to tell us where you were born and when?
Speaker 2: I was born in '58 [1958], January of '58 [1958], in a little tiny town outside of Boston [Massachusetts] called Saugus, Massachusetts.  I don't even know if the town is still there.  The hospital is definitely not there anymore.  And lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] for six months, and then my father took a position at Patton State Hospital [Department of State Hospitals-Patton, San Bernardino, California] as a counselor some time in '59 [1959], I guess, and California has been home ever since, even though I've been out here for a little while.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: California is home.
Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Got one brother, David [McCoy] and he lives just outside of Oakland [California] in Fremont, California.  And no sisters, he's my only brother.
Speaker 1: Is he younger or older than you?
Speaker 2: He's three years younger.  He's also a counselor and he's got three boys and a gorgeous wife and they're running amuck (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the immediate family included four people?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 312494
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandparents or great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: Great-grandparents I never met.  My grandparents on my mother's [Florence McCoy Coleman] side, David McCoy and David Wesely McCoy, I'm named, the Wesely is after him.  And my grandmother was Francis [Francis McCoy], and everybody called her Fannie [ph.], and gosh I don't know or I should know but I'm just not remembering my grandmother's maiden name on my mother's side right now, so Fannie McCoy which is what she went by.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, did you wanna know what I remember about them or--
Speaker 1: Well sure.
Speaker 2: My grandfather grew up without knowing his father, grew up outside of his family and was raised by folks who took him in between Boston [Massachusetts] and Lynn [Massachusetts], and for a period of time by a man, relative, who is Chinicot [ph.], who helped to raise him as well.  So he's just a old school black Yankee, part West Indian but he considered himself a black Yankee, and just a self-made brother, boy.  He, he got blown through a plate glass window working at a chemical company in the mid-'20s [1920s], he was the sole survivor.  The man who had been standing next to him was in pieces on the sidewalk across the street from the, from the building where my grandfather woke up, then he spent the next, I believe, three years in a hospital and had the first plastic surgery in, in Massachusetts done on him.  He spent all of that time lying on his stomach because the work was done on his back.  And he worked from that point after healing, he worked for White's Laundry [ph.].  And just a streetwise, old school gentleman, knock you through a brick wall.  And he rose to become the vice president of AFL-CIO Laundry Workers [AFL-CIO Laundry and Dry Cleaning International Union] in America.  You know, just straight up mother wit.  My grandmother just cool, cool people.  Her family is out of Virginia.  And she and my grandfather were married for over fifty years and nothing but fond memories of both of them.  Grandma was as cool as it got.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that was my experience of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did they meet in Massachusetts or did they know each other--
Speaker 2: As far as I know, they met in this little tiny hamlet, at the time it was tiny, just outside of Boston called Lynn, it's an old industrial manufacturing town about eighteen miles outside of Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they tell you any stories ever about how they came to live in that part of the country?
Speaker 2: They probably did but I don't remember how it was.  I think my grandmother had been there all along and I think my grandfather, though he was raised to my knowledge in Boston, Lynn came to be his home, he was working at this, this chemical company was actually in Lynn when, when he survived that explosion.  Lynn was an all working-class shoe manufacturing town and just manufacturing across several different industries.  But a little tiny town.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And those are your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Maternal.  Paternal, my grandmother, Beulah Harrison Coleman is my heart.  She's just my heart.  And although I grew up on the West Coast and she lived out her life at 31 Holyoke [Street, Boston, Massachusetts] after having come up from Choccolocco, Alabama.  I, I don't know why but I just had a real strong connection to her.  And she told me all kinds of stuff about our family.  Her husband, my grandfather [Andrew Larken Coleman], I met, whew, as an infant, I have no memory of him really, I've seen pictures.  My father [John Coleman] hasn't talked much about his father.  He came up from Georgia, they got married, I think he was from Valdosta [Georgia], so it's not too far from where my grandmother was from.  And they got married on my grandmother's father's front lawn and they took the train after dinner that night to Boston where the family stayed with an older sibling.  And the oldest of my uncles in my father's family was born in a hospital and the rest of the family were all born upstairs (unclear) 31 Holyoke, just old school country girl style.  She baked every morning, got up at five, did the laundry, baked bread every day, had those country breakfasts, huge big slices of ham that, well bacon that might as well be ham, you know.  And was just a woman who never raised her voice but, you know, could move mountains with just the force of her personality, and brilliant and great sense of humor. Cool people.
Story_ID: 312495
Speaker 1: Were both your parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] from large families?
Speaker 2: My father had one sister and three brothers, has, but his sister passed but three brothers are still living so that was a family of six.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Larken [Andrew Coleman] is the oldest.  Amy Easter [Coleman Simpson-Watkins], Sam [Samuel Harrison Coleman], my father is John, and then [Andrew] Larken [Coleman], my, my grandfather and Beulah [Harrison Coleman], my grandmother.  On my mother's side, boy, in addition to my grandparents, my mother is the oldest, so Flozie [ph.] (unclear), the oldest.  She left this world in May of '93 [1993], I'm sorry, May of 2003.  Then there is Elaine [ph.], my other mother, then Ann [ph.], my other, other mother, and then Davita [ph.], my sister, then David, my brother, David McCoy, not David Coleman.  And so that's a family of seven.  So, you know, I hadn't thought of them as large families but, yeah.
Story_ID: 312496
Speaker 1: In the household where you grew up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was it just immediate family or was there always the presence of the extended family or the heart, your heart (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother [Beulah Harrison Coleman]--
Speaker 1: --or your grandmother that you mentioned before?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she came out to California, to my knowledge, once.  We made trips back there.  But it was primarily the, just the, the, you know, that, that core family, just my, you know, the family of four, parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] and my brother [David McCoy] and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what are some of the earliest memories that you have from your childhood?
Speaker 2: Orange grove fights.  We grew up one house over from the orange groves.  And the orange groves ran for about thirty miles, thirty square miles into a, a dry river bed, the Santa Ana River, which we called The Wash, and that's right at the foot hills of the San Bernardino Mountain ranges, it goes up to Alpine [California].  And the neighborhood, primarily African, working-class African American, Mexican-American, and a couple of Filipino, and one white family that was there as well.  We just ran amuck, you know.  And the orange grove man was the, was the, the manager, he didn't own it but we gave him grief, much grief, you know, the man shot at us with, with shotguns loaded with salt, you know.  I don't remember getting hit, I'm sure I would have remembered if I got hit (laughter).  I remember going into the groves with BB guns as, you know, we got around eleven, twelve years old.  I remember that at one point the, the City of Redlands [California] took a portion of the orange groves and knocked down maybe two or three acres and then the men from that neighborhood all joined together and helped to build a park at the corner of Texas [Street] and Lugonia Street [sic. Lugonia Avenue], so they called that Texonia Park.  And softball were in there, some basketball courts, so we shot a lot of twenty-one and, you know, pickup games there.  And then some swings and a little merry-go-round, I guess, the one that turns around.  I remember lizards, horny toad lizards, so they look like little dinosaurs, triceratops.  I remember pulling catfish out of the irrigation ditches.  Redlands is hot, it's, it's semiarid.  And so they had a reservoir on the other side of town which would irrigate orange groves all over town.  And catfish would come through those irrigation pipes and get caught in the, in the, in the irrigation ditches.  And sometimes, you know, on a hot summer day the water gets real, real low and these catfish would refuse to die and they're kicking in the mud and just real resilient.  So I remember reaching in and trying to catch catfish or seeing catfish and being real impressed with catfish that had, you know, 12, 13, 14, and 16, 18 inches larger, you know, and to a little kid that's pretty huge.  I remember the first time I shot a bird, haven't done that since, you know.  Young guy, I guess, twelve (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why'd you shoot the bird?
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Stupidity.  Yeah, there's no other way to put it, just see if I could with a BB gun.  I'm not proud of it, it's a long time ago but I remember it, it's, it's just something that just always kind of marked me and felt like I, I owed something for having done that for no reason.  What else do I remember?  I remember early on, my younger brother's real sharp but my parents made sure that both of us could read before we went to school.  I remember early on my younger brother when he was in either kindergarten or first grade, probably first grade, and I would have been in fourth grade, his teacher slapping him because she had asked who could come up to the front of the room and write their name on the board, of three young black kids in the class with primarily white kids in the rest of the class, he was the only one who walked up to the front and, you know, just no big deal wrote out D-A-V-I-D period, and she slapped him.  She was so shocked that he had the audacity and the confidence to be the one to do it.  So that's something that stood out.
Speaker 1: And how was that dealt with?
Speaker 2: I don't think she ever slapped anybody again.  My parents handled that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Made a phone call and went down and had a conversation, I remember the woman's name to this day, you know, and she didn't do it to me, it was to my brother.  So that, that's another memory.
Story_ID: 312497
Speaker 1: Well we're already into school days.
Speaker 2: Oops (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, (laughter) and I didn't ask about kindergarten at all (laughter).  But, but there are a lot of memories obviously that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're willing to share with us.  But if you can talk about your entry into school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, and talk about some of the pleasant, and if you want unpleasant experiences in your school days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, of course, if you wanna share more about your brother [David McCoy] that's fine, too.
Speaker 2: Um--
Speaker 1: Remember the first school you attended?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to right now.  Kindergarten, where'd I go to kindergarten?  Oh, brother.  It might have been at Franklin [Elementary School, Redlands, California], it probably was at Franklin, which is, Redlands [California] is a small college town and at the time it was about thirty-two thousand folks.  And by the time I was in third grade Franklin got shut down for a little while because California has a lot of earthquakes, we had an earthquake and they had to do some renovation.  I remember nothing about kindergarten.  I probably liked it.  I remember being a really creative kid.  And my parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] who, you know, were both, you know, children of the [Great] Depression era and working class, poor, really poor families, and the fact that both of them, my father's through the GI Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] had gotten money for school and my mother was the first person in her family period to go to school and just mother wit and grit.  So education was real important to them and they did everything they could to expose myself and my brother to a whole lot, a lot of range.  And I think they recognized that, you know, I, I was a creative kid and probably a little odd, you know, and they did everything they could to support that.  I remember Time-Life books being in the house and as I said, having learned and being really encouraged to read.  School, I remember nothing about kindergarten, probably had a lot of fun with drawing and, and painting but to be honest I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How about some of the other early grades, any special teachers whose names you can recall?
Speaker 2: Nothing positive (laughter).  Nothing positive, not, not early on, no.
Speaker 1: Well why is that?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it was just the matter of my school experience was uninspired or that I was inattentive or that my heart was really in music and in art and school just it was hard to figure out how that was gonna be anything interesting to me.  I read all the time.  My parents had me swimming, you know, and I was really resistant to that initially 'cause neither of them swam.  But school, first grade, I remember nothing.  I remember that I wasn't the only black in the class.  I remember that there were two or three others and folks that I knew, maybe even a few more than that, and then, of course, Mexican kids, but I always remember that we were treated, all of us were treated very differently.  I remember in, I guess, it was third grade, I had a teacher who was very young and fresh from the South and I mean even to a young third grade black kid it was very apparent that she didn't expect anything of myself or any of the rest of us.  And so I just really, school was not a spot that, that had real positive experiences for me.  You know, probably art but I don't remember having any art classes past maybe third or fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Story_ID: 312498
Speaker 1: Well can we talk about third grade then?  At, at least get the crayons somewhere (laughter) in this story.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Because ultimately someone inspired you to become an artist.
Speaker 2: Ah, well--
Speaker 1: I'd just like to know who that someone was.
Speaker 2: My parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman].  And it wasn't, it wasn't in terms of drawing although my father probably had, between both of my parents they had all the drawings that I'd done either in their office, my mother was a social worker and they both really had that kind of background.  And I, I think, my parents encouraged me but really the thing that got me to art was just storytelling, you know.  And it's just a narrative thing and reading and having like I said Time Life books around which included the arts but European masters, Charlie White was at the barbershop, his calendars.  He was on the cover of Jet magazine, he was doing illustrations in Ebony.  We had all of those magazines.
Speaker 1: Charles [Wilbert] White--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --who was married to [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.
Speaker 2: Liz Catlett, exactly.
Speaker 1: Charlie White.
Speaker 2: Charlie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That was, that for me, that was art, you know, outside of Michelangelo that I had no connection to other than Time Life books and, you know, appealing paintings.  Charlie White, that was it.  But I never dreamed that that was a, a livelihood, it was, you know, something that I would do for the rest of my life, and I didn't for many, many years.  I was, it's much later in the story when that started.  So where in school that art became a focus and became something that was clear, never.  School was not a place that happened.  I didn't take art classes beyond, you know, compulsory drawing and painting, finger painting, whatever, around third grade [at Franklin Elementary School, Redlands, California] and maybe returning for specialized projects later, through maybe sixth grade but no memory of any of that, you know.
Story_ID: 312499
Speaker 1: Well you said your parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] encouraged you to read--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that you enjoyed art and music.  Was there a lot of music in your home as well?
Speaker 2: All the time.  All the time.  And my parents' range was real wide from just roll your eyes back music that just like bored the hell out of me, to jazz which gave me an instant headache and, no longer so, you know, it's my heart, to [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, to Mexican folk songs to blues, back to popular music and my father played a lot of stuff that was just boring, (laughter) I love him but that that stuff was just boring, but music was always there.  And I grew up, and like I said this, we had to, we lived initially in North Redlands [Redlands, California] which was really working class and then moved later to a more working class, middle-class neighborhood across town.  But in that first neighborhood I remember very early on, brothers from the neighborhood, both black and Mexican-American, who had a little garage band around the corner and I remember being awed by the two vocalists, by the, the guitars, the basses, the drums, oh, the whole nine, and the music just caught me from early on.  And a, a young brother that I grew up with Joey Means [ph.], master, master musician, played piano, and played trombone and, you know.  His family was friends with our family.  And Joey's like brilliance as a musician always affected me.  Marty Hill [ph.] is a guitarist who, you know, I grew up his family and he was just a couple years older, maybe a year older than me, he was another inspiration.  And my best friend Butchie [ph.], he, he, you know, played an instrument, you know, forced in school, and just music was all around us in the neighborhood.  (Unclear) it was just a constant presence, everywhere, all the time.
Speaker 1: And did you have a favorite style early on?
Speaker 2: Early on before the Jackson 5, which was early on for me too, it was what those brothers were playing in the garage around the corner at Mr. Carrera's [ph.] house, you know.  And they played everything from The [Rolling] Stones that you wouldn't recognize 'cause they, they put their own flavor in it.  So I remember, 'For Your Love' ['For Your Precious Love'], '['(I Can't Get No)] Satisfaction.'  I remember a lot of Isley Brothers that they played.  I remember some blues that they played.  Joey was a jazz master and a classical master, so I remember him early on explaining counterpoint to me, I couldn't explain it now but he made it make sense to me way back.  What I loved was, way early on, was the Isley Brothers.  Gosh, oh, [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, absolutely Ramsey Lewis, 'Hang on Sloopy' and all of that stuff, way, way, way back in the day.  And my mother's favorite was Abbey Lincoln, so I remember that.  Nina Simone, Lady Day [Billie Holiday] was my personal favorite and remains.  And then my mother and I later on shared a favorite with Joe Williams 'cause that brother can blow, straight up.  And then later on I got to turn my mother on, but this is much later, to Andy Bey and it's just (making a sound).  Remember the bass, Andy and the Bey Sisters [Salome Bey and HistoryMaker Geraldine de Haas] out of Newark, New Jersey, phenomenal, phenomenal.  Sarah Vaughan, if I didn't say Sarah, all of that goes way back.
Story_ID: 313910
Speaker 1: Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], you described for us the sights of the, the orange groves--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I think you said thirty square miles (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's at least, at least.
Speaker 1: --of orange groves in [Redlands] California.  And the sights of sometimes catfish--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --jumping in the irrigation ditches--
Speaker 2: Oh, no question.
Speaker 1: --and the sounds of the various styles of music.  But can you tell us about some of the smells that you associate with growing up in California?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I remember unbelievable crisp, crisp, clean air and winter being cold and cold can go anywhere from the teens in winter to, you know, a 110 degrees in the summer.  But the smells that I remember are those orange blossoms, it's amazing, amazing.  Honeysuckle, just unbelievably fragrant.  Red clay drying, red clay drying or mud drying.  Grass, the smell of grass, you know, cutting lawns for folks, pulling weeds for folks.  And the man who lived next door to us on the right, Mr. Washington [ph.], cut lawns for a living so, you know, although he'd go to the dinner table sharp, you know, he went to work in overalls every day.  And I remember the same truck so, the sound of the truck starting in the morning.  The sound of lawn mowers.  And then I, I clearly remember a point as a real young person talking about, you know, probably ten, eleven, when the smog got really bad in California and up against those mountains it'd go up real high.  And then coming off the ocean in Los Angeles [California] and there would be an onshore breeze that would push the smog from L.A. and then from Pomona [California] and El Monte [California] and Covina [California] and San Bernardino [California], Riverside [California], Colton [California], all up against those [San Bernardino] Mountains, but because of the heat you get an inversion layer, so the smog would build up and get denser and denser and denser.  So I remember going from like these crystalline blue skies and being able to play outside all day and run and run and run, to a point early on where it would hurt to take a breath and you can smell the smog and it just has, it has this kind of yellow-brown haze, makes pretty sunsets but it was nasty.  I remember the smell of that and the taste of that.  Something else that I remember with all those orange groves was smudge pots.  Now what a smudge pot is, is the oranges if they drop, if the temperature drops for more than, I don't remember if it was two or four hours below thirty-two degrees, so if they get to thirty they have to heat those oranges otherwise they lose a crop.  So the smudge pots are these oil burning like heaters that are dispersed throughout the orange groves.  And then there are these tall windmills that take the heaters, the young men would light and they'd go out at about two in the morning and they'd work for the rest of the morning until about five or six and they'd light these smudge pots and then those fans would come on and that would blow the rising heat back through the trees to try to keep the temperatures down.  I remember the smell of the smudge pots.  And in California, you know, it's a, it's, you know, everybody's got a car or motorcycle, so.  I remember the smell of, you know, the cars.  You know, it's something that's separate from the smell of the, of the smog.  But also I grew up in the swimming pool so I remember chlorine.  We all did, which it's hot so in the summertime we'd get to the Plunge [Sylvan Park, Redlands, California], it would be, I grew up me and Butchie [ph.] and my brother [David McCoy] grew up in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] swimming pool.  So I, I remember the smell of chlorine.
Speaker 1: Was that an outdoor pool?
Speaker 2: The Plunge was at a park downtown, Sylvan Plunge, and that was an outdoor pool.  The YMCA, the one that I really grew up in was an indoor pool, yeah.
Speaker 1: I was about to say you're, you seem to have been quite the outdoors man--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --with the oranges, I don't suppose you were throwing those indoors, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, we, we threw down though.  We, we ate, we ate, I mean, this is--there's two different oranges, the Valencia that grows at one period of time and then the, the navels that, if I'm remembering correctly, grow right around January, December, January.  And we like, we were terrors, we ate so many of those things, and we threw them, you know, we threw 'em outside but we, yeah, we were throwing all the time.
Story_ID: 313911
Speaker 1: Well are there any special holiday meals that you remember the smells of those at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Family get-togethers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I would say sitting down, my mother [Florence McCoy Coleman] would cook a pot of either pig knuckles or pig feet and she'd pop a bay leaf in and then it's a pressure cooker, my mom did a lot of cooking in the pressure cooker, and she taught me to cook real early.  But a smell I remember early on is the smell of that bay leaf in the pressure cooker when those, those pig feet are coming up and popping that lid off of there.  I haven't eaten them since I was seventeen years old but I love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd be lying--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know, so I remember that.
Story_ID: 313912
Speaker 1: Well you've talked about some of the institutions that were important (cough), or at least present.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The schools were there if they weren't pleasant, pleasant places to be they were present in your life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there other institutions, fraternal or benevolent associations that your parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] belonged to?  Were you active in the church?
Speaker 2: We went to church but I was, they had to force me to go, me and my brother [David McCoy] we'd rather be out in groves or in the canyon running.  And there were two churches in the town, First Baptist [Church of Redlands, Redlands, California] and Second Baptist [Church of Redlands, Redlands, California], go back and forth between the two of them but Second Baptist more rarely than First Baptist and it's, it's First Baptist was more like a, just everybody was there.  Second Baptist was a black church.  If I could get out of church I got out of church, period.  But there was a neighborhood association in the neighborhood and, and on the north side of Redlands [California] and for the whole time that my mother was there and throughout, my father lives in Riverside [California] now but still has a home, still has the home we grew up in on the north side and the home we grew up on the other side, and he's remained active with many of the folks there in the neighborhood and my mother was very much a part of a group of women, I'm trying to remember the name of it, that was there in Redlands but it was a neighbors association.  It wasn't anything formal, it wasn't about property owners who, you know, trying to keep folks out or, or, you know, had particular formulas for the way you were supposed to keep your yard.  It was really about getting scholarships for kids, helping with books at high school, and putting tuition together for folks who were gonna go to college.  They'd have social gatherings.  It was really about a support system for folks from the north side.  And as I said, they were, they were in that all of my life in Redlands.  And the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association (Y)] that was like, that was my thing.  My father was, was on and off the board there.  And I grew up in the Y, I went to Y camp, a lot of kids that I grew up with were there.  My buddy and I went to camp up until, you know, we stopped going.
Speaker 1: As teenagers?
Speaker 2: I think probably 13, 14 years old, yeah, yeah.  I ended up being a counselor, a counselor-in-training, I don't remember if I went to counselor, I ended up being a lifeguard up there so I must have been 15 or 16 by then.  But yeah, there was more of just really smaller, closer to home.  They, my parents, were involved with NASW, National Association of Social Workers and the Urban League.  That didn't have an impact on me other than y'all gon' be gone, cool (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What are we gonna get in to?
Speaker 1: No Junior Leaguers (laughter) there in your community?
Speaker 2: I don't remember being involved with it.  But my parents' engagement, and my mother was, I don't remember what the sorority was, gosh I should but I don't remember what it was, and she, she maintained an involvement with that.  And there were, some black folks who were also social workers that was, were extended family with us, along with a whole bunch of other folks.  But I remember growing up with the Smiths [ph.] two different families of the Smiths in San Bernardino [California] and Clarence [ph.]and Colin Smith [ph.] and Ivan [ph.] and, and Colleen [ph.], Colleen being a, a filmmaker now, Colleen Smith.  And I remember growing up with them and, and, you know, always kind of maintaining an extended family and, and doing a lot of things together, going to the, to Yosemite [National Park, California], going to the desert, and doing that also with folks from the neighborhood that we grew up in, yeah, yeah.  Then a gang of black folks out there in San Clemente [California].  You know, San Clemente, it was a beach and it's in Orange County [California], so a gang of black folks showing up to San Clemente (laughter).
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was different, and we had a great time.
Story_ID: 313913
Speaker 1: Do you have any special memories about your high school years [at Redlands High School, Redlands, California]--
Speaker 2: Hmm (laughter).
Speaker 1: --in California?  Were they--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --hopefully a little more pleasant than (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: --the early years?
Speaker 2: My high school years, the pleasant part was turning in timecards from work and going to athletics.  In terms of in the classroom, I, I was probably a very poor student.  I didn't take any art in high school or junior high.  My memories of high school were the dances, beautiful women, good food, (laughter) a car, motorcycle, going to work, making money, and going to athletics and running track 'cause then, and well I also was a kick boxer doing a lot of fighting.  But my memories of high school are primarily track, you know, and going all over the state and running and invitationals and the mile relay and the four time high jump and quarter mile and hurdling.
Speaker 1: So you were good at those things?
Speaker 2: I was all right.  It was, it was a long time ago.  Now I limp up the stairs (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you're smiling at it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.  I had a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a great time.  In fact, I, somehow my parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] as I said were very committed to education and they required my brother [David McCoy] and I to go to summer school through many of our summers and being, being an inattentive student who really didn't place a lot of premium on what was going on in the classroom and my teachers didn't inspire me or the majority of the people in the classrooms, to do so, I still managed to stumble into graduating, having the credits to graduate in my, at the end of my junior year in high school.  And I remember having my father, who was then dean of admissions at University of California at Riverside [Riverside, California], had me sit down with a brother, J.C. [ph.], I think it's, I cannot remember his last name but I remember J.C., brother offered me a cigarette, you know, Pops is in the next room, it's like just you and me brother, come on let's sit down, let's talk about getting you into college and I remember telling him, I'm not interested, you know, I'd rather go back and, you know, enjoy my senior year on the track team and I've got all kinds of partners that are in college, if I wanna go party I will go to their parties, you know, college is not an interest for me.  I was lousy (laughter) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No this is--
Speaker 2: It's, but it was, it was what my experience was.  It just, school was not something that drew me.  My experiences, my memories of high school were really social and, you know, my awkwardness as just coming through my adolescence, my peers, trying to be as cool as I could be.  I don't think I was, we were all bright kids really.  We were all bright kids.  I remember having an African American geometry teacher, I believe, in either tenth or eleventh grade, and he was cool.  He was really cool.  Right off the block in San Bernardino [California].  But he was not an inspired teacher and I came out of geometry, I came out of algebra, knowing very little geometry or algebra and as a carpenter I can use that stuff.  You know, I've learned how to do what I need to do in terms of building and designing.  But my memories of high school are really about the way in which we, we learned to socialize and really trying to grow to just have a kind of fluency in, in the neighborhood, in the streets, in the schoolyard and on the track and with my hands and my feet.
Story_ID: 313914
Speaker 1: Now you said your, the home that you grew up in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is still in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe that street that you lived on--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and the house you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Sure.  It's, we lived at 1334 Frances Street [Redlands, California] and as you turned in off of, I believe, Sharon [Road] onto Frances Street, on one corner is Mr. Taylor [ph.] who drove a truck and his wife and their two boys and one, one daughter who was gorgeous.  Across the street were the Acquieles [ph.] and they were Filipino and Mexican.  Tommy [ph.] and Michael [ph.] both crazy, gifted, brilliant cats but both crazy.  Next door to them were the Harrisons [ph.] and Amanda [ph.] and Leroy [ph.] and Reggie [ph.] and Roland [ph.], all good friends grew up with them.  Next door to them, unless I'm missing a house, Mitchell [ph.] and Michael Curtis [ph.] and their older Donna [ph.], Dotty [ph.], older sister, Bonnie [ph.], and the parents.  And then ourselves.  And I designed the house we're living in now and without realizing it, the bedroom that my brother [David McCoy] and I grew up in, is exactly the room, exactly the room that my brother, my son lives in now, his bedroom.  The house in the backyard had a pomegranate tree, guava tree, two lemon trees or one lemon, one lime, a pepper tree.  Small backyard, brick, and then over one fence were the Curtises [ph.], over the other fence were the, were the Washingtons [ph.].  And the, over the back fence, the brick fence was my buddy, Butchie Demeries [ph.].  And directly behind our house were the Jordans [ph.].  I remember it very well, very well.  Um--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was a brick house?
Speaker 2: The house was--
Speaker 1: --or was just the brick fence?
Speaker 2: --it was the brick fence out back.
Speaker 1: Fence, okay.
Speaker 2: Kind of concrete block brick.  The house was stucco, out in California we have a lot of stucco houses.  And it was a small house, I don't remember the square foots, I didn't pay attention to that stuff back then.  But I think it was three bedrooms.  We used one of the bedrooms as, as a TV room, den, small kitchen, and my parents' [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] room, my brother's room, and that's it.
Story_ID: 313915
Speaker 1: When you graduated from high school [Redlands High School, Redlands, California] then at seventeen?
Speaker 2: I convinced my father [John Coleman] that I was gonna stay--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --for senior year.  I did run my, my varsity year at high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a great time.  I was not in classes.  I, I was through with class.  The way I was able to kind of trick my father into this is he did not know that as a lifeguard I had already had first aid.  So my thing was, Pop I really wanna stay, his thing was if you stay you have to take college prep classes at the junior college, which I did and I did very well.  And, you know, those were much more inspiring than high school was.  But I told him that I didn't have first aid.  I knew full well I had first aid, I was a lifeguard (laughter) but I told him I didn't.  And somewhere along the line in there I took first aid in my first, in my senior year of high school.  The rest of it, I did not go to any classes, I turned in my timecards, just work study and I went to track, athletics, that's all I did.
Speaker 1: Now where were you working?
Speaker 2: I worked at Redlands Community College--Redlands Community Hospital [Redlands, California] as a cook.  I worked in the kitchen, started as a dishwasher and delivering trays.  Started that, yeah, I think in my first year of high school.  And then I cooked all along so they had me, I, I got promoted to cook one of, one of the cooks, you know, just cooking what they told us to cook.  But folks like, I put my own little flavor in it whenever I could get away with it and they all told me it was great.  I was working there and then later I, still at the hospital, I worked as a janitor, did that for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: So were you still taking the community college courses while you were working?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Full time at the hospital?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was that toward the fine arts degree or--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Not yet?
Speaker 2: --no, not yet.  I mean art did not come, Regennia [Williams], art did not come until way out, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, the way I grew up, art is not (laughter) something black folks do, you know.  We do it for fun but the, the art that I grew up with to be honest was a van called the Red Fox [ph.], it had a beautiful mural on the side of it.  The way people dressed, the way you talk, whether or not you can play that guitar, can you draw, but basically it would be a design for a fort or tearing apart a carburetor or a starter, I mean, all of the art stuff was really functional.  It was, it was, my, my models for art like I said were Charlie White [Charles Wilbert White] and that was off of Jet magazine and out of Ebony and at the barbershop, you know, he had all those calendars.  I did not take any art classes in high school.  I did not take any art classes until I was 27, 28 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that's much later.
Story_ID: 313916
Speaker 1: When did you begin to study art?  I know at age twenty-seven but where are you academically, same community college or--
Speaker 2: No.  I thought I was gonna be, I wanted to be a lawyer and so I went up to, followed a buddy of mine, after, a, a difficult incident, I ran into some rednecks out in a little town called Mentone [California], they tried to take my life and I reconsidered getting out of Redlands [California].  And I followed a friend of mine who was going to school in Santa Barbara [California] and I went up there and ended up going to UCSD [sic. UCSB, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California] and it lasted about nine months before I ran out of money and I left there on probation anyway (laughter).  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) UCSD?
Speaker 2: U, I'm, UCSB, I said USD--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) USB?
Speaker 2: It's the University of California at Santa Barbara.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All this time though, all this time, I drew on my own.  And my friends and my brother [David McCoy], my family, my parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman], they had drawings that I had been doing all my life.  And while I was in Santa Barbara I, I was in school for one, three quarter academic year, ran out of money and started working as a, at that time I had been working as a, essentially a janitor for Thrifty Drug Store, which is a drug chain out on the West Coast, was a drug chain.  And I did a better job than their current management trainee so the manager that I worked for at this ghetto store in Lower State Street, what was then a ghetto store on Lower State, State Street in Santa Barbara, he said, "Listen, [HistoryMaker] Johnny [Coleman], if, if you will not say anything to our personnel director about you going back to school," 'cause I had intended to go right back to school after one year, "I will give you a recommendation for the management trainee position and you'll go from eating ice cream for dinner to," I scooped ice cream, "going from eating ice cream for dinner to, you know, having a decent paycheck."  So overnight I went from something like $400 a month to what to me was like lots of money it was around $1200, well a thousand, somewhere between a thousand and $1200 a month, overnight because I--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --went into the training program and was doing the same stuff I had been doing all along.  Long story short, I ended up staying with Thrifty's for many years and eventually had my own store and was the youngest manager in the chain throughout California and did really well but didn't enjoy it.  And all through that time my friends and my brother kept saying Johnny you're an artist, you play music, you draw your ass off, why are you doing this man, you're an artist, an artist and after several years I finally quit and went to a community college in Santa Barbara, that's where I took my first formal art classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, in my mid, late twenties.
Story_ID: 313917
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers from that era in your life who were especially influential?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Inspiring?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  In, in college my first time around at UCSD [sic. UCSB, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California], there was a class that I would sit in on with Dr. Ire [ph.].  And my brother [David McCoy] and, and some of the fellows that I hung out with, they were taking classes with this brilliant, brilliant man who was talking about philosophy and he was very inspirational, Dr. Garth St. Omer who was teaching African American studies but taught literature.  And I remember taking a class with him, Creative Expression in Black Literature.  I was ruined from that point on, you know, law was like just never even a blip on the screen just, you know, storytelling, narrative African American studies.  I remember also a man, I don't remember his name right now and I should, but he was brilliant and I took a class in sociology.  I'm, I think it was comparative ethnic relations and he had worked, taught in Japanese real location campus and it was in, I think, stratification was the name of the class.  And that was really, really, inspiring to me.  This is all at UCSD.  I mean, UCSB, Santa Barbara.  My experience, my classes there were brilliant and I enjoyed it immensely.  I left on probation because I was working full time [for Thrifty Drug Store] and I did not have enough time to complete, in my last quarter, I would, was struggling and didn't have enough time to complete all of my classes and chose not to take one of the finals and spoke to the professor and told him, you know, I, I, "I'm not gonna be able to take the final, can you give me an incomplete?"  He said, "Why?" and I told him, you know, "work; I'm just overextended and I can salvage my other classes but I can't salvage this one without jeopardizing the others."  It was in astrology, yeah, astrology, astronomy class, and it was really brilliant but I didn't have a very strong math background and so I remember being really intrigued by the notion of gravity and black holes and white dwarfs and red giants, and, and time and space continuum.  And I always was really drawn by kind of metaphysics and so these kinds of really large ideas in terms of physics really connected and resonated for me along the lines of as above so below in relationship to the spirit.  So I really, really found that course compelling and, and inspiring but I failed it and that's why I was on probation when I left UCSD.  When I did get back to school, all of my teachers were inspiring.  Bali [ph.] Bonnie Blaw [ph.], this is at a little tiny art department in, I mean, a really fine, extremely fine art department in a community college which is how I started.  Bonnie Blaw was particularly inspiring to me.  Patricia Bendasure [ph.] was particularly inspiring to me.  I believe, Bob Frank [ph.], and I apologize for not remembering everybody's name to them, you know, but all of my teachers were really inspiring.  And they recognized that I was really hungry and that that all though I didn't have any formal training I had a lot of skills and they really extended themselves to me and brought other artists for me to look at.  Early on I became aware of Oliver [Lee] Jackson because of Bonnie Blaw, I mean, her telling me, you know about this African American painter up in, in Davis [California], who lives in, works in Oakland [California] but teaching at Davis [sic. California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California], and I had never heard of him and she made him accessible to me.
Speaker 1: And this is the 1980s about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is probably '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 313918
Speaker 1: At that point in time were you, were you focused on any particular artist or the kind--let's say artists whose names we might come across in the, in one of those anthologies put together by someone like [HistoryMaker] Samella Lewis.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All of them.  First and foremost again, Charlie White [Charles Wilbert White] was it for me.  And I had come across Jacob Lawrence.  By this time I'm in my mid-twenties and mid, late twenties and I realize that I had absolutely no grounding as an artist in the traditions and the culture and the visual culture of African Americans.  So I went to the library and just did a lot of reading that's how I become, became aware of Dr. Lewis.  And her anthology took me to, to Lawrence, took me to [Romare] Bearden, took me to [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, took me to Betye Saar, and John Outterbridge.  And then when I got to Otis [Art Institute of Parsons School of Design; Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California], when I did go to an art school after a year and a half, I guess, or a year and a summer at the community college, people really, really extended themselves to me and, you know, took, good, good care of me and made sure that I had resources.
Story_ID: 310239
Speaker 1: Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], you said that at the junior college you started to go to the library and look for studies of African Americans, individual arts.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at that point in time had, had you started to, had you start to read about the, the black, the idea of a black aesthetic is what I'm trying to say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I'm, I had.  [HistoryMaker] Samella Lewis was probably the first person that I became aware of who articulated it and she talked about it in terms of a process, an aesthetic process that is not necessarily related to visual only, it's, it's, you know, it's happening in music, it's happening in literature, it's happening in theater, as well as, as the visual arts.  But she talked about in relationship to who's your audience, who are you talking to, what's your relationship to that audience, intentionality, what is it that you wanna convey or what is the dialogue that you wanna enter into.  She talked about history.  She talked about a responsibility back to community.  She talked about artistic freedom as never being con, constrained by a sense of obligation but, you know, this sense of improvisation and taking a legacy, a visual legacy or a narrative legacy and constantly having responsibility to take it further but at the core was always this kind of reciprocal relationship between the artist and the audience and always asking the question who is this work for.
Speaker 1: So that's 1980s--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when we hear Samella Lewis making those kinds of statements?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --seventy [1970], I mean she's, she was elder working out of, I believe, out of Claremont [California], the Claremont Colleges [Scripps College, Claremont, California].  And she had a real strong relationship, to my understanding, a real, a very strong relationship to the Black Arts Movement that was happening in Los Angeles [California] with the poets and the writers, Watts [Los Angeles, California] poets and writers, and with those visual artists who were around Betye [Saar], who were around Charlie [Charles Wilbert White], who were around Mel Edwards who was in Los Angeles at the time, John Outterbridge, who remains in Los Angeles to this day, David Hammons, [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, this is, oh, I'm forgetting her first name, [Senga] Nengudi is her last name I just blanked on her first name, but there were so many, Wanda Coleman, just so many.  So Samella was one of the, she was a, an academic who was looking at this evolution of this kind of creative process and seeing it in context through the culture, seeing it in the larger context with the rest of African American forms of expression.
Story_ID: 310240
Speaker 1: Can you sort of walk us through the 20th century survey of African American art history.  Was, I'd just like to have a better understanding of the roots of that kind of black aesthetic rhetoric, if we can call it that safely--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --without, you know, denigrating it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at all but just to say the things that are being said in the 1980s, you know, they, they have earlier precedence.
Speaker 2: Oh, they sure do.  I mean the things are being said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So where would you trace it to?
Speaker 2: I would trace it primarily back to, to the [Harlem] Renaissance and to Langston Hughes, you know, at one of, one of our native sons having come in high school from here at Central [High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And Langston in terms of his love of black culture and vernacular speech and music, music, blues and jazz, and how black folks live and interact and wanting to reflect that on a personal level and on a cultural level, not so much as didactic, though he did write, you know, the, 'The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain' where he's talking specifically about, you know, who you're talking to and what are your reference and, and are you willing to, to identify yourself as, as a Negro artist in, in the lexicon of the day or black artist or do you simply want to be an artist.  And he, he put a, a kind of binary in, in this kind of relationship as being an artist which he said he, he viewed as, I just wanna be an artist in an American sense, read: white.  And he said that in opposition to an artist who had a strong relationship to community, to culture, to the language of black culture, to images, to history, to the way in which we are who we are not that's its monolithic but the range.  And I would say that black aesthetic rests profoundly on his shoulders and some of the ideas that he was articulating along with others, Alain Locke, there in a big way.  The Renaissance, you know, was a kind of a seedbed, it wasn't only located in Harlem [New York, New York] it was also happening in Chicago [Illinois], it was also happening in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I'm talking about just creative expression within black folks.  But as a, as an overall movement, it was certainly centered in Harlem and it was so rich and dense there across all the arts, all of 'em.  But I think that in the '30s [1930s] is where this aesthetic really--
Story_ID: 310241
Speaker 1: You know, somebody who's really important that I did not say is Augusta Savage, who, I think, in a very, very, profound way, demonstrated as well as articulated this kind of sense of a black aesthetic from the jump.  And she had the largest arts, not club what am I looking for?  Just a community center.  She had the largest community center [Harlem Community Center, New York, New York], I believe, in the country, certainly in New York [New York] in the '20s [1920s], out of her studio.  And she educated with her example at great expense to herself, a lot of sacrifice, all kinds of African American artists.
Speaker 2: Now what was her medium?
Speaker 1: She was a sculptor.
Speaker 2: A sculptor.  So you had literary artists, sculptor--
Speaker 1: And they're all talking to each other.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're all talking to each other.  Musicians are talking to each other, philosophers, [Alain] Locke, they're talking to each other.  And there again, there are artists that Locke is bringing to, I'm blanking on the name of the founder at the [William E.] Harmon Foundation [New York, New York] which was helping to provide exhibitions and catalogs so that at the turn of the '30s [1930s], artists would actually have things like resumes, would be able to claim themselves to the professional artists and, and as the Works Projects Administration [sic. Works Progress Administration] came into being they were able to apply for teaching positions, apply for, for not residencies but actually jobs where they would be working on a mural in the heart of the [Great] Depression.  But Augusta Savage she, she was such a community person and this is, you know, ten years before the kind of seeds of the [Harlem] Renaissance kind of took fruit in the '30s [1930s] where social realism and, and artists really documenting, not so much a romanticized notion of Africa but documenting lynchings, documenting the streets in New York, but, you know, that social real experience.  So there, there was a real kind of agenda of resisting and responding to social realities for black folks in the country at that time.  And I think the aesthetic really got formulated in a, in a more practical and functional sense in the '30s [1930s] but it rests solely on the shoulders, squarely, not solely on the shoulders of the, the community of folks in and around the Renaissance.  Augusta Savage was never really embraced within that community but she was actually demonstrating, she was functionally producing an environment where young black kids could come in and see images of themselves, learn a craft, be around elders who were at varying stages of their craft, many masters, and be in the presence of, you know, brilliant minds.
Story_ID: 310242
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you mentioned that that essay 'The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain' [Langston Hughes].  It's, some historians describe it as the cultural manifesto--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the [Harlem] Renaissance.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I won't say Harlem [New York, New York] because you've reminded us that it's happening all over the country--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --not just in Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But there are some other negative criticism too about the Renaissance period and I just wanna get your opinion on that, this idea of white patronage--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and black art--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the 1920s and whoever still had money after the stock market crash (laughter) and after--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the onset of the [Great] Depression as well.  Many critics wonder how revolutionary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The work could be.
Speaker 1: --the art could be--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Langston Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --if you're waiting for godmother [Charlotte Osgood Mason]--
Speaker 2: Right, right, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to send you a check.
Speaker 2: --exactly, godmother.  Well I think, I think Hughes broke with her though they remained, I think, emotionally connected, he broke with her and I don't have, you know, all the insights, you know, he speaks about it and [Romare] Bearden does an incredible job in 'African-American Artists ['A History of African-American Artists from 1792 to the Present,' Romare Bearden and Harry Henderson] in this anthology he produced with, oh, gosh, I'm not remembering his coauthor but the, the research is extensive, the bibliographic notes are extensive, it's a real master text.  Only comes through the Renaissance, okay, the artists born as of the '20s [1920s].  It goes, it, it brings through until the black artist movement, at the beginning of the black artist movement and Charlie's [Charles Wilbert White] in there, [John T.] Biggers is in there, big ups to Biggers, but only artists born by the '20s [1920s].  But Bearden speaks extensively about Mary B. Brady, he speaks extensively about the Harlem, the [William E.] Harmon Foundation [New York, New York].  He speaks extensively about the artists who were at the core of the Renaissance and the artists who were not allowed in the Renaissance, Augusta Savage.  I didn't, you know, I think that it's really difficult to, to negotiate that con, that conflict and I think that folks had to make a break, you know.  And I don't know the specifics about how that happened with Zora Neale Hurston but I don't know look at her work and see her work as reflecting any sense of self-censorship, you know, or her writing in such a way as to please, you know, I think her works brilliant.  And likewise with Langston Hughes, you know, his simple stories are brilliant.  I don't agree with everything that he said within 'The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain.'  I think that it's possible for an artist, an African American artist to use a different context, we're talking about, you know, 21st century talking there in the context of the '20s [1920s] and, you know, we have the New Negro and, you know, this, it's really a different cultural landscape.  But I think it is limiting and prescriptive to say that an African American artist has to work with black themes or an African American artist has to refer to themselves as an African American artist.  I mean, I'm, I profoundly love Martin Puryear and his work and if I don't misunderstand him he has referred to himself throughout his career as an artist who happens to be African American.  His themes have, have been very broad, he's, you know, including themes that refer to African American history and, and individuals, [James] Beckwourth, Jim Beckwourth, he did a beautiful piece for Beckwourth.  So I think there's, some, some tension in what Hughes is saying there but I think it's like essential, you know.  And I think that to my mind, those are questions that I would think most, if not all, African American artists have to, to engage, certainly myself.  And I, I just respect, you know, I respect his work immensely.  I think that Hughes is, is pretty much a bedrock.
Story_ID: 310243
Speaker 1: That's a, a key era--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to focus on in the history of African American art in the first half of the 20th century.  What do you make of this movement of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the Black Arts Movement?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And, and what they said--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) about the Negro movement of the earlier period?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Is there something revolutionary being produced in the way of black art in the 1960s that differs so dramatically from the earlier stuff?
Speaker 2: I remember Faith Ringgold, 'Flag for the Moon: Die Nigger Die' [sic. 'Flag for the Moon: Die Nigger'] (unclear), you know, that's Die Nigger Die (Die Nigger) is woven in, into the stars and the stripes.  And I remember, again, [Romare] Bearden with 'Rocket For the Moon' [sic. 'Rocket to the Moon'], and what you have is an image of a rocket shooting to the moon in the backdrop but at the foreground is an inner city scene with all the kind of visual tension that Bearden was such a master of creating with his collage work.  I remember Gil Scott[-Heron], 'The Revolution Will Not Be Televised.'  I remember Patti LaBelle turning it out big time, you know.  And I love Gil Scott.  I remember, 'In The Bottle' [sic. 'The Bottle'], Gil Scott.  I mean, you know, I think Gil is, is profound in that.  I think, yeah, there were differences.  I think there were, folks were much more overtly, I identify myself as black, you know, and redefining that term as something that is a source of pride as opposed to a lump in your throat.  The term itself, boom, because, you know, when I was in second, third grade, having a European-American kid say black it was always like a barb in it and that created a lump in the throat.  The only time we talked about black people in my classes it was talking either about Africa in a manner that gave no student in the class an accurate depiction of the continent and the multiple, multiple, multiple cultures there and the richness of the history.  It was always kind of a National Geographic moment, you know.  So we got barefooted, you know, bare breasted, always brown and black folks on the cover.  And the only time we got into any detail, and it was very limited, was in terms of slavery.  So that was an inversion, that (unclear) just completely reversed and I think that that was profoundly revolutionary, James Brown, you know, articulating in music, Martha and the Vandellas, I mean, you know, even if, you know, that wasn't written as an anthem it became one, 'Dancing in the Streets.'
Speaker 1: James Brown--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'Papa's Got a Brand New Bag.'
Speaker 2: '[Say it Loud] I'm Black and I'm Proud.'
Speaker 1: 'I'm Black and I'm Proud.'
Speaker 2: "Say it out loud, I'm black and I'm proud."  Long haired hippies and Afro blacks going down across the tracks and they partied, 'Get On the Good Foot' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'This Is A Man's World' [sic. 'It's a Man's Man's Man's World'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but true.
Story_ID: 310244
Speaker 1: Is that revolutionary thinking though?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on which we're talking about.  You know, I thought very much so that 'Say it Loud I'm Black and I'm Proud' was absolutely revolutionary thinking.  And I, 'It's a Man's [Man's Man's] World' we, we're still talking about Georgia, we're still talking about a southern man, we're still talking about patriarchal culture and we're still talking, yeah, is of his generation.  Was it revolutionary?  I think we still need a lot of work to do in terms of, you know, recognizing all of our strength and, and not articulating it in terms of a man's world, you know, as opposed to our world as a, as an African American world, it, it, that is strong, rich, solid, and able to greet any other world at any table, under any circumstances with, you know, the richness of who we are but that includes all of us, right.  So I don't think that, that James [Brown] was, was articulating that in 1960, who was it, you know, 'It's A Man's World,' the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] but I don't think to many folks were articulating that.  That's not an excuse, you know, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was taking care of business.  James Baldwin was taking care of business.  [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was taking care of business in my point of view.  And later Richard Pryor was taking care of business, he was a little rough around the edges but I lived all of that, you know.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that you mentioned Richard Pryor the comedian in the same breath as Maya Angelou and James Baldwin--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --great literary artists.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But, but wait a minute Dick Gregory's here and he's a comedian too.  A very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's a--
Speaker 1: --different sort.
Speaker 2: He's a revolutionary, I mean, he's, he, he was always, you know, sometimes maybe even a little out there but Dick Gregory was, I remember an album way back, you know, I was a kid I might have been twelve, it was called '[The] Light Side [The] Dark Side,' it's a double album set.  And on one side he's talking, he's just being funny but he's, he's playing off of what's happening in the culture.  (Unclear) nigga, remember that?  You know, and he's being in, in this southern (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's the autobiography, right?
Speaker 2: I think so, absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's been a while.
Speaker 2: It has been a while.
Speaker 1: But I, I associate that title with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, you know, he's sitting in this restaurant in segregated and he's ordered chicken and they brought the chicken and this old boy say, boy anything you do to that chicken we gone do to you and he picks it up and he kisses it.  Dick Gregory, by all means, sure.  Richard Pryor, I mean, he's a master storyteller and he was able to use humor to articulate so clearly what's happening on the street and, you know, I remember just us talking about justice and, you know, I remember justice, yep, just us.  And, you know, you look at the, the military industrial complex and who's in jail and why and, you know, who's, you know, under some kind of governmental surveillance or locked down and why and its relationship to color and class and Richard Pryor is talking about all of that and Dick Gregory was talking all about, all of that.  So, yeah, I, I absolutely see them as, as being continuous with, with Jimmy Baldwin, James Baldwin, Maya Angelou who is so brilliant.  And, and, you know, these were books that were on the shelf at our home.  So, you know, my brother [David McCoy] and I, we were raised, you know, with these parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] who were a part of that optimistic early '60s [1960s], and you will achieve and these are all the, what was happening in the culture what possibilities we believed would, we would be achieved.  And it wasn't until the late '60s [1960s] that, you know, ooh, you know, it's gone be more difficult.  But those were the books that were in the house.  So I was reading, 'I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings' [Maya Angelou] in fifth grade and it was never a class assignment.  I, I, you know, if I ever had that book assigned to me it was in college.  I was reading James Baldwin in fifth grade but that was at home.
Story_ID: 310245
Speaker 1: So by the time you decide to become, I don't know, you'll correct me if I'm wrong, a serious artist--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --now maybe you were very serious about life before then but to pursue art as a profession not just a hobby--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --perhaps, in the '80s [1980s], you'd heard all these other voices.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So in the midst of all that how do you find your own voice?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  I, I from the second day, well actually from my first day as a student at Otis-Parsons [Otis Art Institute of Parsons School of Design; Otis College of Art and Design] in Los Angeles [California], I, I had work study and some scholarship money, and my work study was to work in the tool crypt.  I reported to work and was immediately assigned to go work with Ulysses Jenkins who was a videographer, video artist, performance artist, brilliant brother, very much a part of the Black Arts Movement in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And from that day forward, Ulysses updated and challenged me not from the pages of [HistoryMaker] Samella Lewis' books or, you know, from 'Blues People[: Negro Music in White America,' Amiri Braka] or from whatever articles I might have read but from, you know, a young, brilliant articulate, straight off the block brother who was an artist and he asked me the questions, you know, about who are you, who are you talking to, what do you got to say, why should we listen, yeah, you can draw, who gives a shit.  You know, you can do anything you wanna do, what do you wanna do, why, you know.  He made all of those questions really, really palpable for me.  And then, you know, to take those things that he's asking me and in the context of what my parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] provided to me and, and, you know, realizing that Lerone Bennett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett] had written an essay on, about [President Abraham] Lincoln and I was probably in fourth or fifth grade and I read it and got mad at my parents 'cause they had allowed me to celebrate Lincoln's birthday, and, you know.  And they had to, you know, help a fourth grader to get past all of that.  But to take the context of what my parents had made available to me and what I had grown up with and see that, oh, yeah, that is an artistic existence, that is a, there isn't a split between, you know, the culture, the history, and then what you do on paper or on canvas.  And it still took time to actually find my own voice.  I, I was profoundly influenced by music and narrative storytelling.  And still I wanted to learn some skills and so I thought that I was gonna be an illustrator a la Charlie White [Charles Wilbert White], that was my heart.  And I could draw really well before I got to school and took a lot of advanced drawing classes my very first year.  And all the time there was Ulysses whispering in my ear, "Yeah, nigga, I know you can draw, who gives a shit," you know, it's just, so, what you gonna draw, what you trying to talk about, what you trying to say.  And it did--it had a profound impact on me.
Story_ID: 310246
Speaker 1: You talked about the experiences at Otis [Otis Art Institute of Parsons School of Design; Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California] but how about the, the M.F.A. program, where would, was that working come from?
Speaker 2: That was at the University of California in San Diego [San Diego, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was that immediately after finishing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Immediately--
Speaker 1: --the undergrad program?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --immediately following undergrad.  I mean, I, I was either 29 or 30 when I went down there, and, you know, by the time I got to school, I knew, that I was an artist, that I wasn't, you know, trying to justify it anymore, I was passed my fear of, you know, the way I was raised, boy you don't quit one job unless have another job, you know.  You're gonna quit work, you got a job, you got a serious job, you, what.  My mother [Florence McCoy Coleman] telling me you call them back and tell them you made a mistake, no you didn't, you know.  I was passed that by that time.  So I came out of school and had plenty of momentum and went right into graduate school.  And for the most part, spent most of my first year of graduate school in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] working on installation crews for other artists or a friend of mine and I, but this might have been my, it, it was my first year at UCSD [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California], we, built in the shell of a factory of a warehouse, we built the studio for a brilliant artist, Bill Viola, and my buddy, Joey Santa Lomano [ph.] was, I guess assistant at the time and I could build so Joey and I built, you know, thirty foot walls going up twenty foot high.  I hung his lighting grid, this is all while I'm supposed to be at graduate school.  But the thing about graduate school was that they gave me a studio, I had a fellowship, and I had time to work.  So I did my work, went down there, had my committee, showed my committee my work and I got the hell out of San Diego [California] and went back to L.A. and worked, you know, made money.
Speaker 1: When and where did you acquire the carpentry skills?
Speaker 2: That was at Otis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That tool crypt.  I, you know, I had great teachers in the classroom, Ulysses [Jenkins] at the time was adjunct faculty.  He and I remained always, always very much in contact, me very much his student, the whole time that I was in Los Angeles.  It was his insistence that I even apply to San Diego because they'd make me fight and because it was a very conceptually grounded program.  In the tool crypt, I worked with brilliant male and female sculptors who taught me everything that I came to know about the fundamentals of woodworking and metalwork.  And so I was, I was getting, you know, really a great education in the classrooms with Michael Wingo, with Sam [ph.], oh, man, Sam I apologize, with Robin Vaccarino, with Scott Gregor [ph.], I mean, just incredible in classes.  Ulysses was the foundation, the, the undercurrent in terms of not, you know, remember this is just language, what you trying to say, you know, and he brought Betye Saar to me.  He brought Matthew Thomas to me who became another mentor, John Outterbridge to me who became another mentor, Timothy Washington, Senga Nengudi, many, many, many people but always, Charlie White's [Charles Wilbert White] son, Ian White, my third day of classes, he pulled Ian out of class and said, (making sounds) you guys need to know each other.  So I've, you know, my experience, it was just incredibly valuable and that includes what I learned in woodshop because that that extended, you know, my drawing skills and what became painting skills and I discovered I have a love for architecture and worked with the architecture students there at the, at the college.  But all of the building skills, all of the, you know, being able to kind of articulate on two dimensions what I'm gonna construct in three dimensions, that's all at Otis, not at UCSD.
Story_ID: 312509
Speaker 1: All right.  Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], at the end of the last segment, we had established the fact that you found your voice and you'd acquired some skills.  Now you're in grad [graduate] school [University of California San Diego, San Diego, California], you have your own studio and, and time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to produce art.  What's next?  Do you get commissions while you're a student then, how do you establish a reputation as an artist or does that come after graduation?
Speaker 2: It generally comes, you know, for those few that are lucky enough to, to get some recognition and, and some establishment beyond the regional level.  I was very lucky, while I was in my first year at grad school, my first year what do they call it?  First year review, I did a piece that became my senior, my graduate thesis, it was called 'City/Country/City: Song for David.'  The story I told you about my brother [David McCoy] being slapped in first grade is a part of that piece, and some of what my grandmother told me about our family, descended of the Maroons, was also a part of that piece.  And, and at my first year review, I was just very, very lucky because in the student gallery, the curator for the Museum of Contemporary Art [San Diego, San Diego, California] came to see the piece.  I was in school with a, a brilliant, brilliant elder brother, his name was David Avalos, master, he was one of the founding members of Border Arts Workshop in San Diego [California], right there on the border.  Latino brother, he was just brilliant, really brilliant.  David is in his mid-fifties.  He was a year ahead of me in grad school.  And became, you know, kind of a companion in terms of his function to Ulysses [Jenkins].  But he was from San Diego and was a internationally established artist before he went to grad school.  And then Albert Chong, who is a, a Rasta from Jamaica by way of Brooklyn [New York, New York].  Albert also had an international reputation before he went to grad school.  These brothers were coming back to school to get their little piece of paper saying, you know, should we need to do anything, got the piece of paper to move on.  Those two being there really taught me a lot.  I think that David made a phone call to, I know he made phone calls, he made to the director of the [San Diego] African American Museum [of Fine Art, San Diego, California] at the time there, Shirley-[Day] Williams.  And he made a call to a critic who was working for the, The San Diego Union-Tribune at the time, Robert [L.] Pincus.  And I have to assume that he called either the director or the curator at the museum and regardless the curator came down and she was very responsive.  She came down, she was sick and called me like the next day and apologized for not having come back, you know, earlier and that she was gonna come down again.  And long story short, you know, atypically I was very, very lucky and I was included in her, in her write-up while I was still in my first year of undergraduate school in San Diego, I mean graduate school in San Diego.  And then became part of a gallery, now this is an installation artist gallery so generally, especially small galleries that, you know, aren't blue chip galleries in New York [New York] with, but a large stable of folks who are selling a lot of work.  That this, Gallery David Zapf [David Zapf Gallery, San Diego, California], who's become a friend that I've known for many, many years now, he, he asked me if I would like to do a show in his gallery.  At the time I was also really talking to Quincy Troupe and his wife Margaret Porter Troupe were in San Diego.  Quincy was teaching in the English department at [University of California] San Diego [San Diego, California] and Margaret had a gallery there in La Jolla [San Diego, California].  But Margaret wasn't quite feeling the work yet.  So though I had tried like, Margaret, you know, (making sounds) you know, but here I am an installation artist, you can't sell installation.  So I, I accepted an opportunity to do a show at David Zapf Gallery.  And, you know, I had no experience whatsoever with, you know, galleries in any serious level.  So accepting to do a one person show at a gallery really is saying, yes I'll be a part of this gallery.  And David handed over his keys to the gallery for two weeks.  He shut the gallery down for two weeks and that became my studio.  And I did a piece in response to the Rodney King verdict from the perspective of somebody who considers Los Angeles [California] home, my family was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], my mother [Florence McCoy Coleman], my aunt, many of my friends, L.A. blows up and I found myself like paralyzed, you know, just with grief looking at, you know, a place I love on fire.  And, you know, the fact of the verdict was paralyzing just, it was just unspeakable and unimaginable, so.  I think that was my first show at David Zapf but I had been doing other things in town and receiving visibility while I was still in graduate school.  I was lucky and, you know, just lucky.
Story_ID: 312510
Speaker 1: It's interesting to me that you, you use that term unspeakable because I also read in some of your background information that you had the opportunity to work with Toni Morrison.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: To be inspired by ideas contained in her award-winning book, one of her several award-winning books--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --'Beloved.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And in there she talks about unspeakable things.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That had for so long been unspoken--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the black community.  But, but you give voice to all of those things, no matter how painful--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --through installation art.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how do you take 'Beloved's' pain--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and put that in a gallery?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that Toni Morrison is brilliant and she says, you know, that her, the reason she's working and what she sees is her mission as, as an artist, as a, as a writer is to imagine the interior lives of the ancestors.  And I think she did it so brilliantly and she took, you know, this experience of this woman being pursued, taking the life of a child, and she spoke how that happened and what was going in her mind and what it was about, you know, Sethe your love is too tough, you know, it's just to, and, you know, it's, it's too hard.  And well she makes it understandable, she gives you an insight into what that was about.  And I don't know, my reference had always been literature back to, to [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou really and, and [James] Baldwin and [Richard] Wright.  So when I had a daughter born, when my daughter [Nyima Coleman] was born, and conceived and born, you know, in this landscape and I had an opportunity to reread it, 'cause I read the book many, many years ago, I had an opportunity to reread 'Beloved' by way of a commission that Margaret [Porter] Troupe had made available to me.  I was, I, I, the book moved me in a very different way.  I had always thought it was brilliant but now being a father of a young man [Ayo Coleman] and a young woman, it, I saw Amy Denver's birth as being profoundly metaphoric.  I saw her as being like this ancestor, not the original ancestor because we have so many before her, Sethe being one, you know, it's linked so far back, but here's this child that's born on the border, she's literally born in a sinking boat on the edge of the Ohio, hell-bent for Mississippi and, you know, there's this moment where just before Sethe passes out and the child draws her first breath, where Amy Denver and Sethe are waiting really tense for the child to draw her breath, excuse me.  And I was really moved by just the hopefulness that comes out of this child being born.  And immediately after the child's birth Morrison moves to describe something that is really just such an incredible shift.  She's talking about the, just all the graphic of they opened the back and the chokecherry tree and the raw slabs of meat and push, you pull, you push, you pull, you know, and then the child being born on the water and coming up not breathing.  And then the next thing she does, this is amazing poetic shift, that I just found so intense, where she talks about blue ferns, they grow along the sides of the Ohio River and if you're down and the sun shots just right, you can see them, they look like insects but they're not insects they're seedpods, hundreds to each pod, each one convinced of the possibility of a future.  I said that's, that's it for me, you know (making sound).  You know, and in the core of the pain that's in that book, is like this transformation and this possibility and, you know, Denver has so much ahead of her she, she, you know, she's haunted by this older sister that she adores and then, you know, has this competition with, for the attention of her mother and her mother no longer even sees her to such a degree because of her own wounds and her sense of guilt and pain.  But Denver transforms herself but right then at her birth in, you know, like just these under, unspeakable, inimaginable, unimaginable circumstances, Morrison in that sunshine provides this light.  And that moved me so much that I wanted to make that particular scene a gift for my daughter.  So instead of a rickety sinking boat, I hand built out of beams from an old barn a boat that it, rather than sinking is floating above two tons of river rock and then later above this straw is spilling from this really celebratory gesture that frames Baby Suggs or a portrait of Baby Suggs.  But it was all about possibility and my locks are in there, a sunflower that volunteered in our garden, other herbs from the garden, I've always worn necklaces so the beads that I had worn up to that point, I no longer wear, their hers now, they were in there, infant shoe form, cowries, smells, and the sound of her taking a bath, splashing and playing in the water with her mother is coming out of the boat.
Story_ID: 312511
Speaker 1: What happens to all that when the show closes?
Speaker 2: Well it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said you can't sell an installation?
Speaker 2: No, the, you know, I've been lucky with one, a very small piece was, was purchased out in California.  But you can't sell an installation but they were never intended, they, that's a prayer for my daughter, it's a trilogy of prayers, each ones very, very specific and different.  So what's gonna happen with it is I have it documented, I have the prayer that I'm speaking to her, physically speaking to her is both written and documented and recorded.  She'll have all of that.  She has all of, she'll have the locks from inside the boat, she'll have that little shoe form and she has all of the, now she's only five now but she'll have all of the necklaces, she'll have all my notes, the sketches, and that'll go into a book for her.  And I've done several pieces for my son, all prayers that went into a book for him.  And, you know, with the pieces that are yet to come, each one of 'em, '[A] Song for Ayo' is for Ayo [Coleman].  I don't know what Nyima [Coleman]'s book is titled but--
Speaker 1: Your daughter?
Speaker 2: My daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those, that's what'll happen with those, you know.  So for me they were prayers and for me the prayers function.  And as far as materials, the boat is in a crate, the corn went to Habitat for Humanity, it went to, it was sewed into, into a, oh, gosh, I'm blanking on the term but it's, it'll help in fertilizing some soil.  All the straw, there were a 140 some odd bales of straw there, all of that went to Habitat for Humanity.  All of the beams which were beams from historic structures, either barns that I had been able to take down or beams that came out of structures that the others had gathered and I purchased ten, all of that's in my studio and is used in other pieces, it's worked into pieces of furniture that I build.  But I got a gang of it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 312512
Speaker 1: I'd really like to stay with 'Beloved' [Toni Morrison] and as source material--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for--literary art inspiring you to create this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --this visual art.  I, I know what you mean about the language.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I know (laughter) why people love Toni Morrison, I--
Speaker 2: Gosh, she's brilliant, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Whose roots are here in Ohio.
Speaker 2: Right up the street.
Speaker 1: Lorain, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Right up the street, yeah.
Speaker 1: I had to put that on tape.  But, and so we love her--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --especially here in Ohio.  But I remember a scene when Sethe was leaving Sweet Home [plantation]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and she saw Paul D--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and he was wearing his neck jewelry which is I thought was just a wonderful way to describe these collars--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that slave men and women were, who had this tendency to run away were forced to wear--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as part of this whole process to, to humiliate them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, to, to treat them like beasts--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of burden, rather than acknowledge the fact that they are human beings.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and she looked in his eyes--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and didn't seem to notice his neck jewelry.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  She's--
Speaker 1: And this is such a wonderful scene.
Speaker 2: She looked in his eyes and saw no, no coldness there (unclear).  She didn't see the animal there.  You know, I can't remember the exact line, but I did a piece for Paul D that Toni Morrison has that was really about him having been locked up underground and they put him in that little cubicle in the, underground with those other brothers, and the fact that he'd had a bit put in his mouth.  And when she looked in his eyes and, and him talking about it, I mean 'cause she, she was so brilliant, she really, really got inside of Paul D's head, she got inside of Sixo's head, she got inside of every one of those characters heads, you know.  But, oh, it was wildness, she looked in his eyes and found no wildness there.  And Paul D was talking about when a bit gets put in your mouth, it changes you and you either become wild or the wildness that was there leaves and it destroys you.  And, you know, nobody came out of this, this unscathed, I don't think we're still unscathed, you know, a 150 years later but somehow, you know, this brother hadn't lost his humanity and she looked in his eyes and saw that.  So that was a piece that she has, it was in response to that kind of the way in which she described like the humanity still existing in this brother after all that he'd been through.  And then I did a piece for Sethe which was called 'Her Marks' [sic. 'Her Marks'] remember the four corners of the sun that was under her mother's right breast and then Sethe telling her mother when she was a baby, only having a little memories of her mother having some of her hair and then that mark, she said mama how do I get my mark and her mother slapped her, baby you don't need this, you know.  So I did a piece for her and I took an old right, wrought iron grille from a heater, you know, a Victorian grille from a heater but it was floral and it was these roses.  And so I took that and backed it with dried flowers from here and so you see the flowers through that, you know, rusted, really beautifully ornate grill.  And then that mark is drawn that you see through beeswax and then the, the wood that is constructed where this woods out of a safe house here in Oberlin [Ohio].  And then, gosh, remember the biscuits they're making there at Sweet Home, right when they have the big party, just before the folks really kind of feel that, when Baby Suggs and Sethe throw this party, they're showing too much, it's to ostentatious, it's just y'all are--
Speaker 1: Oh, they're away from Sweet Home?
Speaker 2: They're away from Sweet Home.
Speaker 1: I think they were in Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're just--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) of Cincinnati.  And so she's making biscuits and Paul D talks about them biscuits and then Stamp Paid brings like a, a shirt full, a jacket full of blackberries and so she makes all the pies and they're just cooking and cooking and cooking.  So there's an old school biscuit, well, it's a flour sifter and then these pair of infant's handmade leather shoes from turn of the century hanging, framed inside that flour sifter and then above it is, is, you know, that grille and, and so she has both of those pieces.  But I mean, I'm--
Speaker 1: Toni Morrison does?
Speaker 2: Toni Morrison has both of those pieces.  But I mean, the richness of the images that she creates and the, the kind of internal forces they have it's, it was, I was just responding to her.  Nyima [Coleman]'s piece is more taking the initial kind of transformative moment where, you know, we go from this pregnant woman, it's the only who made it, all these, the last of the Sweet Home men, none of those brothers made it, Sixo is dead, Halle is reduced to smearing butter over himself and giggling, nobody knows what happened to Paul D, everybody else is gone.  She's the only one who made it, she's pregnant, she's, her back is opened up and now she is like, you know, festering with fever and the child is gonna be born prematurely on the edge in the mud, you know.  And it's like boom, that powerful image comes out of such pain, you know, that's the blues for you just like transform that, that unspeakable into something that can be articulated and can, in whatever language, can transform it.  So, boy, it's just responding to the images that that she, she laid out there.
Story_ID: 312513
Speaker 1: Nyima's [Nyima Coleman] piece ['A Landscape Convinced: For Nyima'], then takes, you know, a father's hope for his daughter, you know, and as I said it was a trilogy so the first piece was that moment.  The second piece was, you know, how we come to be here so you hear those ancestors running through this, the corn, and you hear the sound of the ocean and 11,000 square feet, I mean, like huge, I had built these ancestral houses which were shotgun houses.  And you hear thunderously, the sound of the waves breaking on the shore while you hear birds in the corn and you hear somebody running rustling through that corn.  And then, you know, the sound of her laughter coming out of the boat, way, a 140 feet over that way.  So, you know, like that memory and those, those ancestors and their sacrifices are a part of, her mother's [Nannette Yannuzzi Macias] Mexican and, and Italian, she's got a lot of bloodlines but I want her to know about this, you know.  And the last piece is really just an intimate kind of exchange between her daddy and herself, you know.  But Toni Morrison, yeah, she made that possible.
Story_ID: 312514
Speaker 1: It's interesting to me that you, you use sound--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with the installation pieces.  Is, I can't tell you how many times I've gone into art galleries and looked at work, I thought to myself, I wish this piece could tell me--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, what's going on here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because again sometimes you really have to think about what's in front of you to get it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I wanna get it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So it's, again, that you have the sound incorporated with all of these other things that are going on in the gallery.
Speaker 2: Well I'm trying to, I'm really trying to set up an environment that's inhabited by spirits, you know.  So the last piece was a prayer for my mother [Florence McCoy Coleman] after her passing.  And what it was essentially was a safe house.  I built a, a straw barn, this is post and beam and the walls are literally made out of straw so it's a straw bale structure with a post and beam frame.  Inside it's acoustically quiet because the walls are so thick and the way the floor was designed it's a, it's a studio quality space inside.  And then in that space you're hearing surround sound at the highest level of resolution that we're capable of doing right now.  You hear water running, birds, an ancestor running in the water, and dogs howling in the distance and then getting closer as they catch the scent their howl changes, I didn't know that but a woman who grow up in Virginia coon hunting, she told me this don't sound right.  I said, oh, what's it supposed to sound like?  And she said well they change their sound.  And I went and did a search worldwide and found in Hollywood the sounds of the coons when they catch the scent, and I checked it with this woman, she said you got it, I grew up hunting, that's the sound they make when they got the scent, and I said, oh, God.  And so you hear that when they come very close and the spirit jumps in the water, you hear the splash a long breathless splash, everything once that dog had been right there, everything else falls away, it's just the sound of the water, the birds are gone, you no longer hear the heartbeat that was there all along.  And then what seems like a long time later, you hear this person in the spirit emerge out of the water, take a long breath, the heartbeat comes back very, very slowly.  The birds slowly fade up and then you hear the sound of a helicopter coming to this space and move around the space and then move off into the distance.  And all of that is in very, very low light.  Wooden beams on the floor, a trap door on the floor and just this one panel of the tin roof that is removed and, and now you have this, this floating kind of burlap ceiling through which just a little bit of ambient light comes in and you hear that while you smell the corn, while you hear the birds outside, and if anybody is walking outside there's dry leaves so you can hear them walking.  And the sound for me helps, you know, next to smells, sound is the oldest part of our brain, it's like so powerfully associated.  So you have the smell of the straw, you have the smell of this old wood and you have the smell of the rusted tin and then you have that sound and you imagine the water because it's so clear.  And then we're human so that heartbeat, you know, identifies us.  And you know, it really isn't about trying to tell anybody anything, it's really trying to make one a witness, you know.  That's what I'm really trying to do is make one a witness or a participant within a ritual or a prayer.
Story_ID: 312515
Speaker 1: Now it's, I think, it's especially noteworthy, maybe because we're, we're doing this oral history interview that orality just seems to figure in so prominently into your work, even that, one of the early works you described that incorporated your brother's [David McCoy] story.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The incident with the slapping and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the story that your grandmother, I believe, you said--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --told you.  And then that's in the art.  It's in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Literally written this, the story of my, my brother being slapped is on a chalkboard wall, big, thick, in California we have these thick walls with these metal plates because of the earthquakes sometimes you take a metal plate and tie it in to another structural member so the walls can't bow or tumble.  And so I take this chalkboard and make it this really heavy structural thing, now remember, my experience with school in the classrooms formerly, was a space where they really tried to actually erase you.  So on that chalkboard I write of this early experience in school.  And I write it slanted on the chalkboard, it's 22 feet wide, 8 feet high, the story of so will anybody come to the front of the room and write their name.  David looked and waited, then he stood up, you know, walked to the front of the room and wrote D-A-, in a child's writing, big block letters, V-I-D, period.  She slapped him, period, hard, period, and that's written over, now that's on a slant and then over in a white chalk but mostly erased so it's very, it's like background noise, like this ventilation that you, you hear if you become aware of it, so like background noise or ghost writing there's eenie, meenie, eenie, meenie, miney, eenie, meenie, miney, you believe this shit, eenie, meenie, eenie, meenie, miney.  So that is the background noise un, under which this foreground is written.  Then the story of my grandmother and her great-grandfather as a Maroon and, you know, running away from Burke County, well what's, now Burke County, North Carolina but was then Burke Plantation in Burke County, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 312516
Speaker 1: Before you go on could you just say a little bit more about Maroon communities?  This, most of the history texts will tell us they're mostly in the Caribbean--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or other parts of Latin America (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Well, in the continental U.S., Africans did run away, did resist, and in many, many often, many different situations, often would be accepted within the Cherokee Nation or different nations or would set up these Maroon communities.  And so Maroons are Africans who said enough of this and were successful in getting away and sustaining themselves in a community over a period of time.  It also happened here.  My great-great-great, however many times great, grandfather's case, he had been brought while he was really young.  He had been on the West Coast of Africa, we don't for sure if was the coast or the interior but the point being at the transition between childhood with his mother's compound and into adolescence and the beginning of manhood and moving to his father's compound, there was a ritual process and it involved a hunting expedition and other young men of his age led by elders, he got off that trail and separated from the group, and was captured probably by another area family or a warring family, tribe, and if they weren't on the coast, was marched to the coast and sold.  And where he landed was, what is now Burke County, North Carolina, and he was given a name Jim Burke [ph.], gotta name all my property after myself.  So as a young man sometime between twelve and sixteen years of age he repeatedly, he just could not accept (unclear) just that new definition of himself is just not gonna compute.  So he escaped three times, each time he was caught, each time more severely punished.  Don't keep going to the same wall banging up against that wall, if this one don't work you gotta come up with a plan B.
Story_ID: 313919
Speaker 1: Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], you started to tell us the story of one of the patriarchs in your family, a great-great-great-grandfather Burke [ph.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us more about what he's doing there in the Carolinas?
Speaker 2: Well he was brought there as a slave after having been captured in the course of a ritual where he was taken from his mother's compound to his father's compound and it had to do with coming into the world of men, so it was a, a transformative, a transformative, or a transformation process in his life.  But when he arrived in North Carolina he was given the name of the man who owned the plantation and he ran away several times, each time he was caught and each time more severely punished.  But the way that he was situated in the cultures that, you know, man, this ain't working, you need to come up with something else.  So he came up with a plan B and what he did was whenever he had the opportunity to sneak away, 'cause he was very good about getting away, it was staying away was the problem, and remember he's real young and he's new to this environment, but what he did was he would sneak away and he started digging a hole.  And he would take the fresh dirt and he would gently sift that into the nearby stream so that there was never like a giveaway that somebody's digging somewhere and we don't know about it so.  And eventually he finished a cave and then he took timbers and he framed it out, then he built furniture, married a Cherokee woman, and took his action underground and raised one generation down there, traded with local townsfolk who knew of his presence there and native folks, and remember the Trail of Tears removed a lot of folks but there were still folks there.  So there were people who knew of his presence, probably both European and Native, and he traded with them.  Then his kids had kids and one of the grandkids was seen above ground many years later and they were captured and he and his wife, 'cause if you could catch an Indian [Native American] they were gon' be slaves too if you keep 'em alive and keep 'em from killing you, they were considered too old to be taken back but the children and the grandchildren were taken back.  But that's the story I received from my grandmother.  So that is written on a tablet of slate.  So it's that slate wall over there and then there's across, twenty-some odd feet, on the other side of the room is this hanging object with a piece of slate that has that story written on it in front of a wall that is like skin that has scars like, like counting, you see red coming through this thick tar skin, and then a story about my grandmother's hands is set into the wall.  But this piece floats, it actually hangs out in front of this tar scarred wall.  And there's a bag hanging below it, and the bag has, it's stained from soil and there are peanuts, goobers, and some shells and some other herbs that are a part of this, this particular image.  But my brother's [David McCoy] story is written on in the space and my grandmother's story is written in the space.  My response to my grandmother who stood, you know, just above, you know, my diaphragm and was always, all my life was older, I think when I was born she was probably seventy.  Never raised her voice, very soft-spoken, hands the same size as mine, though she was, you know, probably sixteen inches shorter than me.  So the piece that's set in the wall is talking about her strength and she never raised her voice and she'd just stick her head out the door and the brothers would come running and the strength of her hands.  And so, I mean, the, it's narrative to the degree that in between these two walls there's a, a little rough and framed out shed and you hear the sounds of my family, grandparents, my uncles, just sitting around waiting while my Evie [ph.] is cooking some greens and some chicken and we're sitting and we hear her talking from the other room and we're talking and it's just a family, you know.  Nothing significant, just family.  But that space you hear the sounds of the family.  And the floor is completely covered with really, really rich, red soil.  And then these stories on one wall and then the other wall with this, this little sacred space in between them.  So the, you know, that narrative thing, the storytelling is really, the, the center, the heart of, of all of the work.
Story_ID: 313920
Speaker 1: Are most of your works installations or do you use other media as well?
Speaker 2: There are occasions when I do discreet pieces like Toni Morrison's pieces.  And when I was in California I did a lot more of them and before my kids [Nyima Coleman and Ayo Coleman] were born I did a lot more of them.  But the folks who are aware of me as an artist, it's primarily as a sound installation artist, you know, whose work is really about prayer and gifts and rituals.  It's, I wanna balance that out a little bit more 'cause I'm gonna have to, you know, make some money at some point.  But, you know, the work will always be, you know, narrative and I don't wanna make absolute statements but I think the work will probably always have this, this storytelling core, it'll always be about my experiences in the context of this culture.  But the majority of the work is large-scale installation and always with sound.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where might we experience or see (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I mean, I, 'cause it's more than just looking--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: --so I'm saying experience and hear--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --and be in touch with some of your work?
Speaker 2: There isn't a piece up right now.  The last piece was at the museum downtown at MoCA [Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio] for my mother [Florence McCoy Coleman] that was like, came down last May.
Speaker 1: Did you say MoCA?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Museum of Contemporary Art?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to make sure I understood.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna do a small piece at a place that I just was asked if, if I would participate in a small show.  It's gonna be at a place called the Pomerene Center for the Arts.  It's in Coshocton, Ohio, it's about two hours south of here.  I'd never heard of it or been there.  But I'm gonna do a piece there in a, in a hundred year old house in a room in this hundred year old house.  That'll be in April, do another piece for my mother.
Speaker 1: Is that a commission or just something that you decided (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's not a commission, it's, it's they're, this show was curated, the curator called me and asked me if I could be a part of it.  It's a very small show, there's, there's, you know, no resources, there's no money for it and I'll be doing a sound piece and making some birdhouses and filling them with sound and color for my mother.  What's coming up that's gonna be more local or more visible?
Speaker 1: Well this can be national, international.
Speaker 2: Actually in a, next summer we're supposed to have for the first time in thirty something odd years a group show right here at the museum, here at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Is this the Allen [Memorial Art Museum, Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: The Allen.  I have no idea what I'll do for that, maybe I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now is that technically a part of Oberlin's campus or--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a teaching resource for us in the studio art department.  I use it also as a teaching resource in Afro-American studies as do others of my colleagues in the African-American studies department.  It's, you know, it's a real strong collection.  And actually when Sharon [F.] Patton was the director she made several really high profile purchases of African American, contemporary African American pieces, among them an Alison Saar, a Romare Bearden, one of the conjure women, a Chakaia Booker, oh, gosh, Rashid Johnson out of Chicago [Illinois].  I mean she just, she, really beautiful.  And she was also talking about a, I believe a Charlie White [Charles Wilbert White].  I don't know if we have a [John T.] Biggers yet.  But she did a lot of work.
Story_ID: 313921
Speaker 1: Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], in addition to producing the work, the installation work, the sound installation works, you, you also teach.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're a tenured faculty member here at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and you're smiling?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I snuck in, that's--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Remember I'm not a, I never was a, a scholar.  Never would have thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're a teacher.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and what a high calling, in my opinion.  How do you help your students at this point in your life to find your voice?  Like your mentor, Mr. [Ulysses] Jenkins, helped you to find yours (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To, to find theirs.  Well, I really try to, to inspire them with a sense of passion for the materials.  If we're in, say the introduction to sculpture course, I want them to be aware of a whole range of folks from Andy Goldsworthy, a contemporary artist who works with sight and materials and in a, in a manner that doesn't seek to change that particular landscape and his pieces are completely reversible in time, so they return to the landscape of their own accord, and it's beautiful work.  I want them to know about everyone from him to Magdalena Abakanowicz, an Eastern European master storyteller, sculptor to, you know, the folks who inspired me, Betye Saar, John Outterbridge, Charlie White [Charles Wilbert White], and many, many others.  But their assignments range from a sound making device to a container which is really a very architectural project, they actually have to make an architectural model, draw it out and then construct it, to really just falling in love with process and material.  And for those who are very interested in narrative I, I try to give them as many references as possible and build that, those references into assignments and into presentations that I give.  But then in the classes that are more narratively focused like, Something from Something, which is modeled after Elijah Pierce and Reverend Albert Wagner right here in Cleveland, Ohio.  That really is built upon a notion of intention.
Story_ID: 313922
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you mentioned just before our pause that you have a class, Something from Something.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Based on or inspired by the works of--
Speaker 2: Elijah Pierce and [Reverend] Albert Wagner.  Elijah Pierce spent his life, spent fifty years working as a, a barber in Columbus, Ohio but he's an ordained minister and his work depicted his life, American history, it's a personal history, American history, and the gospel, all of his work, he's a woodcarver and a master painter.  Reverend Albert Wagner is still living.  He lives and works in East Cleveland [Ohio].  A beautiful, beautiful old school gangster, basically, who had his conversion in his mid-fifties and since then has been delivering the Word in his work.  His house is full of his work and he's a really inspiring human being and gifted, gifted artist.  So I take those two artists as a model of intent, intention, what's your work about, who are you talking to, why, right.  And as an example of just an amazing craft even with exceedingly limited means, right.  So their language, their, their, their use of language is masterful.  So I use them as models for thematically driven projects while putting self-trained African American artists within the context of the culture and bringing my students to a, a much broader range of self-trained artists within the culture.  And then they are asked to tell their own stories, and obviously we can't like train to be self-trained African American artists, we, we can tell our own stories, so, that's what we do.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering have you invited Reverend Wagner in to tell his story himself or do you use his works just to illustrate (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I take my students [at Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], and rev, the Reverend's been sick for the last couple of years so I have not taken students as a group to see him in the last two years, and he's not happy about that.  And I will try to take them to see him.  I'll be teaching the class again this semester.  I will try really hard to take them to see him.  I take individuals.  I go see him and I take others to see him but I hope to be able to bring a class, two classes this year, Blues Aesthetic, and Something from Something to see the Reverend.  But if I can't, I have taken so many slides over the years and I, the first time we met we talked for three hours, I have that recorded.  And I've known him for many years.  And I've been interviewed regarding the Reverend, and so, I, I have, you know, documentation of, of him and others talking about him and him in his own words that I can expose my students to.
Speaker 1: Is there a textbook that you use for that or is it, mostly original material you create your own lectures?
Speaker 2: There's no textbook that I use for Something from Something.  I do have them read different essays dealing with self-trained visionary artists in the culture.  For Blues Aesthetic they are asked to read several of the biographical essays that [Romare] Bearden put together around artists ranging from Augusta Savage to Henry Ossawa Tanner, to Langston Hughes to [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, to John [T.] Biggers and, and more.  But they are also asked to read [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash's screenplay for 'Daughters of the Dust.'  They are asked to read Ernest Gaines' '[A] Lesson Before Dying.'  They're asked to read August Wilson's script 'The Piano Lesson.'  They listen to [Amiri] Baraka.  They listen to Wanda, Wanda Coleman.  They listen to, they read an essay by Toni Morrison, "The Site of Memory."  We listen to a lot of music from Ma Rainey and, you know, the emergence of, of those queens all the way through David Murray and many points in between, John Coltrane.  And then obviously we look at an awful lot of images and we do look at some brief film as well.  So Blues Aesthetic is really a seminar that, that examines the evolution of a black aesthetic within the culture and puts it into context.  Something from Something is a studio class where they're really working hands on.
Story_ID: 313923
Speaker 1: Professor Coleman [HistoryMaker Johnny Coleman], it seems that your life and your work as an artist both are informed in a, in a major way by your experiences in that family of four.  You know, that nuclear family in California where you came of age, and I feel that I would be remiss if we didn't say a little bit more about your family of four (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct, right, yeah, that's correct.
Speaker 1: --that you've created for yourself.  So can you tell us again about your children, tell us their names and ages--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and also your wife?
Speaker 2: Well my wife and I have been married I think about twelve or thirteen years maybe.  And we came to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] together.  And our son, our nine year old son, was conceived really just out this door in a, in a little row house, actually a shotgun house, that's directly behind the inn, Oberlin College Inn [Hotel at Oberlin, Oberlin, Ohio], and he was born right here at the hospital.  My wife is Nanette Yannuzzi Macias and she is also a sculptor and an artist who I met in graduate school and she had been at UCSD [University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California] by way of New York [New York] where she had been for several years.  Our first son Ayo [Coleman], he's nine years old.  His name is Emanual Ayobame Coleman [ph.], so God is with us, joy comes to me.  My daughter is Nyima Luccia Fumelio Coleman [ph.].  So 'Naima' is that piece of music that I love of John Coltrane's, and so she knows that she's, (unclear) named for a piece of music that her daddy loves.  And I sang to her all through her infancy and, and early childhood to the point that when she heard that song she would get mad 'cause it's not bedtime, I don't wanna go to sleep, I'm not tired.  But [HistoryMaker] Wendell Logan, who is a friend and the director of jazz studies here, one time we were over at Afrikan Heritage House [Lord-Saunders, Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and he stepped to the piano and started playing, 'cause he knew Nyima was across the room, he started playing 'Naima' and she walked right up to him and stood there with him while he played it.  So something was getting through.  So her name is Nyima for that and Luccia [ph.] is light, her maternal grandmother, great-grandmother it's her name.  And Fumelio [ph.] is another quality of joy and this one is joy in my house, and she is, yeah.
Speaker 1: Spoken like a proud papa.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Story_ID: 313924
Speaker 1: Are there any goals that you've set for yourself as an artist for the immediate future?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to return to the studio a lot more consistently.  You know, being a father and raising two young kids along with my wife and doing a lot of work around our kids schooling and all, whether they're at home or in school, you know, just the way I was raised with home being such a, an instrumental kind of catalyst for what it is you understand about yourself, I haven't had a lot of time, nor has, in that, nor has Nanette [Yannuzzi Macias], and it, it's real important to me that my kids know what my passion is.  I'm not playing much music, I grew up as a guitarist, I'm not playing much music.  I wanna play a lot more music.  I wanna be much more consistently in the studio.  And I'll be working to end my relationship with academia or certainly profoundly change my relationship with academia where it will be much more of a part-time, much more limited access to that time that could be in the studio.  And really more demonstrably showing my kids what my passion is and how it came to be and what it is that I do and share with them, you know, have my son [Ayo Coleman] come more often to an installation site.  And as Nyima [Coleman] gets older, have her more often come to an installation site, have them participate more.  And show 'em everything I can in the woodshop.
Story_ID: 313925
Speaker 1: You smiled earlier throughout that whole narrative section about your indirect route--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to Otis [Otis Art Institute of Parsons School of Design; Otis College of Art and Design, Los Angeles, California].  But I was wondering now that we've told that part of the story if you have any regrets about having taken the indirect path (laughter) to art school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If, if it, yeah, if it, if it had been possible, if I could go back and do it again I think I probably would have been healthier and happier if I would have taken opportunities that had to have been available 'cause there were good people available in my high school [Redlands High School, Redlands, California] and my parents [Florence McCoy Coleman and John Coleman] were working really hard to make everything that they could available to us, you know, they were working real hard but they did their very best.  If, if there's a regret it would be that I'd not wait so long and that I would have taken much better advantage of my time in school as to junior high and high school.  But there's only so much that, you know, the student can do about shaping the nature of the classroom, you know, and so much is incumbent upon the teacher and the culture.  And, you know, a real source of pride for me has been, you know, to really attempt to be someone in a classroom, and I have worked in public schools and worked with kids and, you know, that's where I would, you know, in the future, wanna spend more time is with younger kids but on a limited basis 'cause I really need to be in the studio.  I, I really wish that, you know, the environment had been much more conducive not only for me but for my peers, you know, for so, that we would have recognized, you know, our, you know, our capacity to learn and our talents.  And, you know, so many folks just didn't stay alive or never reached their potential because they were shut down so early.  And I don't think I'm unique, you know, at all, I know I'm not.  And I don't even think that it's only happening to Mexican and African American kids, you know.  I think that so much is gonna have to be addressed in terms of the way in which we inspire young creative human beings to be passionate about exploring and shaping and describing and inventing their world, and, you know.  I think I got my education other ways.
Story_ID: 313926
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be to your children [Nyima Coleman and Ayo Coleman]?
Speaker 2: Oh, daddy.  I wanna be a good father, you know.  I wanna be a good father.  And a good cook, they think of me as a good, a good cook.  I hope they think of me as a good father.  And I hope that when they look back later that I will have been, along with their mom [Nanette Yannuzzi Macias], a nurturer, you know, someone who was actually helping them to discover what it was that they were passionate about, and helping them to pursue it, supporting them in pursuing it.
Story_ID: 313927
Speaker 1: You shared with us some, some memories of a difficult situations, perhaps from your childhood related to race--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and perhaps indirectly to class, you suppose a working class community.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you think you've been able to create an environment, well, within your nuclear family where your son [Ayo Coleman] won't have to experience as much of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think, yeah, I think, you know, not of my doing or Nanette [Yannuzzi Macias]'s doing, I think that the culture has just moved in, in certain ways where some of the challenges will be different.  You know, I think race is, is still a profound issue and my kids are gonna have to deal with that.  But, you know, the classroom is not as just overtly antagonistic as it was when I was in school, you know.  I think the, the issues will be a little different.  And yeah, you know, their mother and I will do everything we can to prepare them and to make sure that the holes that are left in terms of the way in which popular culture depicts cultural specificity and, and, you know, just the, the range of humanity of the populous.  We'll do everything we can to fill those holes and those gaps and make sure they get lots of music, eat good food, have a, a real healthy secure sense of self, sense of curiosity and play, and hopefully a lot of love, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else that you'd like to add?
Speaker 2: You have been really thorough and I've enjoyed this, this conversation.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) well thank you so much.  We enjoyed being here with you and thanks again for sharing your story with The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my pleasure.
