Story_ID: 613410
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ronald Gerald Coleman, R-O-N-A-L-D, G-E-R-A-L-D, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was--my date of birth is the 3rd of April, 1944, I was born in San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a, a historian.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're--aren't you also involved in diversity or something at the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was at one time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm an associate professor of history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And ethnic studies at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 17th of March 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at the home of Paula [Paula Coleman] and Ronald Coleman, in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Story_ID: 613411
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth there are five warm up questions that are kind of People magazine-ish that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Red beans and rice, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is what it is.
Story_ID: 613412
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Jesse Coleman], but I'll ask about your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Gertrude Coleman [Gertrude Welch Hughes], oh G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Gertrude Welch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then Coleman.
Speaker 2: Well, she's--my stepfather [Thomas Coleman] is deceased so she's, she was married subsequent to that so it's Hughes, H-U-G-H-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 29, 1922.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Monroe, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now what do you know about your mother's ancestors, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know my mother's parents and I know my mother's--I knew my mother's maternal grandfather.  That would have been Robert Sewell [ph.]; they're all from out of northern Louisiana.
Speaker 1: But is that as far back as you can go, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My mother's family I can go to her, her grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I have the names where--haven't started really doing the, the work.  I know more about my father's family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Robert Sewell is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Robert Sewell would've been my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather, okay.  So that takes us back to the 19th century, I guess 1880s or so?
Speaker 2: Yes, Robert Sewell was a sharecropper tenant farmer in Monroe, in the Monroe area.  He had at least two wives.
Speaker 1: At--not--in sequence or?
Speaker 2: In sequence.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And a number of children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact number but I do have a, a relationship with them. They're my--some of them are younger than I am, and but they still always remind me that I'm the great nephew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother is their niece even though she's old enough to certainly be their mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now most of 'em were farmers in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's what I recall, I remember seeing him once and they were--and at the time he was on a little strip of land and that's all I knew is he worked the land.
Speaker 1: Is there any stories from that side of the family about, about what life was like in Monroe for tenant, black tenant farmer?
Speaker 2: No, always just took it to be that it was very difficult in that--especially for my mother's brothers in that my brother--my mother's brothers did not have very much formal education, unlike my mother who attended Monroe Colored High [Monroe Colored High School, Monroe, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And graduated from Monroe Colored High and attended for at least some period of time, I'm not sure as to how many--long--Grambling College [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Um-hm that seems like a pattern almost, I know some people in Dayton [Ohio], my in-laws, the Scotts [ph.] grew up in Monroe and went to Grambling too.  I mean it does seem like it's--is there a connection between Grambling and the area around Monroe?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's close.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very, very--you know it's less than forty, fifty miles and my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite Miller] had plans for my mother to become a, an educator, a teacher.
Story_ID: 613413
Speaker 1: And so, and my [maternal] grandmother was a domestic worker and she worked for the Rogers family, they owned a--
Speaker 2: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Marguerite Miller.
Speaker 2: Okay and she worked for the Rogers family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now, okay were the Rogers like a significant family?
Speaker 1: Yeah they owned the, one of the car dealerships there.  So it was one, one of the very typical southern stories in terms of African Americans working in domestic services and sometimes for the, the parents and then later the children, and I never met this man in my life but periodically I'd receive something when I was growing up in San Francisco [California] from Mr. Rogers (laughter).  Later I found his name was John or Jack Rogers, but it was always--Mama always spoke of him as a--Mr. Rogers.
Speaker 2: So he would, he would see it fit to send you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Something.
Speaker 2: --something himself or through them?
Speaker 1: I, I don't recall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Although when I was in college [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] I heard from him on an occasion in, in the aftermath of a football game.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: So he did have some concern about you as offspring of someone that he cared about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was Marguerite's grandson and I lived with my grandmother briefly when I was first born and so, and had it been up to my grandmother I would've remained with her, but my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes] prevailed and I was, I went back home.
Speaker 2: Okay, now your, so your mother went to Grambling [Louisiana Negro Normal and Industrial Institute; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] after?
Speaker 1: She attended Grambling and apparently I don't know how they met but my father [Jesse Coleman] and mother did meet and commenced a, a courtship and my father went to California and he was working for the railroad.
Story_ID: 613414
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's, let's go--let's pick up his side and then have the stories meet (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah his, my father's name is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was Jesse Coleman.
Speaker 1: Jesse, J-E-S-S-E?
Speaker 2: J-E-S-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was March 7, 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think my father was probably from Sicily Island, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Sicily--like the island of Sicily [Italy]?
Speaker 2: No, Sicily Island it's a little--it's down in southern Louisiana.  This is stuff I've just learned recently.
Speaker 1: I mean is it spelled like the island of Sicily?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. S-C-I--?
Speaker 2: S-I-C-L-Y [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, S-I-C-L-Y (unclear) in Louisiana, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And at some point his father, his father [Moses Coleman] and mother [Clarcy Coleman] moved, they moved from Sicily Island which is located in Catahoula Parish [Louisiana].  They moved to Monroe [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your parents meet in Monroe?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now before I get to their story, are there any--how far back can you trace your father's side?  How far can you take them?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Charlie or Charles Coleman. Charlie probably, it, it varies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you see Charles for one, then his son says Charlie [Charles Coleman] so my great-great-grandfather's name was Charles Coleman and his wife's name was Ann [Ann Coleman].
Speaker 1: Okay well what is their story as far as you can tell?
Speaker 2: Well it's--I think they were primarily farmers.  I think my Great-great-grandfather Charlie's--I think he's from Mississippi, he was from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his wife Ann was from Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they, they got--I don't know where they met but they ended up getting married in Catahoula Parish. I've been able to locate their marriage certificate, and my great-grandfather whose name was also Charles was born in 1875, and I can't recall when Beau- when Bulah [Bulah Walker Coleman], who was my great-grandmother when she was born, although I had the good fortune of having photographs of them now.
Speaker 1: Now is it possible that your great-great-grandfather Charles Coleman was born during slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes he was.  Now I mean the easiest thing to say is that he was a slave but I haven't quite been able to do it but more than likely he would've been, Mississippi--yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah it seems likely that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes he was born somewhere I'd say between 1848 and 1853.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would seem to make more sense that he and his wife going from Mississippi and Kentucky to Louisiana would do so at the behest of masters taking them there probably?
Speaker 2: Possibly, yes.
Speaker 1: Than people just deciding to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause black people if they had as a choice they'd probably go north in those days.
Speaker 2: Well especially if he, if they--in her case if she would've been in Kentucky, I mean.
Speaker 1: Then she'd gone to Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or Indiana or some place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I do know that at least for my great-great-grandfather it was his second marriage.
Story_ID: 613415
Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down about the days of Reconstruction or?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't even know of his name or existence until a year ago when I was going through some materials at the LDS Family History Library [Salt Lake City, Utah].  I have the photographs of mama and papa, that's Charlie [Charles Coleman] and Bulah [Bulah Walker Coleman] and but it wasn't until I was able to actually go through the records that I discovered that my [paternal] great-grandfather in fact was named after his father, and what the name of Charles to you know you see Charlie versus Charles and so that's, that's where I am and then I was able to later locate their marriage--each of their marriage certificates for Charlie and Bulah as well as Charles [Charles Coleman] and Ann [Ann Coleman], so, and so it's more of a solid Catahoula Parish [Louisiana] and which I, I have to still learn quite a bit about and then as I look at the--Charlie, I think they were a very close knit family and because at one time Charlie and Ann each had children by a prior relationship, in this case my great-great-grandfather had divorced and I don't know much about Ann, but each of them brought a child to the union, and that was Charl- Charlie and Bulah and subsequently Charlie and Bulah married one another, which would explain why there was always a pretty close relationships in terms of even living when Charlie and Bulah later had their children.  For example, my father [Jesse Coleman] and his oldest sister lost their mother at a very early age, and my Grandfather Moses Coleman remarried and at least for a while my father and his sister Irene [Irene Coleman] went to live with mama and papa; that is Charlie and Bulah and their cousins.  I mean so I think it was a big extended family so much so that my father's--had very close relationships with his cousins and then subsequent to that, other children were born to the union of Moses and, and his wife Ms. Anna [Anna Coleman] and it was--and I think things were difficult.  My father had health problems as a young man, he had what we would today refer to as polio and he had a very limited education.  He was a, a very attractive man, nice looking man and I don't know, he swept my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes] off her feet, and against my grandmother's [Marguerite Miller] wishes my mother married him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: You say your father, they met in Monroe [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then your father was working for the railroad.
Speaker 2: Found employment with the railroads, went to California and I think he went to California in '42 [1942], sent for my mother late '42 [1942], '43 [1943], early '43 [1943].  They were married and a year or so later, April of '44 [1944] I popped into the world.  I was the first of three children of that union.
Speaker 1: Okay now did they settle in California first or did they?
Speaker 2: San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: San Francisco, okay all right.  Now it's interesting now some of the things that you've been able to find out about your father's family were found out through retrieving documents from the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Documents and--
Speaker 1: --the Mormon archive right?
Speaker 2: Down at the LDS Family History Library, that and my father's family kept records, they had a Bible, and in the Bible of which I have a copy of a page, they listed the names of Charlie and Bulah, their birthdates and the name of all of their children and their children's children and then grand- great-grandchildren as much--as, at I, I guess as long as they lived and so you, you get a chance to pick up some names of people that you, you were related to.  So that's, that's basically my anchoring point and I was able to talk to my father's aunts and to see them at certain times which gave me a, a closer affinity for them in that they were more open about their family past whereas my mother tended not to be until recently and she said, "While you looking after your daddy's people, don't forget mine."  I was able to tell her I said, "Well you know they were, they have been more forthcoming than you have."  So she's given me some names to work with, now I have a place to start which will take me over multiple families.  Its been easy pretty much doing Coleman lines, but it'll become more difficult as I try to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the female line does, it throws you more names (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but I've got the names of Welch, Flint [ph.], Roy [ph.], Scott [ph.], you know I mean I, I can, can do some--something.
Story_ID: 613416
Speaker 1: When you think of--now did your father [Jesse Coleman] continue working for the railroad?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.  I mean there were times when he was--what's the term they used to use, he was laid off, put on the extra board he wasn't working and my parents' marriage was rather short term.
Speaker 1: Okay so they split up and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, and shortly after or about this time the third child, third son was born.  So this has to be '47 [1947] and there was a very brief period a year or so when my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes] could not care for us.  I mean work and take care of the three of us, so we went back to live with my mother's father and his wife.
Speaker 1: So back in Monroe [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: We--no, no we went to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, Chicago!
Speaker 2: Yes, my, my grandparents, my maternal grandparents had divorced, I don't know when they divorced--relatively early in my mother's life.  I mean it has to be somewhere--I think daddy was gone by the '30s [1930s], he was in Chicago as I recall, and then he went back to Louisiana during the Great Depression and he had remarried, and so we went to Chicago to live with daddy and Mama Jessie [ph.], that was his wife, she was a very, a wonderful woman and we stayed there from about late '47 [1947] until '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: So you were about five I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah when we came back to California, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And--although I first started school in Chicago I don't, I think it must've been to kindergarten, because when I came to San Francisco [California] I went right into the first grade.
Speaker 1: Now do you know what school you attended in Chicago or what neighborhood you lived in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Gladstone Elementary [William E. Gladstone Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Gladstone, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah I don't know if it's still in existence but yeah I remember Gladstone.
Story_ID: 613417
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about your, well your parents' personalities and dispositions and talents, and who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Wow, each of them will tell you that I'm like the other one.  I think, I'm probably a lot more like my father than I would have ever known and that he, he basically--I've got a--I have some idiosyncrasies, some little ways that remind--enough of them of Jesse Coleman and, and yet physically, physically I look like my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes].  I've got my mother's body build which raises some concerns as she's eighty-six and I know--I'm aware of her health problems so there's some things I need to be more attune to than I have been whereas I was more attuned to my father's situation and my father never weighed over 160 pounds in his life.  I wish I could have that going for me right now and my coloring and everything is just my mother's compared to what my brother's and my father's family and I, I think my penchant for being able to have a decent appearance when I come out, when I'm working I think that came from my father's side.  You know sometimes when you feel that you have been--not had the material things that you would've liked to have had when you're young and I remember when I would go to my father's house I, I would go there and then on Sundays he'd always give us money for Sunday school and I always thought he--I liked the way he carried his self, and this was, this was a point in time when black men who may not have been working full time or were down at the barbershop, they were still clean, they were still clean and that's stylish and I, I grew up.  That's when I come up age observing that, that they're dressed and I've always liked when I needed to put 'em on to be able to put 'em on.  Knowing that, that doesn't make the person but that is important in a sense you know, how you feel about yourself and, and I've noticed that some of the, the people I've observed and met, sense of being able to pull it off when they want to pull it off, but my father wasn't the most trusting person.  I think I'm trusting but I think I also have good antennae, and I think that's--I have some little idiosyncrasies.  Sometimes they come out more, or more, more often it will be something that somebody who knew him will say, "You're just like your father."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 613418
Speaker 1: You have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: A lot of 'em, yes.
Speaker 1: Well is there one earliest one?
Speaker 2: That has--I'll tell you one, it's not my earliest, but it was one of the most poignant moments in my life.  It was in 1954 during the Christmas holiday, my father [Jesse Coleman] had gotten us a pass.  By this time my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes] had been remarried for a number of years and my stepfather's name was also Coleman, Thomas Coleman, and there were six of us by this time, three from the first marriage, three from the second, and we all got on the train and went, we were going to see my [maternal] grandmother [Marguerite Miller] and, and then--it was a big trip, and when we left we--I don't know how we got to from San Francisco [California] over to Oakland [California] but that was where the train departed.  When we went down through the San Joaquin Valley [California] and then the train went over through Arizona, New Mexico and then El Paso, Texas and it was in El Paso that first dealt with segregation, because on the train we had to go to just an all-black section and you know my mother I guess knew what to deal with I mean but never went to the dining car, and then when we arrived in Houston [Texas] it was late.  We missed our connection to take us into Mon- to Monroe [Louisiana], so we had to sleep in the train station and I, I can see out in the distance they had an open area with cots and that's where the white passengers were able to lie down and sleep.  We slept on those hard ass benches, and you know when you're ten years old you don't think that much of it but it was six of us from three to ten plus my mother and then that next morning, we couldn't be served there in the train station.  So she was trying to get us breakfast, so she got us in a taxicab, we went somewhere which was black owned or, and we had breakfast, and then from there--she's trying to get us back to the train station and in the process she ended up losing one of the, one of the younger brothers' jackets.  And that's the first time I'd ever seen mother cry, and that's, that's a very poignant moment for me, and, and because it talked about the, the--to me for it was just symptomatic of the problems of being black in America at that time, although I couldn't articulate it but it, it hit me right between the, the eyes and then of course the next, the next year, not even a year later you know was in about the fifth or sixth grade, Emmett Till, I mean I, I knew what Jet was and everything so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he--
Speaker 2: One of those poignant moments.
Speaker 1: You were about nine or ten when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven?
Speaker 2: It was '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 613419
Speaker 1: All right well tell us about the Emmett Till encounter.
Speaker 2: Well I--my, my brother sold Jet magazine and Ebony magazine I was supposed to be helping him but he was, he was good and I was, I just was not a good magazine seller, but I do remember that issue of Jet magazine and the fact that Till's mother [Mamie Till Mobley] insisted that the casket be open and it's just like I'm looking at you right now, I could--it's in my--I picture it.  It, it's one of those moments that's frozen in town--time and I, I often use those moments as illustrations when I'm in my classes because my students have just finished recently reading a book called 'Trouble in Mind' ['Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow,' Leon Litwack] which looks at black southerners in the age of Jim Crow and the book ends at World War I [WWI], but I want them to have an understanding of the long history and legacy so I talk about well what--even though the book ends in World War I.  I said in my lifetime I've known it since the '20s [1920s], the '30s [1930s], the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s] and even the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And even now and--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness terrible.
Speaker 1: And Charles Byrd [sic. James Byrd, Jr.] just a few years ago.
Speaker 2: Yes and the young man down in Texas.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Charles Byrd.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I mean Jasper, Texas.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Jasper, Jasper is the modern day Emmett Till case.
Speaker 1: I think France Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] has relatives in Jasper.
Speaker 2: And, so those events have, have helped to shape me and when we came back to California we attended school there, Emerson School [Dr. William L. Cobb Elementary School, San Francisco, California] and it was the first time I'd ever seen an African American male figure outside of the church in a position of authority.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like?
Speaker 2: I was five.
Speaker 1: Five years old, Emerson School and when Emmett case went down you were about eleven?
Speaker 2: I was eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 613420
Speaker 1: So Emerson School, so we're gonna pick it up--let me ask (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Dr. Cobb, William Cobb [William L. Cobb] was the--
Speaker 1: Dr. William Cobb.
Speaker 2: --principal, he was the first African American principal of a school [Emerson School; Dr. William L. Cobb Elementary School] in San Francisco [California] and he was, he was a fair man although a strict disciplinarian but it was just something special to see a black principal--to be in a school with a black principal and at least one other black educator who was a teacher, Mrs. West [ph.] and she--I knew where she lived and knew her son.  It, it was a wonderful time to have come of age in San Francisco at that time.
Speaker 1: Now what neighborhood did you live in (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well today it's--there's a part of San Francisco which is generally known as the Western Addition, but we grew up in what was called the Fillmore District [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean I learned about it from Lou Rawls' album ['Live!'] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: The Fillmore District (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lou Rawls when he was working the Chitlin' Circuit as he called it.
Speaker 1: That's right the Fillmore District.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 613421
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh man, it was--Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California] was a, a lively, vibrant African American community which was full of social and cultural activities.  We use to go to the barbershop and the barbershop--you, you saw everybody in the barbershop.  I mean I was a, a--able to observe but I always had to stay in a, in a little boy's place, but for example I saw the great Nat King Cole there getting his hair processed back in the day, and I got his autograph man and I couldn't--I don't know where it is, and it was a place--I mean my stepfather [Thomas Coleman] when he'd take us there he'd always tell his guy the same thing, "Cut it close," but you know that's where he--you know they had guys talking a whole lot of smack.  You know what went on in the back room and you know it was, it was a social and cultural place pretty much in the same way that Elks clubs [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and other places have functioned for blacks in, in a number of years.  It was--there were black owned businesses, Wesley Johnson owned the Texas Playhouse [San Francisco, California]; there was Jimbo's Bop City [San Francisco, California], there were a number of thriving--Fillmore was a lively place.  There was a--as close I guess you might as I would have ever come to Harlem [New York, New York].  It was a place--we, we went to the Booker T. Washington Community Center [Booker T. Washington Community Service Center, San Francisco, California].
Story_ID: 613422
Speaker 1: We were a member of Bethel A.M.E. Church [San Francisco, California], also attended bible school at my godparents' which was Second Union Baptist Church [Second Union Missionary Baptist Church, San Francisco, California].  So we back forth Baptist or A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] it didn't make any difference and in, in the church the women of that church I mean they, they--I'm indebted to them.  They took me when I was very young and immature and they always made me feel I was very special.
Speaker 2: Now what was the name of the church again?
Speaker 1: Bethel A.M.E.
Speaker 2: Bethel A.M.E., okay.
Speaker 1: They nurtured me, trained me, I mean that's for--you know that one time.  Oratorical skills were important and it's kind of interesting today how some people try to minimize that or try to make light of it by implying that there's no substance behind a good speech if you know what I'm talking about.  Don't hate, congratulate, and so I--they just helped me.  I mean I certainly wasn't gonna get it in the schools.  I mean schools were okay, I went to predominately--I didn't go to white--I didn't go to school with white people for the most part.  It was African Americans, Asians, a few Mexican Americans, but very few white people, and it was--I went to Bethel A.M.E., I mean it wasn't an option.  You had to go every Sunday and the Sunday school--and there I, I made my first addresses.  Had my first, really first black history lesson and that I didn't have to do a report but I learned a song that sang about Richard Allen, one of the founders of the A.M.E. Church, and I still know that song today man.
Speaker 2: How does it go, I've never heard this.
Speaker 1: (Singing) "Come gather around your children and a story you should hear of a man we all know and love, his name was Richard Allen and they say he was a slave but he steady rose to great--to heights above, Richard Allen, Richard Allen," and that's (laughter) you know, yeah, that's, that was my first black history lesson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 613423
Speaker 1: And so I attended, after Emerson [Emerson School; Dr. William L. Cobb Elementary School, San Francisco, California] I went to Pacific Heights School [San Francisco, California] and because Emerson only went up through the third grade then fourth, fifth, sixth was at another school.
Speaker 2: So Pacific Heights School?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In the same area that was made famous (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you know it was, it was--Pacific Heights [San Francisco, California] is a different area.  It's pretty upper crust but we were just like on the border of it and then we went back down into what was the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California] area, it was bounded by Fillmore but that was the upper part of Fillmore where primarily whites went, but they didn't go to school there.  I mean they went to private schools or something, and so--.
Speaker 2: So how was Pacific High School [sic.], was that, did you have any black teachers there or?
Speaker 1: No, no, no they were all white and the principal was white, Ms. Ethel Duncing, and by the time I went to junior, to Pacific Heights I was taking, my brother and I were taking music lessons.  My parents [Gertrude Welch Hughes and Jesse Coleman] made great sacrifice to try to get us--my brother played clarinet and I took trumpet lessons and my parents made great sacrifices and found us very good instruments and I played from the time I was in about the fourth grade, third grade up until I was in the eighth grade when athletics came to prevail and I remember telling my stepfather [Thomas Coleman], I said--I don't know what I was thinking that I didn't have trumpet lips, and I think I lost my chops, but I, I--looking back I was always a little embarrassed about it 'cause I know that, that instrument was one hundred bucks [dollars] which was a lot of money in the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and they paid ten dollars a month to Sherman and Clay [Sherman, Clay and Company] it seemed like forever.
Story_ID: 613424
Speaker 1: Now was he a music aficionado?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he took (unclear), yeah he turned (unclear) you couldn't fool with the phonograph, that's where I was first exposed to Louis [Louis Armstrong] and you know when we lived in the Fillmore District [San Francisco, California] there was a place that--we lived up the street from a place called Jimbo's Bop City [San Francisco, California] which was--you could sneak over the fence at night.  Obviously we were doing what we--my parents [Gertrude Welch Hughes and Jesse Coleman] if they'd of known it they'd of killed us, but it's an after hours place and so you could be out there and, and listening to the music and they the--cat--(unclear), the liquor was flowing and everything a lot of the musicians would come in and join you know.  Fillmore was a lively, lively center and--
Speaker 1: So it was Jimbo's jazz club (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Jimbo's Bop City.
Speaker 1: They played bop (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They called it Bop City, but that's where they played--after, after the other places had closed down--say you might've of had Nat King Cole or somebody playing at the Fairmont [Fairmont Hotel; Fairmont San Francisco, San Francisco, California] and one of those Mark Hopkins' Hotels [Mark Hopkins Hotel; InterContinental Mark Hopkins San Francisco, San Francisco, California], well they would come down there and they would jam and everything.
Speaker 1: After hours, after they were?
Speaker 2: After hours, yes.
Speaker 1: So they would play for the white establishments and then after hour they'd come back to the black community (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and there were clubs in the Fillmore--different clubs--I, I was too young to go to at the time and but you know my, my stepfather [Thomas Coleman] went and you know we, we were introduced to the barnstorming tours of Jackie Robinson, Roy Campanella.  It was just a very--my stepfather took us to see the San Francisco 49ers play and you know, you knew that Joe Perry lived in the neighborhood, not that far away.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Joe "The Jet" Perry.
Speaker 2: Joe "The Jet" Perry lived up there on Sacramento Street, he was special.  I mean him and John Henry McLe- John Henry Johnson.
Speaker 1: Right, John Henry Johnson, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah so you know it was a great time we and then you--it was a time when your parents weren't afraid--I mean basically you had to go outside because there were so many of us inside, so we were encouraged to go to the park and play and--
Speaker 1: What about Willie Mays?  Did you ever meet Willie Mays and Cepeda [Orlando Cepeda] and?
Speaker 2: What--Mays came to San Francisco [California], the Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants] came to San Francisco in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And for a while Mays stayed up on Spruce Street.  I knew him, I knew some people that lived up by him and a couple of my friends used to tell me that they use to see him sometime down on the Fillmore at this place called Trees [Trees Pool Hall, San Francisco, California] which was a pool hall, but you didn't really have any interactions with them.  I had another friend who lived across the street from Mongo Santamaria up on Golden Gate [Avenue] and sometimes P.J. would--across the street, Mongo Santa- I mean you'd hear them bonk, bomp, bomp, bomp and Cepeda. They, they were all (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The greatest conga player of all times some would say.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you know and his--he had a daughter I think her name was Nancy Santamaria [Nancy Santamaria Anderson], I forget her name.  So you know you would in a peripheral way maybe they would come across somebody.
Speaker 1: It sounds like an exciting neighborhood.
Speaker 2: It was I mean and then the--at a certain point you knew about the dances.  I mean I lied, put my age up to thirteen so I could go to the dances, go to the dance and not dance (laughter), you know but that was all part of your moving into adolescence, learning, you, you know coming of age and then by the time I was sixteen, seventeen I was going to the Fillmore Auditorium [The Fillmore, San Francisco, California] to see James Brown and The Famous Flames, and Hank Ballard and The Midnighters, Little Willie John and that--you know it was, that was the old Fillmore when it was a Fillmore Auditorium it was on off of Geary Street, not this stuff of Bill Graham's day.
Story_ID: 613425
Speaker 1: And I'm not, don't mean to be wandering but when I was in the--coming, going into the seventh grade I had an experience which really probably was very important.  I'd had some problems in elementary school [Emerson School; Dr. William L. Cobb Elementary School, San Francisco, California] in terms of discipline, and lack of respect for authority.  I use to always get citizenship checks and I'd gotten a couple of suspensions and so I was not--my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes], my mother did not want me to go to the junior high school in our neighborhood.  Instead she used my cousin's address and for the first time I was--I went to school I found out what being a minority was.  I'd never gone to school with whites where they were just over- just overwhelming in terms of the numbers.
Speaker 2: Well how did that work out?
Speaker 1: It was a very good experience.  It, it opened me to the possibility of friendships.  I think I got a better education those three years because it was in the Marina District in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And in fact it prepared me for the high school that I eventually entered which was also a predominately white and at the time was one of the better high schools in the United States in terms of its academic standards and its racial, racial balance and I just had a wonderful education.
Speaker 2: So what was the high school's name?
Speaker 1: George Washington Senior High School [George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: I went there in 1958.
Speaker 2: Now what neighborhood was that in?
Speaker 1: That's out in the Richmond District [San Francisco, California] in the avenues.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Off of Geary Street [sic. Geary Boulevard], bordered between about 30, Geary and Anza [Street], no, no, Geary and Balboa [Street] and 30th [Avenue] and 32nd Avenue, it's a big high school, built in 1936.
Speaker 2: So this is about 1958 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And by then I was playing sports.
Story_ID: 613426
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is also the age when rock and roll starts turning the corner or something you know.  So you're part of that generation where the jazz thing turned to rock and roll, where all the young people seemed to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, by that time you know R and B, rhythm and blues you know that was more and more you're buying your 45s [45 rpm record], but you still, we still had a touch with well Armstrong [Louis Armstrong] recorded album 'Satch Plays Fats' and so we you know you couldn't fool with the old man's hi-fi, by then they had a hi-fi, and so I'm familiar with "Honeysuckle Rose" and Fats Waller tunes and everything and so that--foot in both camps, but I obviously drifted more towards the rhythm and blues, The 5 Royales and I, I just heard an interview last week on satellite radio, The Dells and I mean boy those cats been blowing a long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're from Harvey, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean they have been blowing a long time.  The one guy, Barksdale [HistoryMaker Chuck Barksdale], that brother can blow and at, at but at the same time you know San Francisco [California] in our neighborhood for a while the Mathis family lived there before they moved.
Speaker 1: Oh, Johnny Mathis (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I would--his, his youngest brother was in the Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and so you know by the time I went to high school [George Washington Senior High School; George Washington High School, San Francisco, California], my parents had bought their first home and then in 1960 when I was gonna be a senior in high school they left the, the Western Addition [San Francisco, California] and moved into the Richmond District [San Francisco, California].  On the 3rd Avenue which at the time I didn't realize, didn't know anything about it but my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes] never went into this one grocery store on the corner.  It's Chinese owned, never--she's, she never set foot in that store when it was in business and I didn't know why and she didn't care for the people who were their tenants.  Upstairs there was two units that my parents rented out and later--years later she was more forthcoming.  My parents--we were--there weren't any other African Americans living on the block when we moved there and apparently there had been an attempt to get a petition not to rent from [sic. to] her and Henry [ph.] who later became, was okay. Henry he owned, owner of the grocery store he and his wife were one of the people who put up the petition, plus one of the people who, who were tenants up in my parents place when they first moved there and my mother she knew about it.  She never went to that store and very quickly she got them people out of the front apartment and the little cat that owned a store across the street, a little small store, he's something of a, a redneck.  He, he spilled the beans told my parents everything and then that left a bad taste with my mother, but we grew up there and my mother's still in the same house today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's almost forty-eight years.
Story_ID: 613427
Speaker 1: So that, now you played football right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in, in high school [George Washington Senior High School; George Washington High School, San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're pretty good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty good.  We were encouraged to play sports simply for the fun of it.  Never played it with any intention of doing anything, it's just fun and ran track and we had some success at it.  When I went to high school, it was a way of you know you meet people across the city, played and, and we won a championship my senior year and I was a good player for the team.  I wasn't the best and--
Speaker 1: Now what did you play?
Speaker 2: Running back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I had some, I never thought of scholarships and by the time I was a senior I was getting some feelers.  We could go over to see the Cal Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] games and then Marv Levy was the coach then.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And, he, he--
Speaker 1: Became a pro coach and all that.
Speaker 2: Yeah and later talked about sending a transcript; well I know I didn't have grades to Berkeley and it was one of the few times that my stepfather ever just blew--got mad 'cause he always assumed that the grades were there and so when I didn't, couldn't take it you know I mean he just, that's when he started paying more attention to the academic side.  I mean I don't know, I don't know that I would've gone to college had it not been for my stepfather.  I, I don't know, it would've--when I told him I didn't want to go to college even though that was something that they'd always drilled, he had pushed it more than my mother [Gertrude Welch Hughes].  It was--and I told him I was gonna be a plumber, I had a hook up and that's when he broke it down to me.   This is--I did--thought I had a hook up about the--you know about blacks being allowed to be in the union.  So I had no other choice but to go to college if I wanted to stay in their house and so he said I had a second chance, and I went to City College [City College of San Francisco] in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: This is 1960?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], played football 'cause it was fun, my friends were playing and played a second year at the insistence of my stepfather 'cause by that time I didn't wanna play necessarily but I wanted to get out and make me some money and a lot of my partners had dropped out and he said, "Nah you gonna play for--you don't have to work all your life, go ahead and play one more time."  And I had a great year, we didn't do nothing as a team which was--bothered me 'cause I had gotten by that time I was really into the--if the team do well then I've done well and so out that came scholarships and I wanted--I had some chances to go back to the Big Ten [Big Ten Conference], but that would've been staying in junior--a community college another semester.  This was in what January, end of '62 [1962] coming into January '63 [1963], and I'd started to slip in school.  As I said many of my friends had dropped out, and so I remember telling my stepfather Thomas Coleman I wanna to stay one more semester because I wanna go play in the Big Ten.  He told me no, he said, "You're going somewhere at the end of January," he said, "me and your mama giving you a going away party," (laughter), and that's basically what went down.
Story_ID: 613428
Speaker 1: I had to pick a school, and I, I don't have any regrets.  The guy that recruited me to Utah, I'd have gone to Timbuktu [Mali] with him.  He's never--he'd tell you today, say, "I took him when he was eighteen and leaned on him," you know he's always been there for me, and so I came here.
Speaker 2: The University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Yeah I came here because it was not that far from home, I liked it here, the coach that recruited me and the head coach (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was--well who was the coach?
Speaker 1: The coach that was the head coach was Ray Nagel, but the guy that recruited me was Chuck Chatfield [Charles Chatfield], C-H-A-T-F-I-E-L-D, and this, this cat was good to--you know he recruited a bunch of brothers, he was with the Washington State [Washington State University, Pullman, Washington], he coached at Sacramento City College [Sacramento, California], Washington State, came to the University of Utah, later worked for the Dallas Cowboys and then he walked away from it football 'cause he said and went into business in about--he'll be seventy-two this year, two years ago.  Brothers that he recruited they played for him at Sacramento, at Utah, at Wash- you know he brought a number of us in for his birthday party. You know he flew Roy Jefferson in from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], we had a great, great reunion, my roommate man, he was just a good dude.  You don't find that, that often among coaches and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you know Roy Jefferson as we mentioned before we started the interview was one of the top players of that era, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Roy is good.
Speaker 2: Went on to play pro football, so you, you all were both on a team together at the University of Utah?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we played here '63 [1963] and '64 [1964].  He was here all four years, freshman, sophomore, junior and senior.  I, I transferred at and we played our junior and senior year together.
Speaker 2: Now do you still play running back?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah I wasn't gone get on no line man.
Speaker 2: Well man they might make you a DB [defensive back].  I, you know I don't know, you seem (unclear) like it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I played both ways in high school [George Washington Senior High School; George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] and in, in community college [City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] and when came here they just put me at, at the running back position.  I mean we were in a good conference, played against some good teams in our senior we just had a great team.
Speaker 2: Well Utah plays what Colorado and Arizona State and--
Speaker 1: Back then we played Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], we played Utah State [Utah State University, Logan, Utah], we played Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], who else?  I mean we, we went all of the country, Army [sic. United States Air Force Academy, Colorado], Idaho [University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho]--we were at the Western Athletic Conference at that time.
Speaker 2: The WAC they called it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and that was when Tony Lorick and those brothers was running outta Arizona State, they had Larry Todd and Charley Taylor and Gene Foster.  Arizona State was bad, we whooped 'em up here 16-3 our senior year.
Story_ID: 613429
Speaker 1: So it was, but I, and I think when I--in coming to school here [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] you know I knew about the Civil Rights Movement obviously, but our sense, first sense and I knew not--what not to do I mean in support you wasn't gonna cross no picket line down in Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] in San Francisco [California] no much--no matter how much I liked those Neapolitan ice creams.  But here, there was called to our attention that we had a responsibility.  There was a brother here by the name of Dr. Charles Nabors [Charles James Nabors] and he was in anatomy, he was a Ph.D. candidate then he was in the faculty here.  He was very active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and it was Dr. Nabors along with some other people in the NAACP, but particularly Chuck, who sort of pricked our consciousness about a need for us to stand up for, for some things and especially when you know in the aftermath of Roy and (unclear) married and they had to deal with.  It wasn't any ordinances but there was de facto segregation.
Speaker 2: So Roy Johnson [sic. Roy Jefferson] married a white?
Speaker 1: No, no she's black.
Speaker 2: No, black but what, what was the problem?
Speaker 1: Well housing, trying to find housing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, housing, okay.
Speaker 1: Trying to find housing, yeah, and, and knowing that the, the housing, general exclusion from access to some areas of public accommodations and you knew that the seat of the, many people--I remember we went down at to the old LDS Church Office Building [Salt Lake City, Utah] which was on South Temple [sic. North Temple Street] between State Street and Main Street, just north--just east of the Hotel Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] which was an active hotel then and just doing some picketing, just marching and protesting and that, and then going, part of the educational experience here was they brought people here.  Point, counterpoint type of thing, we saw Ross Barnett and I mean he set up there and made the comment about, "Ain't nothing wrong with our nigras" and with that same year that he was here they also had Dr. James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the head of the law school and became the president.
Speaker 1: Yes and so--
Speaker 2: Barnett was the governor of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yes, and so you had this sort of point, counter point where you saw Louis Lomax one year.  So and that sort of just sort of pushed your consciousness and everything and I left here in December of 1965.
Story_ID: 613430
Speaker 1: Okay so you earned your B.A. in sociology [from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: Sociology.
Speaker 1: In 1966 right?
Speaker 2: Yes and I completed my course requirements for a Bachelor of Science degree in sociology in December of 1965 and the formal graduation was June of '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I went, I left, I left Salt Lake City, Utah never to return.  I'd had a wonderful experience, made great friends but I never and ever envisioned myself living here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I went back to California, I was able to--I was in--I was a little naive and I had been in school under a student deferment and I figured that I had a military obligation, and so in December of 1965 I went to the selective service board on McAllister [McAllister Street, San Francisco, California] and turned in my student deferment--duh.  In February they declared me 1-A and I naively wrote them a letter in which I explained my situation in terms of what I had just accomplished and that I thought I could make a more contribution to the nation by remaining on stateside, and then six to eight weeks later I got my letter for my physical, and I had a little cup of coffee up in Minnesota, Bemidji, Minnesota in 1965 when I tried out for the Minnesota Vikings and I--it was over very quickly, but I'd gotten enough money 'cause I didn't have to work that summer and so by '67 [1967] though I recalled--I took my physical and did--was--didn't pass.  And so they gave me a--they changed my classification to 1-Y.
Speaker 1: Now what did--you have a knee problem or something or--?
Speaker 2: I'd had some benign tissues and they wanted to make sure--and I had some knee problems.  All I know is that the--I took about three or four physicals and they made their decision.
Story_ID: 613431
Speaker 1: And so I, I worked for General Mills [General Mills Inc.] for a year and a half, primarily--not primarily, because of the National Urban League.  It's--I think it was a point in time when--I think Whitney Young was still head of the National Urban League and I mean they had made some breakthroughs with some manufacturing companies in terms of hiring African Americans and so I got a job as a grocery product sales representative.  Man, I was proud, I was real proud of that job, I was--I saw myself as having a wonderful opportunity and imagined in the next ten to fifteen years that I would be standing in Minneapolis [Minnesota] in a Botany 500 suit with my arms folded on the pages of Esquire or GQ cause I, I knew I'd work that hard and it was a wonderful experience.  Part of the wonderful experience was learning about institutional racism and once that hit me in my face in 1967 I had a decision to make, which was do you stay here knowing what your superiors think about--not you so much personally, but as--indirectly it's you.  You know in sales they're only interested in knowing where's the business?  And we were doing terrible, weren't hitting our numbers, you know our job is to promote extra sales which was gonna affect everybody's bottom line, and we had a sales meeting up in Sacramento [California] which I was in the Sacramento district and our district manager went around, I mean no, this is our regional manager and he was just giving us hell, and I remember him saying, "You've gotten--some of you sitting around in here have gotten fat, sassy and you know rich, you know what I'm talking about?"  And when he said that I said, what, nah he didn't say that, nah he didn't say that, nah he didn't say that and then I said, come on you, he--that's exactly what he said. So I got up to leave and he told me to sit down and I told him step outta my way. I was gone knock his so and so off.  I left, went home, told my roommate what had happened.  He said, "What you gone do?"  I said, "Man, I don't know what I'm gone do."  I said, "I know what I'm gone do now. I gotta figure out when I'm gone do it."  This was in the spring of 1967, by fall I was gone and by then I'd met some cats.
Story_ID: 613432
Speaker 1: I knew what I didn't know, I knew that--I'd known ever since I was a senior in college [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] that I wasn't happy with my major, wasn't you know, and I'd started going back taking some history classes and then I met some cats and was doing a lot of reading on my own.  And so I went--this guy that recruited me here, Chuck Chatfield [Charles Chatfield], he told me, "I think you ought to put something into the well from whence you've drawn," and I went back to school and earned a teaching credential.
Speaker 2: At the University of?
Speaker 1: At Cal State University, Sacramento [Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California].
Speaker 2: Oh, Cal State (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sacramento State, and.
Speaker 2: What year is that?
Speaker 1: That was '67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was teaching, student teaching on April 4, 1968.
Speaker 2: So you got your teaching (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Teaching credential.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Before then in '67 [1967] I was there in, at Cal State University, Sacramento when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to speak against the war [Vietnam War].  At first they were gonna have it in the gym, then they had to go to the stadium, and by then I'd seen--first time I'd saw Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] give a speech in Sacramento [California] at Sacramento High School, you know it was around you.
Speaker 2: Now that's when he was making transition to the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, and then by then you know you knew the Panthers, Emory Douglas was a young brother from the neighborhood who, who'd become the Panther author, artist.  By '68 [1968] in, in April 4th '68 [1968] I was out at Luther Burbank Junior High School, Senior High School [Luther Burbank High School, Sacramento, California] student teaching when we learned of the assassination and by fall of 1968 I was teaching in junior high school in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: Now did things blow up in California when Dr. King was assassinated?
Speaker 1: Assassinated--yeah, yeah, San Francisco, but I was sort of in Sacramento, I was--by then married, child and--
Speaker 2: Do you remember Julian Richardson's bookstore?  Was that going on there--Marcus Books [San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 1: Marcus Books, I'm familiar with that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In fact I still go to Marcus bookstore--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on Fillmore Street and buy.   I go down and see what they have this coming week, and in fact that's one of the good things good about Fillmore Street now, man, that's--you talk about gentrification.
Speaker 2: That's about the only thing left right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a community center down the street Ella Hill Hutch [Ella Hill Hutch Community Center, San Francisco, California] and so I was teaching social studies at a junior high school and--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: I took my first teaching position with San Francisco Unified School District.  I taught at A.P. Giannini Junior High School [A.P. Giannini Middle School, San Francisco, California] and I was able to go back to my former high school [George Washington Senior High School; George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] and coach the sophomore football team.  I did one semester in junior high school and my former athletic director from the high school I attended called me and asked me if I wanted to come work at predominately African American high school.  And where I would teach social studies and physical education and I would be the assistant football coach and head track coach--Saul Matthews [ph.], and so I took that offer and it took me over into the Bayview Hunters Point area of San Francisco, and it was, it was a--quite different from A.P Giannini Junior High School, but the kids were there wonderful, I had a great experience, I did that for a year and a half and I had an opportunity to--
Story_ID: 613433
Speaker 1: By then I had developed a, a pretty fair knowledge of African American history and I interviewed for a job at Sacramento City College [Sacramento, California] and was successful and which meant I also had to go back and to graduate school to get a master's degree, which I did and I was--studied there [Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California] under Professor Frank Coskey [ph.], the late Dr. Frank Coskey.  I was a student also of Dr. Gregg Campbell and also of Dr. David Covin, and I taught African American history there at Sacrament City College and United States history for three years and in the process I also re- of trying to complete my thesis I renewed a relationship with a former professor at the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah], primarily because I needed access to their resources in the special collections area of the Marriott Library [J. Willard Marriott Library, Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: Now what was your thesis on?
Speaker 1: 'A Black Perspective of Race in the Mormon Doctrine' [ph.], and I came here and renewed some acquaintances and, and in the time that I was here, the late Dr. Philip Sturgis [ph.] asked me had I ever given thought to pursuing a doctoral studies and I told him no, that I really didn't--was happy where I was.  I was in the process of earning tenure and we went back and forth and my advisor at Cal State, Sacramento, Dr. Coskey just said, he said, "This is unique opportunity."  So I decided to lean out on faith and came back to Salt Lake City, Utah and the University of Utah and I've been here since 1973.  I was very rare, most of the time you, you don't--if you're a graduate student you're a graduate student.  I wasn't a professor, I--but I was an instructor and so I was able to work on my degree at the same time that I--I needed full time employment.  I had family responsibilities, young children and I thought that, I thought that I would've been gone, but when the opportunity presented itself to make a chance, to make a change you know weigh, weigh the odds and I think in '81 [1981] I made a commitment to being here and I've been very happy with that decision, very happy.  Still have work to do, it's, it's a lot of vineyards to be worked in and I guess this is the one I've chosen to try to make my contribution.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what was your dissertation on?
Speaker 1: 'A History of Blacks in Utah from 1825 to 1910' [Ronald G. Coleman].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And came here and worked on it.  I had some wonderful mentors and I never expected to spend any time in administration but that opportunity presented itself and so, and I worked under an extraordinarily capable woman, Dr. Flesha Adams [ph.] and she taught me a lot, I learned a lot from her and as well as others and eventually I was--I succeeded her and so I was in the central administration for about ten years and since that time I've returned back to full-time teaching and my research and I'm kind of excited about what I'm doing now.
Story_ID: 613434
Speaker 1: Well, I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you what are some of the highlights of your study of the history of blacks in Utah, I mean who was here in 1825?
Speaker 2: Trappers and traders, trappers, James P. Beckwourth [James Beckwourth], some young brother by the name of Jacob Dodson who came across the plains with the great pathfinder, John C. Fremont and later when he tried to raise some men to fight to protect the nation's capital in the outbreak of the Civil War he cited his experiences with Fremont coming across the plains several times.  Some of--there were some men of African descent with Jedediah Smith, the great explorer/trapper, but Beckwourth, James P. Beckwourth is the best, best known of them.
Speaker 1: There's a guy named, whose last name was Bongo [sic. George Bonga] I think, do you remember him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he doesn't, he's in I think Minnesota.
Speaker 1: Minnesota, okay.
Speaker 2: Minnesota. And then of course when the permanent settlement began with the African Americans who came with the Mormons in 1847, so there's been a black presence here ever since then and certain--
Speaker 1: Well was now since you've been here the Mormon church actually changed its--officially changed its position on black people, but they had an official position though some could argue that all American churches have an unofficial position about black people, I mean the white churches do, but, but they had an official position that was--that people considered very negative towards black people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes at, at some point and historians argue about the point.  I think it--under Brigham Young's leadership the cry- what crystallized was prohibitions against black males holding the priesthood in the LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] faith, and without the priesthood you can't fully participate in all of the rights and rituals of the church.
Speaker 1: Now, to be, to be clear, what is the--is it like the Catholic priesthood?  Or is it like the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no they are a lay ministry but at a certain age all worthy males aspire into priesthood and they have different levels.
Speaker 1: And it's--so is it like a manhood right or something to?
Speaker 2: Yes, but with it comes certain privileges and without these privileges you can't fully participate in church rites and so that ultimately could historically impact upon whether or not in the afterlife you were deemed to be eligible to enter into the highest levels of heaven.  They had a view of heaven which consisted of three, three levels, and so if you were LDS it's extraordinarily important, extraordinarily important.  So in the aftermath--but this practice which begins in the--when Young's--in his lifetime what continued down through as you said, until 1978 and it seems to me, although I'm sure that I'd have some people who would disagree that if you look at a re- people who are religiously prescribed to a subordinate position that, that would impact your secular beliefs about these people, and so certainly I think it was manifested in the public sphere here provided the fact that you had de facto segregation and, in some instances du jour, I mean you, you have always been able to live in this state, territory and later state if--regardless of your racial background if you--but you could not between about 1884 and really up until the 1960s be permitted to buy or purchase, receive a marriage license if you were Asian and, and white or black and white.
Story_ID: 613435
Speaker 1: You could go to California because in some of the surrounding states there were similar anti-miscegenation statutes but if you wanted to get married and then return to the state and so that and the fact that hotels, restaurants in the 1940s, '50s [1950s] and really up until the 1960s routinely discriminated against black people, I mean there's a whole litany of African American, prominent African Americans who in their travels through Utah found Jim Crow alive and well, and I think that the religious prohibitions really didn't gather any national attention until really in the post World War II [WWII] period, and the continued perpetuation of these practices as the modern Civil Rights Movement gain, gained momentum especially in the aftermath of the 1950s and 1960s, sort of pushed the, the LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] faith and its position into a, a larger limelight.  I, I know that when--just at--in the aftermath of revelation, it came at a time when the Dr. John Hope Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] was visiting the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah].  He was a commencement speaker that year receiving an honorary degree, and he had a meeting with the first presidency and in the aftermath that, some of--and there was a reception and several people asked him about it and he said that nothing ever--nothing came up as to the revelation.  And they were stunned that he didn't ask about it (unclear) and he said his response was, "I'm not LDS and I don't live in Utah."  And in, in a sense whatever that conversation was it was a private conversation that Dr. Franklin had with the first presidency, and I certainly could see where he didn't feel like he needed to share that conversation with people at a cocktail party.
Speaker 2: So do you suspect that John Hope Franklin's counsel somehow--?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is something, which--I mean they had been.
Speaker 2: Just a coincidental thing, thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and I think if anything I think this is, it, it's--well we're talking about some, what almost thirty years this year, it certainly removed a stigma off of the LDS church and made their proselytizing efforts and desires to become a universal church much more possible in places where it would not have been possible.  I mean there's--they have--it includes Latin, Latin Americans, South America, and certainly Africans.  A number of--when we were in Ghana this past year we had some contact with some of the people who were members of the church.
Speaker 2: Oh, they send missions out, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah missionaries (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Young men on missions to--
Speaker 1: Young men and women.
Speaker 2: --countries--oh, okay all over the world.
Speaker 1: Yeah and so and then I think it certainly took a load--what's, just for people who--black people of African descent or members, they're, they're much more in a better position now and I guess you can say their faith was powerful.
Speaker 2: To stay in it as long as they--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I have some friends who really--I'd say, I have to admire 'em, and I also think--
Story_ID: 613436
Speaker 1: I don't think even in most--well in other church denominations I can't think of another situation where black folks were told that they could only reach a certain height of heaven or grace, I mean by definition because they were black.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I don't you know even though they've certainly been mistreated in other denominations but you know the official (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here I think for--as a black person living here I think--now when they lift that granite rock off the LDS church it also lifted it off of us to an extent, 'cause now there was nothing to hide under.  You have to (unclear) you know what are you talking about you know?  What's the basis for your biases now?  We've still, we've got to--because of the numbers of black people here are so small, you haven't had the type of interaction that you would have say, I'm sure in Dayton [Ohio], and Gary [Indiana] in any, any other place with a--outside of the intermountain west, well Denver's [Denver, Colorado] in the intermountain west but I think that there's a lack of familiarity on the part of a lot Utahans.  This is a very small state and our black population is less than 1.1 percent and so, and I think at certain times, certain people have felt very comfortable in their ignorance but in today's modern world it's--there's no excuse and I think the Olympics [2002 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City, Utah] and the, the late president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the late President Gordon Hinckley [Gordon B. Hinckley] is a remarkable person.  He came up, he was the right president at the right time for the, for the faith and for the state because he had extraordinary, not only was he an extraordinary religious leader, but man he, he--great interpersonal skills, great public relations sensitivity and certainly, I mean you know Gladys Knight is LDS.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yes and our former Jazz [Utah Jazz] star for the basketball team Thurl Bailey.
Speaker 1: Yeah Thurl Bailey's well known.
Speaker 2: Yeah, great guy.
Speaker 1: He's a commentator now on television for the Jazz right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well for some, one of the sports programs, he's a great guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, and I've met a number of very sharp young brothers and sisters who well--is not, some of who live here and some in other parts of the country and that, I think it's a little bit different if you come from other parts of the country I mean 'cause they got a little beat, a little more rhythm.
Speaker 1: Now do they, does our--how does LDS get, feel about mixed marriages?
Speaker 2: I know of people who are mixed marriages. I don't think they prohibit them.  I don't necessarily know that their religion encourages it either.
Speaker 1: Are there any in the LDS, I mean is?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, marry who you wanna marry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the things I think that one would find is that proportionately there is a great deal of interracial marriages within this community, and it, it cuts across religious, racial lines, yeah that's true.
Story_ID: 613437
Speaker 1: Okay, now as a historian now what courses do you really specialize in or which ones do you enjoy teaching the most?
Speaker 2: The African American history classes, I'm having a ball teaching [at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah].  I'm teaching for my department but I'm also working with the honors students in the honors program which it's just--I've enjoyed it, I'm enjoying it.  Never gets dull and I'm learning all the time myself, all the time.
Speaker 1: Do you have any heroes among the black historians you know that--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --that emerged I guess during the '60s [1960s] or even back further?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what, I've been blessed in that I got some books down there that has [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin's name, but I'll tell you who was very, very kind to me I--when I was just starting and I met him at a conference.  It was the late Dr. Benjamin Quarles [Benjamin A. Quarles] and he wrote me the nicest note and after I sent him something.  Those two, I have extraordinary regard for Margaret Washington, we were friends in back in the '60s [1960s], she's at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] and, and then of course my home boy, Quintard Taylor [Quintard Taylor, Jr.] is just, he's always, he's always been very encouraging and then there's a fellow at Texas A&M [Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas] who's a--is my home boy.  He, he's, he's special, Albert Broussard [Albert S. Broussard], he wrote the book on 'Black San Francisco' ['Black San Francisco: The Struggle for Racial Equality in the West, 1900-1954'] which looks at black San Francisco [California] from 1900 to 1954, and then he wrote a book of, upon this multigenerational black family ['African American Odyssey: The Stewarts, 1853-1963,' Albert S. Broussard], the Stewarts, McCants Stewart [T. McCants Stewart] and there's just so many, there's just so many.  I mean one of the things I've, I've learned is that there's such, such a rich history that and it's the veins of, of richness are just still out their untapped, untapped.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite historical figure?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was--I don't know if I'd say he is my favorite, but I certainly have a lot respect for him, a brother by the name of Allen Allensworth and he was a soldier, chaplain in the [U.S.] Army.  Started an all black town in California called Allensworth and he came here in 19--in 1896 and he was here when they brought a--the entire 24th Infantry Regiment to Salt Lake City's [Salt Lake City, Utah] Fort Douglas.
Story_ID: 613438
Speaker 1: We were talking about Allen Allensworth is one of your favorite characters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you when--if--there was some discussions as to whether or not to bring the soldiers to Salt Lake City's [Salt Lake City, Utah] Fort Douglas in 1896 and early that year The Salt Lake Tribune which is still in existence today and a vehemently anti-LDS news- and it was a vehemently anti-LDS newspaper along with the Utah Senator Frank Cannon [Frank J. Cannon] tried to get the military officials to not send the entire regiment here, and there was--it was claimed that at certain times of the year the soldiers would have to ride on the same streetcar line with some of the better citizens of the community and that drunken black soldiers behaved far worse than drunken white soldiers.  But the unit had never been together in its entirety and they'd been out on the front western frontier for some thirty years, so as a reward for an extended service they wanted to give them a good post and Fort Douglas was considered to be one of the better western forts in the 1890s, and so when they sent those soldiers here in the fall of 1896 the entire regiment it was about 475 black soldiers along with wives, children, camp followers.  I mean it quadrupled the black population here in the city--in the county here, excuse me, and certainly enriched the lives of the black community here for a three year period of time and so colonel--no, Chaplain Allensworth wanted to make sure that the soldiers were on their best behavior and went to the local authorities and asked that they do everything they could to make sure that unwanted, undesirable people didn't come up around the fort.  And you ask about what makes me really get turned on to him is that he was a great bridge builder, he was very articulate, he carried himself, handsome man, spoke well, worked actively in the larger community, white as well as black community and when the soldiers in 1898 when the drums of war began to beat for what came to be known as the Spanish American War and they decided to send the, the infantry [24th Infantry Regiment].  Man, he gives this wonderful, wonderful speech to the regiment as they're there and periodically he said, "Quit yourself like men, quit your--." I mean you know he was calling and appealing to them to man up, and when he, when they, they returned he was gone and the self-discipline and control that they had exercised from '96 [1896] to '97 [1897] to '98 [1898] coming back at the end of '98 [1898] you know you've been out the war and you done put it all out on the line, you're not gonna be willing to take too much stuff from anybody, and so when they'd run into some hostility, some of the salons didn't wanna serve them, they talked about getting their guns and on one occasion the--on one occasion the local authorities asked the, the sold- the officers to come get the soldiers.  The unit had, had grown larger but they didn't have an Allensworth.  Allensworth went on to do a lot of other things, but I've always just thought about that address that he had made, 'cause he drew from history, drew from in terms of military history and he kept appealing to them to, "Quit yourself like men," very--and then the brother went on to do some other wonderful things.
Speaker 1: He founded the town Allensworth, California you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 613439
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I am stunned at the sense of hopelessness for unfortunately too many young black men, and not just young black men, middle aged black men, and by that the sense of despair, the lack of interest in trying to elevate and improve one's conditions through acquisition of skills, education.  Nobody says, get yourself an education that's something nobody else can take away from you.  That was Thomas Coleman's model, I mean if I heard that once I've heard it a hundred times, and the violence, the violence.  I, I lost a nephew about four or five years ago.  He in turn had four children, shoot--black on black crime right in the streets of San Francisco [California] and the culprits have been caught, have extensive prison sentences, but their lives are ruined, I mean and I think we have lost a little sense of our spirituality in a sense that there's not--there's such an emphasis on getting the cash that no one talks about values.  It's the bling--you know the bling, bling, bling with the over emphasis on--the over emphasis on simply material acquisitions.  That's, that's very troubling and there's no sense of social responsibility, and I'm not talking as a point of some stuffed shoe 'cause I know sometimes many of us who have achieved a certain amount of material success or accumulated this sometimes we forget the bridges that brought us over the difficult times.  I just am concerned about the sense of hopelessness.  I've, I have grandchildren and one grandchild and she's a third year college student.  I'd like for her to have a better future for her and hers.  I, I don't know about that, I don't know about that.  The world is so small today that sometimes I don't think people my age can realize what these kids are, are up against and how easy it is to develop a sense of hopelessness and so I know we have all of these programs but can't afford to let any of 'em slip through the crack.
Story_ID: 613440
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I would've taken a, a greater advantage of my educational opportunities.  When I was in high school [George Washington Senior High School; George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] and really for most of my undergraduate experience, I had lower expectations of myself than I should have.  No one said to do the best that you could do, to be the best that you could be and so what I didn't do and initially and I was very fortunate.  So I know it's not the same opportunities that exist today that at the time I came up in age, 'cause no one said it's best to put forth your best foot so that you have some options.  You want to have options and unless you have done your best then your options are very limited.  It's like they say if you drop out of high school, what options do you have?  Well same thing, if you graduate from college and--look, I knew that it was--in order to graduate from college you need a 2.0 average complete hours, okay, I, I can do that.  I wish I would've studied a little harder, earlier and as it turned out and, and I, that's the one thing I want, I wanted my kids [Danielle Coleman, Joron Coleman and Cori Coleman] to do.  I mean I--they--two of 'em have their degrees but they haven't gone on but it, it's their lives and so yeah to, to maximize the potential that you have.
Story_ID: 613441
Speaker 1: Now likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I've been in this state [Utah] here for thirty-seven years, I don't know how many students I've taught, but I think as a result of the ones that I did have most of 'em can say that they have had an experience with an African American educator and mastered the subject matter in a way in which they didn't know they would be able to take it and hopefully keep it.  I, I always tell my students, I, I don't care what you know at the end of the semester.  I mean and by that I, it's not the exams.  It's what do you know ten or fifteen, twenty years from now?  And I had a class here [University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah] with the late Dr. Charles Monson--man, I worked hard for that C.  It was a philosophy course and at the end of the exam--of the, of the semester, this is December of 1963, he said, "Respond to this question as a theologian, as a philosopher and as a scientist."  In order to do that it wasn't so much what Copernicus [Nicolaus Copernicus] said or what anyone--it was the process, the methodology employed by scientists which was a scientific method.  The method employed by the philosopher reason and the method by the theologian faith and I remembered that and I'm a little--it's still in my memory bank.  So I want them to know a little something about certain aspects of African American history depending on what course they talk, talk about and I guess I remembered a student once when I was gonna leave academic life.  This was in the early '80s [1980s] and I was--interviewed with a headhunter and everything, I was trying to get out and make some cash, and I got a letter from a former student and that letter was worth ten thousand dollars, psychic dollars what the former Governor Jerry Brown use to call psychic dollars because in it she talked about the importance of the course and what it--she had, had her father read some of the books and everything.  So, I just hope there are a few of those out there.
Story_ID: 613442
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now.  You're married and you've got children and one grandchild, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've been here with this wife going on thirteen years, and I, I don't think I would've--if you would've asked me would I ever marry again--I was single for about fifteen years.  I would've said no man, been there, done that.  Paula [Paula Coleman], Paula's my groundation, Paula is my groundation you know, and you know people are gone do what they gone do and that's they business, you gotta live with the consequences of your action, but talking to some friends of mine this past weekend who've been married forty-four years--we just chit chatting.  I said, "You know I don't see how anybody could--." This guy spits whatever--just people in general.  I said, "You know, I'd--first of all I'd have a problem with the guilt and I, I don't wanna, I don't like stress in my life.  I don't want guilt and more importantly she trusts me, and I know she trusts me and I couldn't, couldn't be doing anything to betray that trust."  I had a friend of mine, this was about fifteen years ago.  We were at a conference together, he was staying with me and she called the room, yeah, and he said, "Paula, you know he's not here.  He's out partying and drinking and chasing," and she said, "He might be out there partying and drinking but he ain't chasing."  That's it, that's my, that's my people, my groundation.  She keeps, you know I like staying real for her and she's been--we don't have any children biologically but she's been you know as my oldest--my youngest daughter's [Cori Coleman] getting married in May, and I said, "Well how you gonna deal with this," 'cause her mother's coming.  She says, "I told the woman I got two mothers," and that's you know Paula's good people, her, her brothers are wonder- she has two brothers and a ninety something year old grandmother, you know it's, it's been real good, yeah you know.  She's good.  My mother's [Gertrude Welch Hughes] eight--going on eighty-six, and she's in San Francisco [California]; she's had difficult problems lately.  I've lost two of my brothers, one--that's, that's part of heart.  I'll never--I mean next week, twenty-three years.  This week I'm gonna go out, go to, go to the cemetery, make the rounds and I can do every grave, everything is okay, but when I come to his man, I just, 'cause he was my friend, he was my brother, but he was my friend, and if you went around and asked each of the--my siblings they would tell you, "Yeah he was the best--," who their favorite sibling was, they would've said him, and even though he's physically gone, he's still here with me, 'cause my son is so much like him, I mean he is just so much like them Colemans.  In his body build, way of dressing; sometimes my sister calls my son by my brother's name so.
Speaker 1: Now how many children, you just have a son [Joron Coleman] and daughter?
Speaker 2: I have three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: A forty year old daughter [Danielle Coleman].
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: And she's, she has a twenty year old daughter [Amber Coleman] and she's, she works hard.  I'm really proud of her.  She's been a wonderful mother and wonderful, wonderful child.  I mean--I think you said what am I most proud of?  My children all have a good work ethic, I'm most proud of that because life don't owe you nothing and I'm very, very proud of their work ethic.
Story_ID: 613443
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I've, I imagine that coming from back east or Midwest even, but get a large African American community, you probably came out with some preconceived notions about you know people living here [Salt Lake City, Utah].  Have you any questions of us?
Speaker 1: Well I've had a chance to ask most of mine (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On this trip but I, I found like a very, a very tight knit community.  Everyone seems to know everybody else and have a sense of the other black people that are here and what they're doing and to me that, it makes sense to me.
Speaker 2: There is a--I'll tell you what the things--over the last ten to fifteen years, twenty years, yeah---I've been amazed at the pool of bright, talented, black people who have come here, primarily not only through higher education, but perhaps more important through the private sector.  We've had some wonderful people, unfortunately a number of them have come here have been successful and moved on, but I mean it's been a great interactions, just great interactions and there's a lot of, a lot of talent here, certainly not proportionate to larger cities, but there are some very, very talented people here, and you know my wife [Paula Coleman] sometimes says something about moving, you know; primarily in the winter, she'd like a warmer climate so I'm not gonna move, we're not gonna move but what, what I'd like to do is you know in a few years fool around where you take off some time and go to some places.  We, this next summer I think we're gonna go with some friends to St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], spend a couple of weeks there.  That'll make her happy.
Story_ID: 613444
Speaker 1: Okay, well my last question similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh wow!  Oh, my goodness you know I'd--I've thought about that too, 'cause I'm at, at an age where--although I think I'm hopefully I got twenty more--(pause) well, I mean to who, by who?  At, at?
Speaker 1: Well, period I guess, we ask it like that and I don't know you have to kind of think about, I guess professionally, maybe by your family, community, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Someone who made a difference in some people's lives. Someone who made a difference in some people's lives, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right well thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 613445
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And tell us about who we're seeing here?
Speaker 2: That is a photograph of Marguerite Miller, my maternal grandmother.  She was born in Monroe, Louisiana in about 1908 and she died in San Francisco, California in 1981.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and who's this?
Speaker 2: That is Moses Coleman, my paternal grandfather who was born in Sicily Island, Louisiana in 1906 and he died in Los Angeles, California 1952.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.  Okay who's that?
Speaker 2: That's my father Jesse Coleman, he was born in Sicily Island, Louisiana on March 7, 1925.  He died June 2, 1995 in San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, who's that?
Speaker 2: That's my step- stepfather Thomas Coleman, he was born February 24, 1907 and he died October 2, 1964.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my mother, Gertrude Hughes [Gertrude Welch Hughes].  She was born August 29, 1922 in Monroe, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And ready?
Speaker 2: Yes, where do you wanna start?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you go from the left?  I know it's hard (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Start at the bottom (unclear).
Speaker 2: That--from the bottom?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's my son Joron Coleman, that's me, that's Cori Coleman, C-O-R-I.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And at the bottom?
Speaker 2: That's my oldest daughter, Danielle Coleman and the young girl next to her is my granddaughter Amber Lynn Coleman [Amber Coleman] and that's an old photograph.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next please?
Speaker 2: You shot this one?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.  Okay, you ready?
Speaker 2: Yes, that photograph is of me and I had to have been approximately two years of age and it was taken in front of my grandmother's house at 422 North 22nd Street in Monroe, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay you ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, you know I'm looking at that photograph.  So you know what, that has to be an Easter photograph.  Let me just see where we--which house would that have been; which means we were on Webster Street [San Francisco, California] when I was about nine years.
Speaker 1: Don't forget your money.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm just thinking, nine nine--'44 [1944], '44 [1944], '53 [1953] okay, so that has to be about '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: At the top left hand that's me, Ronald Coleman [HistoryMaker Ronald Gerald Coleman], that is my brother Jimmy Ray Coleman who was born on the 11th of August 1947 and he passed on March 21, 1997.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's my sister Margaret Coleman, born February 5, 1951 in San Francisco.  That's my brother Roderic Coleman who was born January 14, 1946 in Monroe, Louisiana and passed away March 29, 1985 in San Francisco, California.  That's my brother Thomas Otto Coleman [Thomas O. Coleman], he was born September 9, 1948 and that's the youngest boy, Floyd [Floyd Coleman] who is my sister's twin, he was born February 5, 1951 in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, what--who's that?
Speaker 2: To my right there is Dr. Wilfred Samuels [HistoryMaker Wilfred D. Samuels] and that's at a reception for African American History Month [Black History Month] in February of 1994 he was then the director of African American studies.  The gorgeous lady in the middle is one of the truly legends of modern dance, the great Pearl Primus, who was here with us and that's me when I was a little younger and a little blacker hair. I think I was trying to sport a goatee something, a beard or something.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 2: That was my senior year of college in 1964.  I was a running back at the, for the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] football team, we went 9-2 winning the Liberty Bowl over West Virginia [West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia], 32-6.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) And ready.
Speaker 2: That is my lovely wife, Paula [Paula Coleman] who was born December 30, 1954 in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and has been with me since November 8, 1991 and we've been married since May 1, 1995.
