Story_ID: 57778
Speaker 1: Thanks again for being with us. Would you give us your name, full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My name is James Franklin Clayborne, Jr., II. J-A-M-E-S F-R-A-N-K-L-I-N C-L-A-Y-B-O-R-N-E.
Speaker 1: Junior, two.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you get that?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Jim Davis Clayborne, my father's name was James Franklin [Clayborne] and my name is James Franklin.  My father is really probably the true senior and I'm probably really the true junior but he just, on my birth certificate, he put Jr., II.
Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: My mother called me Jimmy, so I guess that was my nickname growing up.
Speaker 1: Your birth date, please?
Speaker 2: Twelve twenty-nine '63 [December 29, 1963].
Speaker 1: And the city and state of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Story_ID: 57779
Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase, or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess I like this quote I have on my wall, it's by [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] where he says, "The ultimate measure of a man is not where he or she stands in times of comfort and convenience but where he or she stands at times of challenge and controversy."
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like seafood pretty much, fish, shrimp, lobster.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because the leaves change and it's not too hot, it's not too cold, and I think it's just a beautiful time of the year.  One of the reasons, too, I lived in Miami [Florida] for three years and one of the things that you miss is the fall because there is no visual change in the surroundings.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Just recently I had a chance to go to South Africa and it was more of a business trip.  I really enjoyed that.  Actually, I'm planning now to save money to go back to South Africa.
Speaker 1: What did you like most about South Africa?
Speaker 2: Just a beautiful, the climate actually was a little different.  It was hot in mid-day and it really cooled down at night.  Some of the things that I didn't get a chance to see and experience is the reason why I'd like to go back.  But people were very warm and friendly.
Story_ID: 57780
Speaker 1: Would you name your parents and spell their names also?  You named your father [James Franklin Clayborne].
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother's name was Janet Cooper. J-A-N-E-T C-O-O-P-E-R.
Speaker 1: And your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My father's mother is Frances Clayborne and her husband was Jim Davis Clayborne.  My mother's mother was Catherine Brown and her father was Clifton Nealy.
Speaker 1: What area of the country did your grandparents come from?
Speaker 2: Both sets came from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Do you know what part?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, my mother's father, came from Scooba, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it?
Speaker 2: I believe it's S-C-O-O-B-A.  My grandmother actually, she came from Mississippi by way of Missouri.  She ended up, most of her formative years in Missouri.  My father's parents, his mother came from Shuqualak and I can't spell Shuqualak.  Actually, I think it's S-C, I mean, S-H-U-L-K-A-L-O-C.
Speaker 1: And that's in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: That's in Mississippi.  And my father's father, my grandfather, was from Kellystore, Mississippi, which is right outside of DeKalb.
Speaker 1: Names are interesting.
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.
Speaker 1: Give me your brothers and sisters in birth order.  Give me their names.
Speaker 2: I just have one sibling.  Her name is Sherry Smith.  She is 41 years old.  She is older than I am.
Story_ID: 57781
Speaker 1: What was it like, growing up in the Clayborne household?
Speaker 2: The early years, my parents were married and I think when I was about 6 they divorced.  I remember some interaction, little bits and pieces, but most of my youth, I grew up with my mother [Janet Clayborne] and sister [Sherry Smith].  My mother worked as a secretary during the day and actually went to school at night.  I can recall many days coming home with my sister or sometimes coming home by myself and actually I went to school across town so my mother and I used to catch the bus in the morning and she would get off downtown and I would transfer on another bus to go to elementary school.
Speaker 1: In growing up, what event in just your everyday life, when you were growing up, what event stands out?
Speaker 2: I think it's not one event, but I saw my mother go to school, work, and constantly do the best that she could for my sister and myself, even though she would get home maybe at 10, 9 or 10 o'clock at night, we always had breakfast in the morning that she cooked.  I have to admit that she also worked up until I was about the seventh grade, ironed my clothes, and made my bed till I was about the sixth grade, so she kept everything going.  She did the best she could and I realized when she graduated from college, and it took her about eight years doing it part time, that if she could accomplish that with all the obstacles and in differences that she had in her life, there was nothing that I couldn't do if I put my mind to it.
Speaker 1: What kind of relationship did you have with your sister?
Speaker 2: She was a little older.  There was a big age difference and maturity level between my sister and myself but it was one of older sister/little brother.  She provided some guidance but there was such an age difference that she graduated from high school and I was starting, I had just completed, I think my second year in middle school so there was a big age difference.  We did some vacations and things that families do together but there was a big age difference.
Speaker 1: So you were almost like an only child.
Speaker 2: To a certain extent, yes.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your father [James Clayborne]?
Speaker 2: He, I guess, was a very strong man with very high expectations and it was something that I try, and it's good, but sometimes it's tough, and I try to avoid the same thing with my children, to understand that they can make mistakes and that they're children, and I think the most significant thing about my father was that he didn't settle for anything less than your best.  I think that's why I've been able to thrive and to always try to do my best in anything that I do.
Speaker 1: What did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He retired as an administrator with the school district in East St. Louis [Illinois] but he started off in education teaching school.
Story_ID: 57782
Speaker 1: What type of child were you, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I was a, I think, a very independent child.  As I said, probably from the age of seven, I caught the bus--two buses to school every morning, just a lot of things that I took for granted because of my mother's situation and my father not being in the household but he lived about four blocks away.  But I was, I guess I was an A-minus student.  I thought I was a responsible child because, like I said, many times I came home and my sister, she may have been there and she may not have been there and I didn't get into any trouble.  I came home, did my homework, fell asleep, let the TV nurse me or be my babysitter for the evening, but I was always one who had goals and always wanted to be something and contribute to society.
Story_ID: 57783
Speaker 1: What was your immediate neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: During most of my youth we lived in an integrated community in East St. Louis [Illinois]. In fact, I think on the whole block, maybe the first five years there were only two African American families and we all pretty much lived next door to each other.  It was a little different.  I have visions when I think back of some of the things that happened that I really at the time didn't understand.  I had a neighbor next door and he was a white little boy, I guess he may have been a year younger than I was and I guess the most memorable moment was one day he asked if he could rub my hair.  That always stands out.  At the time I didn't think anything of it but obviously as things have transpired and time has passed, I have always reflected back on that event.
Story_ID: 57784
Speaker 1: You're in school now.  What was your earliest memory of the school process, being involved in a formal learning situation.
Speaker 2: You mean as a young child?  I think it was the first day that I, I started in this program called Head Start, I mean, Follow Through, I went to Head Start and it was more or less at a church. And a young lady who we called cousins, actually her father was my godfather, we went there, and I really didn't see that so much as school but the first day that I started first grade I was enrolled in this program called Follow Through, and for whatever reason, it wasn't like I was a child who clung to want my parents, but for whatever reason, I cried on the first day of school.  I don't think anybody knows that other than my parents, but I guess that's the first memorable moment of school.  In this Follow Through program which I thought was good, and they ended it, it was, first, you had the same teacher first through third grade.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: I thought it was a good program because you were used to the environment, you stayed in the same classroom and basically you had the same kids and I thought it prepared me for the rest of the time in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Tell us what you remember about that first teacher (unclear).
Speaker 2: Ms. Bear ... Ms. Beard was a very tough woman.  She expected the best, and no less than the best.  She was, I wouldn't say hard on me, but she made sure that I did my best because as she told me, my father [James Clayborne] taught her son, so she made sure the first day that I knew that and that she was not going to accept anything less than the best from me.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful inauguration into the formal education situation. Who was your favorite friend in elementary school?
Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Darrell Joyner [ph.] was my good friend.
Speaker 1: Have you kept up with him?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I see Darrell periodically.  In fact, he has two sons and will bring his sons to my sons' either baseball, basketball or football games so I probably see Darrell on average twice a month.
Story_ID: 57785
Speaker 1: When you moved along to middle school - what were those years like?
Speaker 2: It was a little different.  For the first time in my life I went to school around people, I went to school where I lived.  It was really my first time interacting with white students.  But it was a good experience, it wasn't a bad experience.  I remember the difference between the elementary school and the middle school that I went to in terms of how we were taught, some of the things that we read, and early on in middle school, particularly in English, I guess the most memorable moment was not liking some of the reading that I was required to do.  But I had a sociology history teacher by the name of Allen D. McGarien [ph.] who motivated a lot of us.  He was a white man who gave a lot of kids who didn't have exposure to things, he took us to the opera and if you scored a certain, I guess the top two or top three people, he would take you out to dinner to experience different things.  He saved money.  One year, I remember one year he had a little store in the back of his room and by raising money selling products he took so many of us, I want to say maybe a busload of us, to Chicago [Illinois] to the museum here in Chicago.  This was when we were in the eighth grade, maybe.  He took time out to start a chess club.  He also, those of us who were interested, during our free period, he taught us Latin.  So he was a very committed man to try to bring out the best that he could in us and show us that someone did care.
Speaker 1: Can you clarify for me when you were growing up, when you were in Follow Through, you were being bused?
Speaker 2: No.  Actually what happened was - we - this school, Dunbar Elementary School [East St. Louis, Illinois] was one of the better elementary schools in the city.  So actually I wasn't bused.  When my parents divorced we moved to the northern part of the city and the school was in the south end where the black population traditionally lived, so I caught two buses to get to elementary school.
Speaker 1: You had great teachers and a great set of parents.  There's a lot of reason for your success  --  High school.  What was that like?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of fun in high school [East St. Louis High School, East St. Louis, Illinois].  I played football my sophomore and my junior year, played baseball my sophomore and junior year.  I was just a student, wasn't serious about dating or anything, but I was always a good student, always liked to participate in activities.
Story_ID: 57786
Speaker 1: At what age did you start to form your dreams, aspirations, career direction, and what did you start thinking you wanted to do about that?
Speaker 2: Early on, probably from middle school to probably my junior year in high school, I thought I wanted to be a doctor.  I have an uncle who's a doctor and just watching him and some of the commitments that he had in work at home, I decided that I did not want to be a doctor and I decided in the eleventh grade that I wanted to be a lawyer and I set my goals in the eleventh grade saying that I would graduate from college in four years and then I'd graduate from law school in three and because I had goals set, I was able to accomplish that.  Again, I saw the things that my mother experienced and the difficult time she had trying to get where she wanted to be and I realized that I didn't have any of those obstacles and there was nothing to prevent me from achieving those goals but myself so I set out and I was able to accomplish those goals.
Speaker 1: What made you choose law?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean that's a good question.  I think maybe just the art of advocacy, trying to help people, the fact that you can make a decent living, those were probably the three factors that made me go into being a lawyer.
Story_ID: 57787
Speaker 1: You went away to college, Uni--Miami?
Speaker 2: Actually, I went to Tennessee State [University in Nashville, Tennessee] undergrad and after I graduated from Tennessee State, then I went on to the University of Miami School of Law [Coral Gables, Florida].
Speaker 1: The college years - any outstanding events you want to share.
Speaker 2: I graduated in four years but a lot of people didn't.  I've always been focused and I think what helped me, early on I had a history teacher who said, you should take out a schedule that outlines every hour of the day and set the schedule from the time that you sleep to the time you study to the time you eat and I did that.  And whenever I was indecisive as to what I should be doing, it always clicked in my mind, the calendar says that you should be doing such-and-such or doing this or going here and by me having that in the back of my mind I always knew what I should be doing and when I wasn't, I felt guilty about it.  So I think I pretty much followed that schedule probably 80 percent of the time.  I pledged a fraternity and met lifelong friends and it was really a great experience.  I hated to leave college, I enjoyed it that much.
Speaker 1: What fraternity?
Speaker 2: I'm a Kappa.
Speaker 1: Your social life.  At which point did Mrs. [Staci] Clayborne, the wife start to get your attention?
Speaker 2: Actually, we went to elementary school together.
Speaker 1: Oh really, trace that little story for us.
Speaker 2: Actually, she had been chasing me probably since the fourth grade (laughs).  I came home after my first year of law school and saw her in the park and we started dating and we've been together ever since.
Story_ID: 57788
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're out of law school now and it's time to choose a direction, where you want to head initially in your career.  How did you come to those decisions?
Speaker 2: Well one of the...I did a summer internship in the state's attorney's office in St. Clair County in Belleville [Illinois] where I lived and I decided, initially I thought I wanted to stay in Miami [Florida].  I got married going into my senior year.  My wife [Staci Clayborne] was actually teaching in Miami but I had already informed her that my intentions were to return back home.  And one of the reasons why, I felt that I could make a difference in my own community rather than starting up in someone else's community so I decided to go back home.  I had enjoyed the internship in the state's attorney's office so I started working in the state's attorney's office.  I worked there for two years and three months and then I received a call from the current firm.  I had no idea that I would work for that kind of firm, a defense firm, but as a young man with two kids, and they offered to double my salary, I had no choice but to leave.  It's been a good experience since then, every since.
Speaker 1: The name of the firm?
Speaker 2: It's Hinshaw and Culbertson.  Actually, it's a Chicago [Illinois] based firm.
Speaker 1: So what is life like for you in the context of practicing law at a major firm.
Speaker 2: It's been a good experience.  And the reason why is, I have not been limited to one particular area of the law.  I've been fortunate enough, I'm corporate counsel for the city of East St. Louis [Illinois] and you deal with employment issues, you deal with municipal finance, you deal with, just general litigation, business development, real estate development, so because I work for a big firm we're able to provide legal services in all of those areas, so it's really afforded me an opportunity to experience all facets of the law.
Story_ID: 57789
Speaker 1: I can see how you would get the eye of the political community.  Would you tell me how you were selected to be appointed to the [Illinois] Senate?
Speaker 2: My predecessor, Kenny [Kenneth] Hall, died, I believe around March 17 [sic, 21] of 1995 and I had a lot of respect for him.  I was leaving town, I think he died maybe a Wednesday, Tuesday or Wednesday, and I was leaving town that Friday, no, I was leaving town that Sunday, and I knew that the decision was going to be made the following week.  So at the courthouse I saw the county board chairman and I told him that I know that the senator has not been buried and by no means am I doing this out of disrespect to him. But I said, "I'm leaving Sunday and I just want to let you know that I'm interested, if anybody asks."  Because I was leaving, I had been selected as one of, I think about sixty attorneys to go to the FBI Academy for a week-long law conference so I knew I would be away.  I received a call during the week while I was there from the county board chairman asking me if I really was interested and I told him yes.  I came back that Friday and talked to him Saturday morning and basically he said, if you want it, it's yours.  So I discussed it with my wife [Staci Clayborne] and my family and they were excited about it and I saw it as an opportunity to again experience something.  One of the problems that I had struggled with when I left the state's attorney's office was, I was committed to giving something back to the community, trying to make things a little better for myself, and as well as my community and when I went to the law firm [Hinsaw and Culbertson] I saw it more so that I was doing something for myself and my family, but I wasn't really making that contribution that I wanted to make to the community.  So when I was appointed, it gave me an opportunity to do both, to do things for myself and to make things better for my family but also to do things for the community, give the young men and the young women in the community, try to improve the quality of life for them.
Speaker 1: Had you been politically active before you were appointed?
Speaker 2: Other than going to fundraisers, helping with campaigns, no other political offices other than representing politicians.  Again, I was a corporate counsel for the city of East St. Louis [Illinois] but no public offices for myself.
Story_ID: 57790
Speaker 1: How did you find life in the Illinois Senate (unclear).
Speaker 2: Actually it was a little difficult.  I was appointed on April 17th ([1995] and on April 18th, I was actually in Springfield [Illinois] voting.  There were some issues that had been raised when I first arrived that I had to jump right in because there were some attacks, or there was one senator trying to abolish an agency in East St. Louis [Illinois] and I really didn't know anybody and he gave me a good lesson in politics and collegiality and to learn real quickly how to develop relationships with people.
Story_ID: 57791
Speaker 1: Can you detail that political experience you gained very swiftly in the [Illinois] Senate?
Speaker 2: The senator's name was Ralph Dunn and he was a Republican.  He represented a small part of St. Clair County [Illinois].  St. Clair County is a traditional Democratic county and that particular year, the election year of, I guess that would have been '94 [1994], there were several countywide seats that were winning the election.  Republican candidates were winning the election at a rate of maybe 6,000-7,000 votes and when the city of East St. Louis [Illinois], when their ballots came in, then I think one of those races, the treasurer, I believe, lost, the Republican candidate, probably, lost by maybe 100 votes and there was another close one where maybe the county clerk lost by 300, the Republican county lost by 300 votes so the allegation by the Republican chairman was that there was fraud taking place in East St. Louis, therefore she wanted the Republican senator to abolish the East St. Louis Board of Elections which meant it was a $250,000 cost increase to the county and the county necessarily didn't want them and obviously East St. Louis wanted to keep their own election board.  So I began talking with people across the aisle because the Republicans were in the majority in the [Illinois] House [of Representatives] and the [Illinois State] Senate and all they needed was 30 votes in the Senate, I think, at the time, there may have been 33 of them, and they had the majority in the House so obviously it was going to pass.  But I was able to contact, I think in the state of Illinois there are 11 additional municipalities that have their own election board and I was able to contact them and some of them were Republicans and they talked to their Republican senator who I was able to draw and develop allegiance with to support, not to support the senator's bill and he was one of the senior senators and I was able to garner support from the Democratic side in the House and the Senate and I was able to convince the senator after, I guess after a couple weeks, that this bill was not in the best interest of the city of East St. Louis and finally he dropped it.  In fact, I saw him Friday and we rehashed that whole incident.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your ...the years of your term ... the terms of service?
Speaker 2: I was appointed April 17th of '95 [1995].  That term expired in, the end of '96 [1996], December 31 of '96, so I ran for re-election, or election, in '96 and was sworn in in January of '97 [1997] and currently I'm still serving in that four year term but I'm currently running, running for re-election now.
Story_ID: 57792
Speaker 1: How does the whole campaigning and traveling to Springfield [Illinois], how does that impact your personal life?
Speaker 2: You know, the Senate, there's a big demand on, I can't say all senators, but I know there's a big demand on me not only in my area but I think because I am--historically, there have been only two African American senators that are not from Chicago [Illinois].  The first was my predecessor [Kenneth Hall] and then obviously me.  My district is about 70 percent white so there's typically a big demand for me to speak throughout the state and pretty much from Springfield on down and obviously I don't represent all those areas so I try to do the best that I can to give people a part of me but at the same time make sure that I'm meeting the needs of my constituents.  But there's a big demand.  It's hard at times because sometimes I go to the baseball field, Little League field, just to be a father and to coach third base but there are people who want to bring their problems to you at that point in time.  Sometimes your family doesn't understand it.  So it can be tough at times.  There's a big demand but you really get used to it.  You go pump gas in your car and people stop you.  You go buy milk and people recognize you, want to talk to you.  So it's just another part of life and the things that you do.
Speaker 1: Do you miss taking the boys to Springfield?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, what I did, what happened, obviously I'm sworn in and then I leave, what I did was, I took each one except I have a one year old, obviously he hasn't been, but I took each one for their own week and each one spent their own week with me to see what I did and for them to experience that whole environment.
Speaker 1: And then they better understood why you were away and what you were doing.  Does your wife [Staci Clayborne] work outside the home?
Speaker 2: She is a coordinator for [the] Head Start [Program] and for SIU [Southern Illinois University].
Story_ID: 57793
Speaker 1: Who or what, outside of your parents, who has been the most influence on you as a man and then as a politician?
Speaker 2: I'd probably say my early years when I was in school, I talked about my sociology history teacher, Allen McGarien and the time that he took out, not only with myself, but with other young men to make sure that we were exposed to different things and to pretty much tell us that there were no limits for us.  I'd probably say there was a combination of other role models, Malcolm X, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], W.E.B. DuBois, and then some local people.  There was a young mayor by the name of Carl Officer who was a very charismatic, dynamic young man who really made a lasting impression upon me in the fact that he was able to achieve, I think, becoming mayor of East St. Louis at the age of 26.  So I set my goals to say that I don't have to wait until I'm in my thirties or forties to begin accomplishing things that I would like to do.  So I think early on, Carl has been that person who initially I tried to seek, or tried to become, or emulate.  Currently I see it in a different light, and I really don't have aspirations to go beyond where I am.  Right now I'm just trying to be a father, trying to be a good husband, and trying to be the best lawyer and senator that I can be and if that takes me somewhere else without jeopardizing the quality of life with my family, then I'll seek something else, but right now I'm very content in what I am doing.
Story_ID: 57794
Speaker 1: As you know, few adults - let alone young students in school are very aware of what state legislators do.  How would you address the challenge of getting students more involved earlier and actually knowing what takes place in the state legislature?
Speaker 2: One of the things I've done, I've tried to go out and speak to as many kids as I can.  I also encourage schools to bring classes up to the state capitol.  That was something I didn't experience when I was going through public school but I guess one of the most important things that we have to teach in all communities is that people really control the power and it's not the state senator or the state rep [state representative] or the U.S. Congressman because people vote you in and you're there to represent their issues, not your own, but to do what's best for your constituents.  So I think early on we've got to teach our children that being involved is one of the most important things that you can do.  Work, yes, everybody has to work, school, everybody has to go to school, but your working environment, your school environment, is pretty much determined by those people who you have voted or didn't vote for to make decisions on how your daily life or the quality of life that you will have.
Story_ID: 57795
Speaker 1: What do you think has been, to this point anyway, your greatest achievement in your [Illinois] Senate role?
Speaker 2: I would say, and it's been a combination of things, but just yesterday the governor [George H. Ryan] was down.  I supported his bill Illinois FIRST which increased the registration fee as well as the tax on alcohol, but yesterday in a small community of maybe about 40,000 people, the governor presented a check for $57.4 million to build two new middle schools and three new elementary schools.  That is significant as far as that city -- is concerned.  In other parts of my district, in Belleville [Illinois], we've been able to get about $47 million to build new schools.  I guess being able to, there hasn't been one single event, but being able to address the needs of infrastructure, I was instrumental in, we have a youth center in East St. Louis [Illinois] which is called the Jackie Joyner Kersee Youth Center and I was able to secure the facilities, it's about a $6.5 million facility, I was able to secure about $1.8 million from the state of Illinois that put them over the top to be able to build the facility.  So those are things, the new schools throughout my district, this youth center that was desperately needed, in East St. Louis, hopefully will have a lasting impact and will produce many doctors, lawyers, athletes, many people that will be productive, not only in the East St. Louis community but hopefully throughout the world.
Speaker 1: So through your efforts it sounds as though the economic viability of East St. Louis is needed, has made a u-turn.
Speaker 2: Through my efforts, through other political leaders as well as just people in general, I think that there has been a great boost, an awareness from the outside, that people can come in and do business and make money.
Story_ID: 57796
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about this domestic violence bill, how that got started.  I see you were co-sponsor of it and it did pass.  What has been the result?  Has there been any follow-up on it?
Speaker 2: I think it's still too early to really see the impact that it will make but hopefully it will put some safeguards in place for, I don't want to just say women, but those that have been abused, to make sure that the protections are in place, that there are facilities and places that they can go when they're in need, but I think it's still too early to see the impact that it will have.
Speaker 1: Now for the students who will see our CD-ROM, use our CD-ROM ... we're going to make a CD-ROM that will give a history of African Americans in Illinois, and part of that is, we're going to trace a bill.  So in terms of students who would understand, middle or high school students, will you trace for us how, you could even use the domestic violence bill or the education bill, how it went from an idea to actual passage.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure specifically on either one how the bill was originated but pretty much in a typical situation, if it's not an issue from your own constituency, then there may be an interest group that or maybe the Governor's office or someone who comes to you, and presents this idea to you, and basically you sit down and discuss it with them and make a determination whether you want to be a, whether they are asking you to be a chief sponsor, or co-sponsor and pretty much that's how you get your name on the bill.  Then you, what we call, work the bill.  You talk to the committee members and discuss with them some concerns that they may have prior to the committee meeting.  Then you present the bill at the committee meeting.  Again, the committee members ask questions and hopefully they're satisfied with your responses and what the bill is about.  Then they will vote in favor of it.  Pretty much if it gets out of committee you probably have a, in the Senate, probably a 90 percent chance of getting the bill passed.  So once it comes out of committee, then you present the bill on the floor and again you answer questions.  Typically there is a sheet that shows how the committee members vote.  A lot of people analyze the bill as best as they can and then they look and see how the committee members voted.  You pretty much have a sense of how the committee members think and what their positions are on various issues.  Pretty much if everybody on the committee voted for it, the bill will probably pass.  I believe that's what happened in this instance.  Then the whole process starts over in the House.  You try to find a good co-sponsor.  You try to find a good sponsor and work with him or her doing the same process, answering any questions, and then let them know you will provide whatever support you can for them through the same committee and the floor process.
Speaker 1: When you start it in the Senate, you have to wait until it goes the floor route.
Speaker 2: What happens is, a bill has to be read three times.  When you introduce it, it's read.  When it comes out of committee it's read for a second time.  Then the following day, typically the following day, it's read again and once it's read the third time, that's when it can be voted on.
Speaker 1: And so after the Senate says yea or nay, then you send it to the House.
Speaker 2: Right, if it originated in the Senate.
Speaker 1: And when it goes through the House and with the support you've been able to garner in the House, does it come back to the Senate?
Speaker 2: If no changes have been made, it will go to the Governor's office.  If a change has been made from the bill passing out of the Senate, then it'll come back to the Senate and the sponsor will either concur or nonconcur.
Story_ID: 57797
Speaker 1: When you did the education bill, how much-how smoothly did that bill go through ... for the schools, how smoothly did it go through the process?
Speaker 2: There was some controversy because any time it's our obligation as elected officials to be prudent in spending taxpayers' money to make sure that if we're going to increase fees that it's for a viable purpose, it's for a good reason.  Those were some of the debates that took place.  But once people saw the benefits, then there was an overwhelming number that supported the bill.  It was made very clear that those who, and it makes sense to a certain extent, those that don't support it, why should they reap benefits from it, so there was a little pressure, a little politics being played in terms of support for the bill.  But the bill was an initiative of the Governor [George H. Ryan], called Illinois FIRST, funding for roads, infrastructure, transportation and schools and because of, and the other thing that happened, there was a sheet that showed how, if this bill was passed, how it would impact your district.  So you look at the benefits of it and you make a determination whether this is truly in the best interests of your district.
Story_ID: 57798
Speaker 1: Speak if you will about the scholarship money that is available through certain legislative kinds of assistance.
Speaker 2: Each legislator is given two scholarships each year, one to any state school, except U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] and then you give one to U of I.  Typically the process is, at least in my office, I have an application and people call in and I send them an application, they fill it out, and I evaluate the application based upon really two criteria.  One is need and one is academics.  It's not saying that you don't have to be a person that needs to get it, nor do you have to be a straight-A student to get it, and I break it up into four one-year scholarships for U of I and four one-year scholarships for other state institutions, so typically I award eight people one-year scholarships during the year.
Speaker 1: What is the value of the scholarship commitment?
Speaker 2: It's a tuition waiver for just that one year and then they have the opportunity to have it renewed the following year.
Speaker 1: But what I was asking, the cost to the state of Illinois for the package?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  It's been a big issue but most people understand that the university spends more money, my understanding that the tuition scholarships that the legislators get is only about 4 percent of the total cost of tuition or scholarships given by the university.  For instance, if you are a employee with the state university, your child can go to school free along with-I mean, you get free tuition as well.  So there are a significant number of children that are going to state schools free because their parents work there.
Story_ID: 57799
Speaker 1: Is there anything about the political side, generally speaking, that we can tell young people, anything else we can tell?
Speaker 2: I think one of the biggest things involved in politics and despite what people think is making an impact on people.  People turn to you when they pretty much have nowhere else to turn.  I can remember, maybe my first five months in office, I received a call from a young lady who basically said that her aunt was dying, that she had had breast cancer maybe about ten years ago and she had surgery and now ten years later she was having the same problem and had no health insurance.  She was literally wasting away at home.  She was literally dying at home.  I was able to call a hospital until we were able to get her a medical card.  They brought her in and treated her.  I followed up for awhile and apparently she was doing alright and I lost contact with her, but I wouldn't know the lady if she walked up to me now.  But it was the fact that I was able to be there, provide access to healthcare for her when she had nowhere else to turn and didn't know what to do.  And those are the kind of things that keep you going.  So if anything, it's the fact that you can really help people when people really need help and have nowhere else to go.
Speaker 1: On a scale of 1 to 10, where does Illinois stand in the medical segment as far as the way it's legislators deal with medical challenges?
Speaker 2: I think that we've been very progressive.  I think we have a long way to go.  We have passed a form of a patients' rights bill but we really need to be a little stronger in that area.  We've increased the eligibility for the circuit breaker which provides prescription drugs and other benefits for seniors at a certain income level.  We've also been very strong in the last few years on kids' care, in trying to make sure that every child who does not have health insurance through their parents or Public Aid or whatever it is, that they're able to get those services.  But until we make sure that every person in Illinois has access, equal access to healthcare and we're not there yet and to make sure that decisions are being made by competent people, the doctors, and not somebody sitting in an office who's looking at costs, then we have not accomplished what we should accomplish.
Speaker 1: In the area of housing, has the legislature historically dealt with that in the way that would please you as a senator.
Speaker 2: Again, there's a bill pending now, we're having hearings over the summer, we've had over the summer, looking at a tax credit for low income housing.  I know Illinois has, particularly in my area, provided us some help in terms of tax credits for housing but they're through the Illinois Housing Development Authority but also some of that money comes from the federal government, tax credits from the federal government, which has afforded East St. Louis [Illinois] an opportunity to build about 174 new single multifamily units, tax credits about $11.5 million on a $23 million project.  But there's a tax credit that we're looking at right now that will go to developers who will decide to build in low income areas to address the housing and I think that that will make a big impact but I would give Illinois currently on the housing issue, probably a B, B+ and obviously this tax credit has proven to work in other states and it's definitely something that we should look at passing and implementing and making sure that it really meets the needs for developers, to encourage them to build low income to moderate housing.
Story_ID: 57800
Speaker 1: Have you seen, as an African American senator, have you seen any difference in the way the system in Illinois responds to you other than just basic politics? Do you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: I believe I do.  One of the problems, I guess, and if I'm not answering your question, please let me know, and I believe you're saying the way people treat me or just --
Speaker 1: Just ... the process in getting your work done in the legislature.  Is there any blockage that you sense maybe more than just politics as usual?
Speaker 2: You know, I really haven't experienced that.  I have crossed the aisle to work with my colleague, my Republican colleagues, on issues that are important in their area to get support from my Democratic colleagues in turn, again, this is that education I was talking about early on, in turn I've been able to get support on issues that have been controversial in my area but everyone knew that these issues needed to be addressed.
Story_ID: 57801
Speaker 1: Well there was a community college in 1969 that was established as an experimental community college which was basically a state agency.  The state funded them up until about 1996 but during that course, probably in the latter 80s [1980s], early 90s [1990s], a lot of fiscal mismanagement, a lot of problems that generated at the community college.  My predecessor tried to merge it with one of the other local community colleges and the representative from that area fought him and made the college autonomous, to be supported on the backs of the taxpayers within that community college district.  Well, one of the problems was, the average community college has 250,000 people, an assessed property evaluation of about 150 million.  This community college probably had about 50,000 people and maybe assessed property evaluation of about 70 million.  So it had two deficiencies that from the beginning were set out for it to fail.  But working through the legislature and working with people and having some reputation of being a very credible person and an honest person and one who was in favor of fiscal responsibility and accountability, I was able to secure $25 million to rebuild SIU [Southern Illinois University] in East St. Louis and put it on campus with this community college and $12 million to upgrade the community college to go along with SIU and basically the state was about to shut this facility down.  So I was able to keep it open.  Right now the Illinois Community College Board is running that institution and there are other community colleges that provide coursework at that facility.  But that was one of the issues that I was able to get accomplished because of the hard work and the reputation that I had established despite the fact that the representative from that area was totally opposed to it.
Story_ID: 57802
Speaker 1: Well that certainly is a good favorable example for--what could have been a serious loss to residents of the area.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And one of the reasons why it plays a significant part of my life and means a lot to me, my mother was able to go to school and get her associates and at the time when she didn't have a car, she caught the bus downtown and it was right downtown and she caught the bus home and it afforded her an opportunity to improve her life so I figure there are many women as well as men and young adults who need that institution not just there, but to be a viable functioning institution.
Story_ID: 57803
Speaker 1: Now do you feel that the constituency generally really understands that this is a great example of the importance of a state legislator and how it impacts so close to home, but people generally are not aware of this level of importance.
Speaker 2: I agree with you.
Speaker 1: How do you fix that?
Speaker 2: You try to reach out and touch people and explain what you do.  I tell people, any time you see work being performed on a state highway or even a federal highway, those are monies that were procured through your state senator or state rep [state representative], any time, particularly when you see state programs expanding in your area, more monies from the state made available, better quality of education, buildings, those are products of your state legislators who have gone to work, gone to bat, to make sure that these things are viable.  Particularly, most people don't understand a lot of the things we do.  When we provide more money for education, that's not something that you can really see, you know, unless you go and see the impact that it makes in the classroom, obviously it makes an impact on teachers' salaries which is not something you can really see, but it does, the intent of it is to improve or reward that teacher to keep them motivated to provide and produce a better educational environment for the children so that they can thrive.  So there are some things that visibly you cannot see and there are other signs that you can see.
Speaker 1: Are you able, when you have a success as shown in the community college situation, are you able to publicize it as much to help them understand and have a real live example in your hand?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I try to do, I try to, at least twice a year, go on our cable access stations and talk about some of the new programs, some of the monies that are going to come down, some of the projects that will take place in the upcoming year.  The other thing that I do, I try to send out a newsletter to let them know what's going on, what things I have available for them.  I'm starting up a website so that those who are on the Internet can access that website and I hope to be able to keep them informed of various things from job opportunities from people who call and say, I have these positions available, can you fill them, to scholarships to, all the things that I come in contact with.  I mean, part of the problem, and hopefully this website will resolve it, is once you receive the information, how to disseminate it.  If Monsanto calls and says, hey, we have a free prescription drug program, how do you get that out to those who need it and what I've done in the past, I've sent letters out to churches, I've sent it out to the senior citizens' groups hoping that they will disseminate that information so that those who are really in need will be able to take advantage of it.
Story_ID: 57804
Speaker 1: What do you think of our project The Historymakers?
Speaker 2: I think it's an excellent project.  I think, as I've sat here, to realize that we all have different stories, but typically there is someone that's out there who is in the same or similar situation that you were in as a child, or as a young adult, and to let them know that despite the adversities and obstacles that have presented themselves, you can make it.  Growing up in a single family home where my mother was the head of the household, the statistics show basically that I wouldn't make it, that there were too many variables or obstacles or things in my way to prevent me from being the best that I could be and I look at anything and as I tell my kids, you can always find a reason not to do something, but the most important thing is to find a reason why you should succeed and why you should accomplish your goals.  So I think that when kids and people reflect back on this program, project that you all have put together, then they can see that we aren't special people, that a lot of us are just ... we're ordinary people who had goals and we didn't let anything stop us from achieving our goals.
Story_ID: 57805
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have asked you, whether personally, professionally?
Speaker 2: I-I--You touched on it and I kind of, I guess, got sidetracked, I got caught in some other conversation, but I tell people and kids most importantly that the biggest accomplishment that I am proud of is the fact that throughout all the indifferences and the problems that I may have experienced as a child that I was able to graduate from law school and pass the bar and become a practicing lawyer.  That is the most important thing that I am proud of, of myself and I think that that has afforded me an opportunity to become a senator, to be able to provide a decent and quality of life for my family.
Story_ID: 57806
Speaker 1: I think that there has been a lot of progress in that we have African Americans who are heading major committees.  Here in Chicago [Illinois], the Democratic lead on the Senate Appropriations Committee is an African American senator.  I am the Democratic lead person on the Revenue Committee and there are other significant committees, banking committees, so I think significant progress has been made.  And in the house they're in the majority and they have people that are African American woman who chairs the Energy and Environment, dealing with all our utilities so I think there's been substantial progress.  Do we need to make more?  Sure.  We have a Democratic minority leader out of Chicago, Emil Jones, who leads the agenda for the state senators in the state of Illinois.  But obviously as we continue to progress one of the biggest things I tell the kids is that we have to work together and that's one of the fundamental problems we tend to experience, but we've made significant changes, we've done some significant things for the African American community, made sure that dollars and programs get back to those communities.
Story_ID: 57807
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you anything about your opinion, or feeling, or response, to The Civil Rights Movement in the 60s [1960s] and 70s [1970s].  Would you like to comment?
Speaker 2: I think one of the problems from reflecting back on my own experiences and looking at that time was, we lost sight, meaning the African American community, we lost sight of supporting each other.  I think the true movement was for us to be treated as equal and to be allowed to experience and have the same quality of life as any other American but unfortunately we lost so much in the sense of black businesses, we lost sight of supporting each other and lifting each other up and I think that that's a movement that we're steady foraging now, but I think that we could be, we could have been so far ahead of the learning curve if we had understood the true significance of being treated equally but not to the point where you don't support black businesses.
