Story_ID: 17131
Speaker 1: My name is Emma Chappell.  Chappell is spelled "C H A P P E L L".  And I was born on February 18th, 1941.
Speaker 2: And give us today's date and our location and your profession.
Speaker 1: Today is--Wednesday, May 16th, 2001.  And I am currently the director of the Wall Street Project in New York City.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what would you list as your profession?
Speaker 1: I would say that I'm an executive.  If one would compare it, they would say executive director or president.
Story_ID: 17132
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite...
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red and blue is a second runner up.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say fish, seafood. I love seafood.  That's my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd have to say San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: [unclear]. And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase would be "Believe in yourself."
Story_ID: 17133
Speaker 1: I wanted to start with your father.  His name was George...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: George Bayton, senior.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering if you could tell us, you know, what you know about him and his background.
Speaker 2: Well my father was a great man.  He passed away just before I opened the bank, in fact.  And he raised me from a teenager on.  Because my mother [Emma Lewis Bayton] died when I was 14 years old.  And I know that he was probably one of the most encouraging people.  The kind of person that believed in his children.  And gave you the feeling that you could do almost anything.  Which was outstanding because his background was that he was a chef.  He worked at Horn and Hardart, was a famous restaurant years ago and especially on the east coast in Philadelphia and New York.  And he was a top chef at Horn and Hardart for 30 some  years.  And people depended on him.  In fact, he was also the chef at our church, which was Zion Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  For many years he did all of the cooking for the church.  And we had a large congregation.  So he loved to cook.  And he also loved his children.  There are three of us.  And one of the things I like about him is that no matter how hard he worked, we knew that at five o'clock in the afternoon you'd better be in the house.  Not sitting out on the stoop.  In the house doing your homework or have done your homework by the time you got... by the time he got home.  And so in many respects he was a tough taskmaster.  But he had a very genteel way about him.  Most people thought he was such a nice man.  Very calm and collected.  And I saw him just the opposite.  Because I saw him as a disciplinarian and very strict.  But very calm and quiet strictness.  You knew that you had to do what you had to do and get it done in a timely manner.  And you also knew that it--you had to put all of the effort you could behind it to make sure that it was done to the best of your ability.
Speaker 1: Now do you--do you know much?  Did he talk--?  Was he comfortable talking about himself?  Or do you know of him--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] As far as I know he was born in Virginia.  I know his--my grandfather and grandmother lived in Virginia. Tappahannock, Virginia to be exact.  And unfortunately we never did the family tree.  But I do know that we used to go to Virginia every summer.  And so in a sense that's where we were raised up.  We had a farm.  In fact, I--I own the farm today.  It's in Ozeana, [Essex] county.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Did he ever talk at all about growing up or what he experienced?  Did he share any stories with you of him growing up?
Speaker 2: Not any that I can remember. And I think it has a lot to do with the fact that he was doing--wearing so many hats. Being the mother and the father at a time be--when people weren't really looking for men to be the mother and the father.  They saw women in that role.  But they very seldom saw men.  And he--when my mother died, he made a decision that we were all gonna stay together.  And he did that.  And very successfully so.
Speaker 1: You know, that says a lot.  That says mountains, really.
Speaker 2: It really did.
Speaker 1: Now do you know how he came to Philadelphia?  Do you know even that story?  How he--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No only that the family--he and his sister and brothers. All of them came except the mother and father.  That was ironic.  They all migrated from Virginia to Philadelphia.  In fact, the sister--it was a sister and a brother that lived the longest.  My dad and his sister.  And they died within six months of each other.  He took care of her 'til her death.  And then he died.  It was to the date.  They were so close.  It was like he held off because he knew she didn't have any family.  And he had me and my sister and brother.  So he held off to take care of her.  And saw her buried.  And then it was like he had done everything he expected to do.
Story_ID: 17134
Speaker 1: Now your mother.  Her name was Emma Lewis [Bayton]--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes
Speaker 1: Dayton.  What do you know about her?  Her family--?  Was she from Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: No. My understanding is that she was from Atlantic City.  And I don't know.  I always--I can remember when we were kids that we used to laugh about the fact--who was raised--who was born in Atlantic City [Laughing]. It was a big joke in our house.  And so when I was young, she used to talk about being in Atlantic City. And how great it was to get good seafood.  Because you were right there at the ocean. And so the restaurants even way back then had great seafood.  She used to work in a restaurant also.
Speaker 1: So do you know how--?  Was a--do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Now I do have a relative by the name of Gresham (ph.) that seems to really know the family tree.  And he lives next door to the property in Virginia.  And he has told me that anything that I wanna know, that he would share that with me.  So I just need to do some research.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I would--you know, I keep encouraging people to even find out if they don't know.  You know,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: Because it's all part of discovering our past.
Speaker 2: But he knows all of the facts.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] He does?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Knows--he knew my grandfather.  He knew that my father [George Bayton, Sr.] was the son of his second wife.  And he has told me a lot of the history over the last few months as I've been tracking it.  But he's getting up in age.  And I need to go and debrief him.  So that I can really find out what my roots are about.
Story_ID: 17135
Speaker 1: Let's go over your siblings.  There are three of you.  Where do you fit in the family tree?  And who is--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I'm in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay. [unclear]
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] My brother's the oldest.  And I'm the middle child.
Speaker 1: And your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Is George Bayton.
Speaker 1: And your name?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] George Kendall Bayton. And--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And it--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And--
Speaker 1: You're Emma Bayton?
Speaker 2: I'm Emma Carolyn Bayton.  And my sister is Mary Bayton.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we have a middle name.  We--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: You didn't go over that at the beginning.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh, Caroline.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay [chuckling], "C-A--" Can you spell it?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] "C-A-R-O-L-Y-N".
Speaker 1: Okay [Chuckling]. Holding out on us then.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing] Yes. It's Emma Carolyn Bayton.  In fact, I usually use my middle initial.  Emma C.
Speaker 1: Now do you know--?  You don't know where the name Bayton, even it's derivation or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No but they--it was a very large family.  That's why I really need to find out what--as much as I can.  I remember everybody in the township was a Bayton.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: In a place called Dunnsville, Virginia.  And there's people still living there that knew them.  And I recently went down to the graveyard where my mother was buried.  But I wasn't able to find the grave.  But the former neighbor called me and learned that I was at the church looking for it.  And told me he has the plot and everything so that I can find it.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So I will be able to get more information for you.
Story_ID: 17136
Speaker 1: Well, my earliest memories are the trips to Virginia and spending summers there.  In fact, that's where my mother [Emma Lewis Bayton] died in Virginia.  And we used to go to our family home, which was a large farm with 70 acres.  To me as a kid seemed like a lot of land.  And that we lived right across the road from a river.  And I remember going over there.  'Cause I had a good friend that lived over there.  And the river was the Rappahannock... Rappahannock River which runs right through Tappahannock. And I remember going to the movies.  Being at... And even today, I love to go to the theater [chuckling].  But as a child, I went to the movies.  But we used to have to go upstairs and sit in the balcony in Virginia.  And now the town has grown up tenfold.  But it was a wonderful little area.  And everybody knew everybody.  And we were close.  And the Baytons apparently owned the town.  From the post office and everywhere else.  And so I enjoyed that.  And as I've gotten older, I didn't go home as often.  So I kind... And my children never wanted to go to Virginia because they felt like it was too many mosquitoes [chuckling].  So we stopped going.  And they really just didn't have the interest to go at all.  And then I remember that I had an excellent friend who was like a godmother to me.
Story_ID: 17137
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have?  You know, you, you were talking about the Virginia memories.  But are there other memories of--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes. I was about to say I had a wonderful woman in my life that sort of assumed the role of a mother.  And she was my godmother.  And she was quite a Christian woman.  And she was the one that made up in her mind that no matter what happened to my mother--the fact that she died young that I was gonna stay in the church.  And I used to have to go to church morning, noon and night on Sunday.  So I would be there from Sunday school to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union].  I don't know,--she would--and I remember she was a praying woman who--one who was very--seemed extra religious when I think back on it.  Seemed like she was--but whatever it was, I know I loved her dearly.  And the best part was that when we finally left church, we went to her house and she would always have a good dinner cooked [laughing].  So I always got a home cooked meal.  And we lived just like my mother [Emma Lewis Bayton] was alive.  It's like she took us over on Sundays.  And became very much a part of our lives.  And so my father [George Bayton, Sr.] was pleased with that.  And she was older.  And I was trying to think if--not Jehovah's Witness, but it seemed to be a different faith than I was.
Speaker 1: Now your father. You described him as a very strict disciplinarian, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that... Now your mother. What--? Before--do you have memories of her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you talk about her?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought.--she was an invalid most of--from what I can remember--probably five years before she died.  And I remember that she used to tell me that she wanted--how she wanted me to grow up and the things she wanted me to do and how she believed in me and that she wasn't well, so that if she should die early that I became... was to become the woman of the house.  And in so doing she taught me how to cook.  And she taught me how to sew and clean.  And she would do all this from being in the bed.  So in other words, as I went to cook, I would have to bring the food in the bedroom.  She would tell me how to fix the ingredients, what to do and take it back and put it on the stove.  She was an excellent cook herself.  And 'til this day people love my cooking.  And I've always been that way.  And it was like my sister [Mary Bayton] took it very hard when my mother died. 'Cause she was much younger.  And it was like I raised my sister.  So when I had my own children, it was like having a second set of children.  And my brother [George Bayton, Jr.] took it very difficult.  Even though he was older, he really had a major set back.  And emotionally it affected him.  And so I ended up taking care of my sister and brother.  And I was the woman of the house at fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: That's sort of--that's an amazing story.  Now how did--?  What did your mother die of?
Speaker 2: She died of heart disease and sugar diabetes.  So I've made sure I haven't had either [laughing]. I just don't have either.
Speaker 1: Did you find--do you--that period of time must have been traumatic for the family?
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Okay. So can you--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But my father was the strength.  And yet you knew that he was suffering.  But he seemed so strong.  And I'm sure he did it for the children.  For us.  And even when she passed away I was with her.  In fact, I was in the bed with her when she died.  And he had told me to watch her because we were going to leave the next morning to drive back home. But he didn't--she wasn't well.  So he wanted me to stay there and keep an eye on her.  And I always felt like I fell asleep and let her die.  But he, of course, explained that wasn't true.  As I got older--but that's what you--that's how you feel as a kid.  And so anyway we didn't come back home right away, of course.  We had a big funeral.  And all of the relatives came around.  And they kind of embraced us and took us over.  And started taking care of us.  And I just think that my father was--what should I say? Not a disciplinarian as you would know one today. But very strong.  You knew that if you had a problem, he was there for you.
Story_ID: 17138
Speaker 1: What was the young Emma like?  What were you like?  I know you took--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Bad.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously laughing]
Speaker 2: [Laughing] Very bad. I loved to talk in school.  I talked too much [Chuckles]. And I loved to--chewing gum.  I had to eat my chewing gum.  And--but smart.  Sort of a natural smartness.  I loved the different languages and things of that sort.  Very fascinated with chemistry.  Thought I was gonna be a doctor.  Naturally I guess, because my mother had been so sick.  I thought I would save lives.  And I ended up a banker.  Because I was good in math.  But I was always very fascinated with science, mathematics and English.
Speaker 1: And now what--? Tell us the schools you went to.  Starting with elementary and, you know [unclear]...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I went to Belmont Elementary School, Sayer Junior High School in Philadelphia and West Philadelphia High School.  And then Temple University... No, then Berean Business [Institute] school, where I got an associate degree.  Then Temple University, well, evening division.  I didn't actually graduate from Temple.  I went on to Rutgers University.  And got a master's equivalent in banking.  So therefore, at Rutgers, I was in a program called Stonier Graduate School of Banking.  Where they trained you to be CEOs of banks.
Speaker 1: Now what--? I know you said you were a--not a trouble--you were mischievous or a troublemaker.  But, you know, we all when we're young we have dreams of maybe becoming something or doing something.  And I was wondering what the Em--young Emma dreamed of.  You know, or was fascinated by?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. I dreamed of being a doctor.  I really did. And I used to tease my daughter.  Just recently I was teasing her that I think it's time for my second profession.  And I'll go into medicine.  I was always fascinated with the human body.  And I'm--I like this whole thing about cloning and things of that sort.  I'm very futuristic.  I like to know what's gonna happen in the future.  I'm not too interested in history.  I was never very interested in history.  I wanted to do good.  And I wanted to do good things for people.  To make other people happy.
Speaker 1: And in school, were you active in certain things?  Was it the church?  Or was it, you know--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I was very active in church.  But in school, I always became president of my class.  So I guess that you would say--one would say I was a leader.  And I--And when I said I was bad, I mean I was mischievous.  I would love to tease people.  If things were just going along normal, I would try to do something to break up the monotony.  But I loved school.  I mean I really genuinely loved to learn.  I have a thirst for knowledge.  And then I try to help other people learn along the way.
Story_ID: 17139
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that stood out in your mind?
Speaker 2: I had--in fact, he's still living.  My favorite teacher was James East (ph.).  A gentleman by the name of James East.  And he was my elementary school teacher.  And he actually mentored me along the way.  And was just a great role model himself.  But a great mentor.  He just kind of took me under his wing.  And kind of directed me in the direction I should go.  For example, he knew that I loved mathematics.  And he would--I was in the math club.  And I would always come up with some kind of way to set up a contest to get other kids to, you know, to excel in mathematics or in language or in English.  Very--I'm very competitive.  And also I would say very strong willed, determined kind of person.
Speaker 1: And what did you--? So your--what is Philadelphia like?  You know, growing up?  What is that whole sort of experience that you were--you found?  Or did you live in your community and wasn't--weren't so aware of the larger community?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's ironic because when I hear people talk about having been poor and things of that sort.  It never really affected me that much.  I think that we were poor.  But it just--everybody I guess in my community was poor.  Because we had the same thing that everybody else had. And we didn't know that we were poor.  We felt that we were living a good life.  And I still today look back on my life and feel that I had a great childhood.  I really do.  And I had people who took a great interest.  Other than losing my mother, everything else was like out of a storybook.  Things were just kind of placed in my path.  And my pastor [at Zion Baptist Church] was Reverend Leon [H.] Sullivan.  And he took--when my mother died, he took me under his wing.  And said, "Well what are you gonna do when you grow up?"  And I said, "Well I'm not sure but I'm gonna do something very important.  Because I wanna be like you [laughing]."  And he said, "Well what can you do?"  And this was before he even started OIC. [Opportunities Industrialization Center ]  And I said, "I can do everything."  And he said, "Well I'm gonna give you a test.  'Cause I wanna see what you can really do."  And my hair stood up--after my hair stood up on my hand--on my head, he actually gave me a test.  He set me down in the basement of the church.  And gave me a test that was just like you were going into college.  And I took this test.  And he said, "I've got--when you get out of high school, I've got just the job for you.  Maybe you won't go to college right away.  But you will--I've got a job for you."  And I said, "Well what is that?"  And he said, "We don't have any Negroes in banking yet.  And I think that you would be a great banker."  And the rest was history.
Speaker 1: That's amazing [unclear].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And he just saw that in me.  And made up his mind that in our community I was gonna be the banker.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.  Boy, that was very--I mean it--you know, it's--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: Right. It's like he had a vision.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It was a vision, yes.  Quite a visionary.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] for you.
Speaker 2: And then the ironic thing is that every opportunity he got, he exposed me to other bankers.  To people who I could learn from.  He had made up his mind that--for example, this person was gonna be a teacher.  Members of the church. Somebody else was gonna be something else.  But I was gonna be the banker in the family.  And then when I think about it, he was very involved with Africa.  And not too long ago, I would say maybe 10 years ago, there was a fellow that I met by the name of Ed Robinson, who had put together this city.  A typical African city.  And the funny thing is that he thought he met me as a young person going into banking.  And as he developed the city, he put me as the banker in the center of town.  And I guess I was just meant to be a banker.  Everybody saw that in me because of my ability with finances and managing money and being able to count.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  And it's a skill set then in the, you know, African-American community, especially at the time you're talking about, not many people--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That's right.
Speaker 1: It was not something people aspired to.
Story_ID: 17140
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about your high school experience that was, you know, important or you...? You know, or significant--to your development?
Speaker 2: Well I think there in high school I really made a decision on myself--who I am and what I was about--and what I wasn't about.  And by that I mean I had a lot of friends that got into trouble.  Girls at the time were getting pregnant before marriage and doing different things.  And I made a decision early on that none of that was for me.  That I might be mischievous--mischievous, but I wasn't gonna be bad [laughing].  Real bad.  And so when I say it was really a coming of my own, I was really coming into my own self.  It meant that I made some very tough decisions in my life, because I was exposed as a child without a parent, without a mother to all kinds of negative influences.  People who wanted to direct me to do this or encourage me to do that.  And I guess something about--I don't know if it was my, because of my Christian faith or my being stubborn or what it was.  But if it had any air of being unorthodox or out of what I thought it should be, I had no interest.  And I would turn off on it.  And now when I look at young people and how they get exposed to drugs and things of that sort, I think about what I went through.  And I know my friends were trying to take me down a different path.  And I just--so it was innate in me.  I just did not want to do anything that was not right.  So I guess I was a good girl after all [chuckling].
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  Now okay, so you're in--you're in your last year of school.  And what is the decision?  What's going on with you?  And, you know, what are your thoughts about after you graduate?
Speaker 2: Well as I said I was typically selected to lead my class in, you know, in different--with different opportunities.  And I became a vice-president and then a president.  And I was in journalism and writing a school newspaper.  And having a lot of fun with the language clubs and things.  And sort of encouraging my classmates to travel. To learn about traveling 'cause, so that we could get together and go places and things of that sort.  And I was really just living a good life.  I hadn't really thought about what I wanted to be.  Other than the fact that I thought I was naturally gonna be--go to medical school and be a doctor.  But when my mother died so young, it ate up a lot of the money that we had because she had been sick for a period--for a long period of time.  And it--because of insurance was not what it was today, it really impacted on my dad's, you know, disposable income.  So I wasn't able to go right away to college.  So when I went to Berean Business [Institute] school, that was sort of a halfway. Like a community college, for want of another way of putting it.  It's still in existence today.  And it's doing fine.  And there are a lot of young people who go to schools of this sort that could not immediately go to a four-year school.  And so what was happening is I was trying to make up my mind what I wanted to do.  Could I live off of income without working full time?  And we soon learned that I needed to go to work and go to school.  And so that's what I did.  And that's when Reverend [Leon H.] Sullivan suggested I get into banking.  Called up.  And he said to me, "I really would like you to stay in banking for maybe five years. And if you like it, you can stay longer.  But it--Stay at least for five years.  So that we can send a message that there are people of color who can count two and two and come up with four." [Chuckling] And so on. And I got into banking [at Continental Bank] and they--the whole industry just seemed to embrace me.  And it was not a color thing.  It--the thing that I felt biased about, if anything, was the fact that I was a woman, as opposed to the fact that--of my race.  And during that period, there weren't too many women in banking.  And I think the fact that there was so much discrimination going on as it relates to women, challenged me.  And as I said early on, I'm a very competitive person.  And so the fact that people started acting like I shouldn't be advancing in my career made me think that I'm gonna advance that much more.  So it more or less kind of got me more involved, more interested in moving ahead in this field that I might have otherwise been.
Story_ID: 17141
Speaker 1: Wasn't it at... What was the bank?  Was it... What...?
Speaker 2: Continental [Bank].
Speaker 1: Continental, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes. It was Broad Street Trust back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what it was called, Broad Street Trust.
Speaker 1: And so you start there.  And that starts the beginning of-- how long--?  You were there how many years?
Speaker 2: 30 years.
Speaker 1: 30... Wow! Okay.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So... And it-- And you... Well I'd like you to sort of recap that part of your life.  You know, and what the whole learning experience--. Now you start there in 19--Do you start there in '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: '60.
Speaker 1: 1960.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you start there... in that whole 30... That's a lo-o-ong... Okay, that's a long...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of change happening in the country.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] That's right.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] at that time.
Speaker 2: An awful lot of change.  In fact, a lot of change was happening right in Philadelphia when we were having the riots and things of that sort. But I started at what was a very difficult time.  In terms of race relations anyway.  It was like the whole civil rights movement and the women's movement were coming to some kind of a peak at that particular time.  And so it was--the women's movement didn't really peak, I guess 'til the '70s [1970s].  But it--Women were beginning to talk about why can't they get jobs in certain industries and things of that sort.  They didn't really take the movement until ten years later.  But minorities were rioting and things of that sort was taking place all during that period from the '60s [1960s]to the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: So what are the things happening in Philadelphia in this whole period?  And, you know, who are the movers and shake...? I mean you're a young adult at this point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But still there's a lot... You know, a lot of the movement was, you know, sort of [unclear]...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well and what was interesting about that period for me is I'd gotten married [to Verdayne Chappell].  And I had two children [Tracey Chappell and Verdaynea Chappell].  One right behind each other, 18 months apart.  And so I really didn't take a major interest in a lot that was going on.  I was in school at night and working in the day, so--and raising two babies.  So I didn't have a lot of time.  And all in love with my husband.  And just being a good wife.  But then I guess around the late '60s [1960s]I started getting much more involved in career opportunities and things of that sort.  And I knew about... What was it, '68 [1968], '69 [1969], when we had the race riots in Philadelphia.  And they started burning down stores and things of that sort.  And Reverend [Leon H.] Sullivan was talking about developing a shopping center.  And the shopping center was no more than a couple of blocks away from where I was working.  That... Where he wanted to create this progress plaza shopping center.  Which was to be the first black-owned shopping center in the nation.  And so then everyday... every Sunday I'd go to church and hear him saying, "Use what you've got in your hand."  That was his saying.  "That you could do anything you wanted in life.  Just use what you have in your hand."  In other words, just take your own resources and develop them to a point that you could be successful in most anything. [Coughs] Excuse me, so anyway.  The banking was changing.  I'd become a teller.  And then after becoming a teller, I moved on to platform.  And they had decided they saw something in me.  And they would pay for my education.  And that's when I got back into school.  And the rest was history.  Because they then walked me, not only through school academically, while they're paying for my tuition and everything.  But they also put me in an executive training program.  And as part of the executive training program, I went through every department in the bank.  And I got a chance to learn about banking at all levels.  From the bottom up.  And I was fascinated with the industry and how you could take people... take businesses and make loans to those businesses.  And grow them to a point where they were multi-million dollar businesses.  To me that was power.  And I loved power.  I liked being able to make things better for people.  As I've often said.  So here we had... I got into a bank that had a culture.  That they worked with... They took small businesses and developed them into medium size businesses.  And then even to larger businesses.  So a lot of the businesses that were becoming successful in Philadelphia were doing so because as a out growth of the bank that I was working in.  A out growth of their direct involvement in these businesses.
Speaker 1: Now when you started, how many blacks were working at that bank?
Speaker 2: They... I was the first minority in this bank.  And certainly the first African-American woman in the bank.  And so... And I'd heard there may have been one other in another bank in the city.  But I think that I was... In fact, that's why Reverend Sullivan wanted me to go there.  Because there hadn't been any minorities in banking.  And then... So therefore as a result of that, as I moved up the ladder and got promotions, then I was always the first this and the first that.  So there were a lot of firsts in my life.
Speaker 1: Hmm. And did you find the environment hostile in the beginning?  Any events...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No I didn't.  I found the environment very supportive because they saw me as a kid.  As a teenager, I started there young.  And they felt that, "She's a nice kid and we'll teach her a lot of good things."  I didn't think that it became hostile until I be... started getting more successful.  And, you know what they say, "As you go up the ladder of success, it gets tighter at the top."  And the further up I went I... the more hostility I experienced.
Story_ID: 17142
Speaker 1: You could recount, you know...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: --experiences, things learned, you know, disappointments, challenges, that type of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well since I was a first at almost every level in banking, I had a lot of difficult experiences.  And as I said earlier especially as it relates to women. There were times that people would say to me, like when I was a teller. "I never thought I'd be working next to a woman." The men would tell me that, who were tellers along the line.  And then because I was a teller that was very fast in counting, and soon the customer base got so they would wait in my line. They wouldn't even go to the other tellers. Now here I was the only black and the only female. And they would all--My line would be almost out of the door. While the customers... they were so glad they waited for me. They wanted me to take care of them. And what it was is that I was warm and friendly to them.  And I would remember their names and how they liked their money and their signature so I didn't always have to look up the signature card. I had a very good memory. And as a result, the rest of the tellers got very jealous and vindictive.  And would say things under their breath.  And after a while they just kind of let me take care of the customers and they just stood on the side.  And just said, "Well, let her work herself to death [chuckling]. 'Cause that--that's on her." But you know what?  I didn't mind it at all.  Because it... I don't think that if that hadn't happened, that I would've been promoted the way I was.  Because the management of the bank saw that the customers liked me.  And the customers would speak up.  And the customers could be black or white.  It didn't matter.  I had all the customers that would wait for me as a teller.  And when I was out, they were very unhappy.  I had people in Philadelphia say, "I knew her when she was a teller.  And we wouldn't go to any other teller."  And they were--I think what happened is because I was born and raised in Philadelphia.  So people saw me as a Philadelphia girl.  And they wanted to support me.  And they always did.  I mean they came through all the time. So I remember experiencing a lot of biases, a lot of negative comments, a lot of... When I went to get a raise one time, a fellow said to me, "Well you're married.  Why do you need a raise?"  And I said, "Well I'm doing a lot of work.  And other people are making more money than me.  And I need to make more money.  I have two children."  And they said, "Well, your husband works.  So you don't need to get a raise."  Another time when I went to get a promotion, they said to me, "Well, why should we promote you?  You're probably gonna have a baby--stop and take a leave and have a baby--anyhow.  So we're not gonna promote you.  Or we're promote you maybe later."  Things of that sort.  You know what I'm saying?  So I think that the biases were there.  But I would ignore them.  And I used to have a girlfriend that... maybe five years after I was there. There was another African-American woman came.  And we'd be--struck up a fast friendship.  And as a result, there were very lonely times for her and I because we at many points--many junctures in our career, we were the only ones. We could only talk to each other.  Because we would be isolated and things of that sort.
Story_ID: 17143
Speaker 1: Did people ever--? Was there a perception--?  I mean... I know you said that you, you know, got this great reputation as a teller.  But one, tellers were well viewed at that time.  There weren't many black people holding the role.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: And two, was there ever any perception on the part of the white community that, you know.  'Cause black people were not necessarily to be in a position where they touched any money.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I wanted you to sort of--I mean 'cause that's--we weren't allowed to handle money.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's why I'm saying it's so ironic.  Because the white community, especially the Jewish community would almost request me to handle their money.  And a lot of our customers were Jewish.  And I think it had a lot to do with the fact that they were the business people in the area.  And they would bring their accounts to the bank.  And they had the most money in the bank at the time.  And as a result, they were very helpful to me.  Because they did just the opposite.  They asked for me.  They would encourage my handling of their account.  So it was going through a time [early 1960s] I think that people were just beginning to think about race.  And when all of this fighting was going on and as we said, "race rioting" and things going on in California and around the country, that people who were--I'd like to say, God-fearing people began to try to reach out to people like myself in another way.  For example, I do believe that people who worked in the financial institution that I worked at, Continental Bank, actually pulled me along on purpose.  It was their way of doing something for the race. It was like I had a mentor but you couldn't point to any one mentor.  For fear they would be--somebody would say something negative about them. So they didn't own up to the mentoring.  But there's no--I know in my heart of hearts there's no way I would have all the opportunities that I had. I was the first woman to go into training as a woman executive in the bank. I was all these firsts. And they had white women who worked there.  But somebody was just kind of marshalling me along.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Without me asking after a while.
Story_ID: 17144
Speaker 1: Now when you went into the executive program, [at Continental Bank, Philadelphia] what surprises...? What things did surprise you about that?  I mean were there surprises about the experience? 'Cause as you move up...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: There, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well the surprises were learning banking, I think.  And for my most fascinating experience was when I had an opportunity to work in the treasurer's office.  And the treasurer bought and sold money of the bank.  And I couldn't imagine them buying and selling money.  And it was just fascinating.  We didn't have all the technology we have today.  But how he would pick up the phone in the morning.  And put in a call for whatever the amount of money that they needed.  And we got it at the Federal Reserve window.  They bought the money at discount at the Federal Reserve Bank.  And how it was delivered to the bank and things of that sort.  That to me was fascinating.  I had--I didn't have any idea. Not a clue that, that's how the money got in the bank.  The other experience was that when you make a loan.  How that grows money in the system.  When you borrow money, it goes into your account.  And it increases the supply of money in the system. In the economy.  But you don't think of it like that.  You see what I'm saying?  So to--I--And if you recall I said to you, "I love to learn."  So to me it was educational.  And every opportunity I got, it was like I was a sponge, just absorbing everything that I could.  I wanted to know everything.  How did it get started?  You know, how do they clean money [chuckling]?  You know, because money's dirty.  What did they do to clean it?  Things of that sort.  And so I really got into the intricacies of banking all the way.  And I think that too is what made my detractors have a sense of jealousy. A sense of dislike for the fact that I was so inquisitive.  But I was always that way.  I always wanted to know why things happen.
Speaker 1: Now what...? How do they clean money?
Speaker 2: They actually do clean money.  They take it to the Federal Reserve.  And they have a whole machine that does. I mean when it gets all beat up and what you call 'em, they just discard money.  But they do have a way of cleaning it.
Story_ID: 17145
Speaker 1: The length or the level that people will go to in order to keep you from succeeding--the hatefulness that people can experience.  It's ironic.  Just Mother's Day, this past Sunday.  I went to a restaurant.  And I walked in with my two daughters and their husbands and my grandchildren and I hadn't been in there two minutes.  And a woman came up to me and said, "You know, you don't--you won't remember me.  But I remember the first day you walked into banking."  This is what a woman said.--it was a white woman said to me--and she said, "I've been proud of you ever since."  She said, "And you won't even remember me."  And she gave me her name.  I didn't remember her.  But I knew her son.  And her son was a businessman.  One of our big business customers that used to come into the bank.  And she said she worked right at the same bank.  She said, "But you didn't know there were a lot of people that resented the fact that you got the opportunities that you got."  So it was like--that the--it was similar to having an angel on my shoulder who was looking after me and sort of marshalled me through the system.  And--but ironically I think the most difficult part was knowing that people would do hateful things to block you.  There were often times--I'll never forget when I ended up in the loan department.  There... How dare a woman,  and particularly a black woman think she could come into the loan department.  And make loans for construction, for building buildings and things of that sort.  And frankly, the last twenty years of my career at Continental [Bank] was in lending.  But when I first got to the department, the fellows were sitting there.  And it was a big room with desks.  And everybody had their own workstation, desk and what have you.  And they gave me a desk.  And they gave me a nice one sort of--I guess there were rows of desks near the window.  And I couldn't imagine why in the dead of winter, somebody would come and open the window and talk about how hot it was in there--well--when it wasn't really hot.  But they wanted me to catch a cold so that I wouldn't be there.  And I would freeze because we catch... We as a race of people cannot stand as much cold as often times white people can.  And so as a result, I would get this awful cold.  And they would crack--they would think it was so funny that I was sick half of the time.  And that was meant so that I would lose time from work and hopefully lose my job.  That was just one little circumstance that I went through.  I've probably went through at least 20 experiences like that.
Story_ID: 17146
Speaker 1: Now once you entered the executive program, can you just trace the positions that you held.  You know, in the area?  You know, you...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: --were in the different departments.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went through... Well I had already been a teller and a platform assistant.  And then I got a chance to work in a branch as a branch manager.  Then they started taking me through the various loan departments, consumer loans, commercial loans, construction loans, etcetera.  In the consumer loan department, that was interesting to me.  Because nine out of ten people came to a bank came because they wanted to borrow money for a car or for a home or something of that sort.  And the way they evaluated loans was fascinating.  Because they would take all the information on your application and score it.  And that's how they made a decision as to whether or not you got loans.  And so--and some banks still do that today.  So I came through almost all of the departments.  All of--certainly all the loan departments.  The--what is it? One was called Proof--Proof Department, Transit.  Proof is where the work--the teller's work would come at night.  And we would go through the deposits and the checks and things of that sort.  And set 'em up and get 'em prepared to go to the clearinghouse.  Another area that I really enjoyed is--as I mentioned where- was the money where--I call them the money-changers.  Where they did the investment at night, they borrowed money in the morning; they had sufficient money during the course of the day. As the money came in, they invested it at night.  And took advantage of the float and earned interest on that float for the bank to use to cover its expenses and things of that sort. So--and then--so I spent a lot of time in loans.  Because that's where my interests lie. It was also in the marketing department.  In fact, I started the marketing department at Continental Bank.  And we had six vice presidents running that department.  And I was the administrative assistant at--during this period. And it was so nice because it was like I was secretary to six V.P.s.  And yet if you... If any of the V.P.s came in or somebody came in to see them, the vice presidents, they would make sure that I was in on the meeting.  So it was just like I was assistant vice-president.  Because I had a lot of good ideas on how they could market the bank.  New business development.  Also we worked in a new business--where a bank officer would go out in the community.  And go get a customer, talk to them about the importance of banking and why they should bank at Continental Bank and things of that sort.  So all in all--I was in international banking, spent a good amount of time in international banking and dealing with all of the documents that are there like the letters of credit and things of that sort.  And the exchange, foreign exchange for money.  So my life truly has been-- has evolved around banking and finance.
Story_ID: 17147
Speaker 1: Now did you like see anything in terms of their dealing with minority community?  Was this--? You know, Continental was viewed as a very prestigious bank.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a bank that was heavily involved in international--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: --affairs too.  But, you know, you hear about... you hear constantly about blacks and redline I mean banks.  Sorry.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: And red lining.  And I'm wondering if you saw any practices that were disturbing to you.  You know, as you're talking about, you know, they had this--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes there was quite a bit of red-lining going on during this period that I was in banking.  And in fact, that was what, probably what advanced me the most, is because the community groups were complaining about it.  Many of them were boycotting banks and things of that sort.  Because they felt that their neighborhood was being discriminated against.  That it had been red lined.  And by red lining we meant that somebody actually took a red pen and got to a map and went up on a map and put a red line around an area.  And made a decision not to lend any money in that area.  And it was clear that if they hadn't red lined the area, they certainly had withdrawn their enthusiasm for investing in those areas.  And the reason why it was clear is because a lot of the homes were in disrepair.  Or people had difficulty getting a mortgage to buy a home and things of that sort.  And so I remember going to my management, top management, and telling them that I thought I had a good idea for a new department.  And told them what the idea was.  And that I thought that they would really be ahead of the curve if they would allow me to establish this department.  So they said, "Well write it up.  And let me know what it should do."  And I wrote up a department that I was allowed to create and run.  And that's what I ran for twenty years.  And that's what helped Continental mitigate the accusations of being accused of red lining.  When other banks all throughout the city were being accused of it, our bank was considered one of the most...What should I say? --liberal banks, when it comes to lending in the African-American community.  And it was because of our department.  And I had a nice, a good department.  And I was able to prove to the banking community that even though this was otherwise considered a high risk community, that you could make loans and still get them collected.  And we had some of the best statistics. Our data indicated that we had less than a 1 percent loan loss ratio.  Because people did pay back the loans.  In spite of the fact that they would be considered the most risky loans because maybe they didn't have as much collateral as the bank would like to have had.  Or they were in neighborhoods that would have otherwise been red lined.
Speaker 1: And so--but you were able to make a difference because you were there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I was there.  And in fact--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And this is pre-Community Reinvestment Act.
Speaker 2: It's pre-community reinvestment.  And in fact, because of that, I'll never forget one of the other bankers saying that they made a decision to invest in Continental Bank themselves.  Because of what I was able to do with that department.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Because that was considered risk.  And if you could run that department well. And our outstandings were like forty million dollars.
Story_ID: 17148
Speaker 1: You stayed at the bank [Continental Bank, Philadelphis] till 19--was it 1990?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you--what was--? What were the circumstances for you leaving?  Was it a job not gotten?  Or, you know...
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] No.
Speaker 1: Or you were just--Or it was an opportunity?
Speaker 2: It was an opportunity.
Speaker 1: It was an opportunity.
Speaker 2: I had worked with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson in '84 [1984] as his national treasurer.
Speaker 1: Oh we need to go back to that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: So wait.  But you're--but let me--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] But it was because of that, that I decided to come out and start the bank.
Speaker 1: Right.  No, I--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] --know that part.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you said you headed this area [department] up for 20 years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That would have been--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: from--I thought it was
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '71 [1971]
Speaker 1: '72 [1972]
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] to '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Oh I see.  Okay, so in between--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, so you are--but let's talk about your role in the community.  You must be playing a much larger role in the community in--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: some respects. Okay.  So can you--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] A huge role [laughing].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I must have had 28 hours in every 24-hour day. Because it did seem like when I reflect on it that I got a lot done for the community.  In spite of the fact that I worked everyday. And it was because I would leave work and be active in the community.  In the evenings, actually showing people how to bank at banks.  How to understand it. We now call it financial literacy. But actually teaching people how to use a bank.  In the evenings in churches and places--at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Center] and places like that.  So I really--when I think about it I got a lot of time out of a little bit of time.
Speaker 1: So you put--how did this--? Why was there this perception in a lot of people--the discussion in the area of--? That's why my father, I think likes so much [Rev.] Leon Sullivan because he was--he had a business focus to--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes he did.
Speaker 1: [Unclear]. And most people--it's just now, you know, with the whole Wall Street and--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, turning the attention from, you know, this--you know, from education and, you know, and to get a job--you know, working.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: To this sort of economic development.  So that's why. In--but--who was most--? Were you saying, "Okay I wanna help."  Or was the community calling out, sort of? And just because you were active, you know, already in the community?  I'm just trying to understand what preci--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well it was both.  It was actually both.  Because I was so active in the community and had been...had taken it upon myself to educate the community on banking and to provide a bridge between the African-American community and the white community as it related to banking. I made myself sort of a human bridge. Because I was the one that was given the opportunity to get inside of banking and really learn it.  And I felt that I ought to be giving something back. And so when I had the opportunity to be Reverend Jackson's national treasurer when he ran for president in '84 [1984], I traveled around the country and saw that in every commun--in every city where there was a viable African-American community, there was usually a minority-owned bank. Even if the community didn't use it at the level that they should be using it.  The very fact that it was there stimulated the interest from the minor--non-minority community to reinvest in those areas.
Story_ID: 17149
Speaker 1: In 1974, he [Rev. Jesse Jackson] came to Philadelphia and started talking to people about economic equality and leveling the playing field.  And he was attempting to branch out with Operation PUSH which had started in 1971 in Chicago.  And the thing that I liked about, best about his message was he was talking about African Americans taking control of their own economic destiny.  And the way he suggested we do that was by creating a vehicle like a bank.  And taking full control of our own economic destiny in our community.  And not waiting for somebody else to do it for us.  So the more I listened to him and his speeches, the more I got moved into action.  And so one day somebody came to see me and told me that Reverend Jackson would like to meet me.  Because he had heard that I was "the banker" quote unquote in town.  That everybody looked up to and thought he should know and that we should know each other.  'Cause he's talking about blacks starting banks.  And I'm the banker--the senior banker at this point.  So this young lady picked me up and took me to meet him at a church.  And he was having a big speech that night.  And I was encouraged by it. And we met afterward.  And we maintained a friendship.  And then he ultimately put me on the board of directors in Chicago of PUSH.  And I got to meet Reverend Willie Barrow and a number of other key Chicagoans.  And I really did enjoy my experience with it, with Operation PUSH.
Speaker 2: Let's talk a little bit about that.
Speaker 1: Sure.  My experience is that I ended up as chairman of the board of PUSH Philadelphia.  Created it in a chapter in Philadelphia.  We had our Saturday morning community meetings.  People would come in with whatever their problems might be.  And we would advocate for them. Just like they did in Chicago.  And we'd air our concerns on radio with the Saturday morning broadcast.  And so we were a miniature Chicago.  And it,--we ran it for a number of years.  So that was in '74 [1974].  So when Reverend Jackson decided to run for president he,-- before--even before that he used to tease me.  And say I was too conservative to be in the movement.  Because everything-- He said, "Emma, you see things black or white. There are shades of gray."  And so I always felt like he didn't like me because of that, because I was this conservative banker.  Even though I was on the other side telling people what was going on in banking, about red lining.  In fact, Reverend Gray, if he were to admit it was-- He was the chairman of PUSH for a while.  And I was the one behind the scenes telling them how banks operate.  So that they could speak out against red lining during the period.
Story_ID: 17150
Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson called me up when he got ready to run for president.  And he said, "Emma, I need to meet with you."  And I said, "Sure, fine.  When do you want to meet?"  And I thought he was calling me about Operation PUSH.  I didn't have any idea that he was gonna run for president of the United States.  I mean I couldn't even imagine it.  So anyway, he said, "Can you come to Washington any time soon?"  And we picked a date.  And the date that I selected, he had to fly somewhere.  So I thought I would meet him in Washington.  And we'd have our meeting and then he'd leave.  The next thing I know I'm on a plane flying with him somewhere.  And I don't recall where we went. But--. Oh I know, Connecticut.  We came up here to Connecticut.  And the ironic thing was that on the plane he said to me, "You know, I've been thinking about it.  And I'm gonna run for president of the United States."  And I was--I said, "Oh, that's wonderful.  I mean I can't even imagine."  He said, "And I'd like you to be my treasurer."  I said, "Now you remember I'm the one you said that never sees shades of gray.  And if you think I feel that way in banking, imagine how I feel in politics."  And he said, "That's exactly why I want you." He said, "Because if you don't, somebody's gonna get in there and mess with that campaign finance.  And we'll have problems.  And that's where they would get us right away."  So I came back and talked with the officials at Continental Bank.  Asked them what they thought about it. They gave me a leave of absence.  And I went to work with Reverend Jackson. And was his national treasurer when he ran for president of the United States.
Speaker 2: So how was that whole experience?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Fantastic.
Speaker 2: [Unclear] It's opening up a new world completely.
Speaker 1: It's fabulous!  It was just wonderful.I could not have paid for that experience.  I couldn't have read it in a book.  It was nothing like it.  We had--I mean almost everybody that was a part of the campaign became something even more than they were when they got into it.  I mean when I think of Ron [Ronald Harmon] Brown. When I think of Alexis Herman, when I think of most--Minyon Moore--most of the people, who succeeded after Reverend Jackson ran as president, were people who were volunteers in his campaign.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: Donna Brazile who was Vice-President [Al] Gore's campaign manager.  I could just name 'em.  All across these United States are as a result of Reverend Jackson's run for president.  And we didn't have a clue as to what we had to do to help him run for president when we all got together.  But we were so committed to what he--to the philosophy, to the idea of what he wanted to do.  And the need was so great.  So we all got in.  I took my area of responsibility very serious.  I would go home at night and read the FEC [Federal Election Commission] manuals.  And come back and implement it the next day.  I would sit in the middle of my bed reading the manual the night before.  And learning what does a treasurer do.  Because we never had experience, we'd never been at that point anywhere like that.  And studied what I had to do.  And we had... When his campaign was over, the FEC told us that we had the best-kept records of any presidential candidate in the United States up to that point.  And people don't talk about that.  But that's what came out of that.  And Reverend Jackson was put in 'Time' magazine'--on the front page of 'Time' magazine--and I remember he called me and said--'cause we used to try--I used to advance him or come behind him.  And one day he said, "I want you to go to a union--labor meeting with me."  And I said, "Okay."  He said, "So I'll meet you.  And come go with me over to the labor hall--to union hall."  I got in a cab.  And we went to the union hall.  It wasn't that he wanted me to go there.  He wanted to open his briefcase up and show me the magazine that named him as the organization man.  And he said, "I am here because of you."  And it was one of the most touching experiences. Because here I am, the kid that was raised up in West Philadelphia and Virginia who got an opportunity to--after their mother died--to be close to the minister.  And raised by my father.  And here I was as someone who really made a difference in a presidential campaign.
Speaker 2: That's an amazing story.  I don't think--people don't know that story.
Speaker 1: No, they don't.
Speaker 2: So how do you think that--?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And I'm cutting it short now.  It was very--. Not only did I-- national treasurer.  But I was his campaign manager for fundraising.  And we raised almost 11 million dollars in 1984 in a span of about six months.  That's a--'Cause he didn't win the primary.  So it was only the primary campaign.
Speaker 2: That's amazing!
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Isn't that amazing?
Speaker 2: So now who were--?  Who were the people--? Who were some of these other people behind the scenes?  You know, because you don't know--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, who were some of the--?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It was fascinating.  Barbara Williams Skinner was a deputy campaign manager.  Arnold--I forget Arnold's last name.
Speaker 2: Does she have the training institute?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] She does.
Speaker 2: Okay go, okay go--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] She does.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] She's fantastic.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Ernie [Ernest] Green.  As I said, Ron Brown and Alexis Herman.  There were just piles of us. Ben Pollute [ph] in Savannah, Georgia.  Laura Murphy.  I could--I mean I'm telling you-- the mayors--Donna Brazile was head of our youth group around the country.  It was probably the most exciting six--eight months of any of our lives.  We jumped on private planes, helicopters, we were all over America.  In farm town--anywhere you could think of, we went.  And we ran one heck of a campaign.
Speaker 2: And did--?  And did--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And it was serious.
Speaker 2: You were serious, but it's not like anyone had any great experience--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] No
Speaker 2: --going into it.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] None of us.
Speaker 2: So that's what this--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] None--
Speaker 2: This is what is so amazing about it.
Speaker 1: And we always were fascinated.  I'll never forget when we--it was time to go to the convention center.  And if you remember, Reverend Jackson had made this fatal mistake of calling something "Hymietown."  And he had to apologize for it.  But we knew even though we had lost the primary, that when it came time to set up at the convention, that we needed to have the same kind of set-up behind the stage that everybody else had. Because we were a creditable campaign.  And we went.  And when I got to California to set up our operation, I found out that everybody had all of these little trailers--they had--that looked like house trailers behind the curtains.  And the trailers were like command posts.  They had all of these computers and technology and things of that sort in them.  And I remember calling Reverend Jackson and saying, "What we have looks like a Mickey Mouse operation.  Can you imagine what's going on back here?"  When I explained it to him, he said, "Oh my God! What are we gonna do?"  I told him, "Don't worry about a thing.  I've got friends out here.  I'm gonna call them.  And we're gonna have the same thing."  Do you know by the time we had the night that we had the big convention, and he made that fabulous speech, we had our trailers back there.  We had computers and people monitoring the computers.  They weren't plugged in.  But we looked just like every other candidate.  So when the press--the media came back behind and walked all along the back, they thought our operation was as strong as everybody else's--was it Dukakis back--? It was Dukakis. [sic]  And it was--I mean it was sort of like learning on the job. But we were so dedicated. Nobody slept, we didn't eat. We got up--Reverend Jackson would turn in at about one [A.M.] and our first meeting was six o'clock in the morning. So we'd sit around in rooms like this and plan our day.  And that's what we did all over these United States. And he ran in like 200 cities, 40 states. He had a legitimate campaign operation in 40 states.  And I was the treasurer of the whole operation. And I figured if I could do that, I could do anything.  'Cause that--I mean it wasn't even in my mind.  I just kind of watched what other people were doing and mimicked it the same way.  And it worked.
Story_ID: 17151
Speaker 1: Out of that experience [working on Jesse Jackson's 1984 presidential campaign] then you were saying that you start seeing in these communities--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: Where there was--you said that--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Viable communities.
Speaker 1: --had black banks.
Speaker 2: --had black banks.
Speaker 1: Okay, and-
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And it--what it would do is even if you didn't go to the bank a lot of minorities as you said--we said when we were on break that often times they didn't go to the minority banks.  They didn't have as much faith in the bank.  But the very fact that it was there forced competition. Because it meant the majority owned banks had to compete for your business. And lets face it we made the difference on the bottom line.  So as a result, they would provide much more capital to our community if we had a presence of a bank that we could go to. And so that was--I mean that was a revelation to me.  And I'm sure it's a revelation to a lot of people.  And its why I encourage that people--I encourage people to have--people of color to have every kind of business imaginable. Because if we don't we'll never get our fair share.
Speaker 1: So you came--and so the campaign happened.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, it's a heady time for everyone.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: He doesn't make--but he makes it much further than people even--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh!  He got seven million votes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.  And so what happens at that point?  You come back to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] So that was in '84 [1984].  And I stayed with him. I organized the Rainbow Coalition.  And I organized the Citizenship Education Fund.
Speaker 1: Can we talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Sure.
Speaker 1: Because see, I think people--the pers--People still think just of Operation PUSH. They've heard of the Rainbow Coalition.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 1: But the--how did the Rainbow Coalition even come about?  What was the concept--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It came out of the campaign.  It came out of the 1984 campaign.  If you recall, Reverend Jackson's platform was the Rainbow Coalition.  And he talked about people of all colors.  Okay, he used to--I remember he used to have this saying. It was, "Black, brown, red, yellow, whatever."  He would have--he would name all ethnic groups.  And so they coined the phrase, "The Rainbow Coalition."  And that was part of our presidential thrust.  So when the campaign was over, we then organized the Rainbow Coalition.  And that was in the latter part of '87 [1987].  And we--what we did--and we organized Citizenship Education too.  Citizenship Education Fund because we found out by him running for president, he got more people back into the electoral process than anybody.  Because he registered more people to vote.  And that was why we formed Citizenship Education Fund.  Because it was voter education and voter registration oriented.  Where the Rainbow Coalition was different in that it advocated for various groups.  Be it--all be it Asian or Hispanic or whatever the case might be.  They--the Rainbow Coalition was in a position of trying to bring the masses and classes together at a point where they could be mutually beneficial to each other.  And so we--then out of the campaign came these two organizations.  As quiet as it's kept, a third organization was birthed around that campaign, which Reverend Jackson doesn't run.  It's run by C. DeLores Tucker.  And that was called the National Political Congress of Black Women. And I was in that first meeting.  And I remember that it was spun off by Reverend Jackson talking about women.  And how they were left--locked out of politics, so to speak.  And so these three organizations came about as a result of his election. Or lack of election.  Of his--as a result of his campaign.  So that was in '84 [1984].  And I stayed with him through '87 [1987].  Set up chapters in cities.  'Cause we had all these people out there that, now that the campaign was over, what will we do?  'Cause it--you know, I mean when I tell you the fellow that was our treasurer here.  And took care of everything--he had a whole operation in New York--what does he then do now that we didn't win?  And so we put them to good use.  And that's how the Rainbow Coalition got started. In different cities.
Speaker 1: So you're still on leave from the [Continental] bank during this time?
Speaker 2: During this time.
Speaker 1: Okay, to '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] '87 [1987].
Story_ID: 17152
Speaker 1: Then '87 [1987] comes about.  And then what are your thoughts at this point?
Speaker 2: Well I decided I'm tired of politics [laughing].  I've had enough.  I'm going home and be a banker [laughing].  And so I return home.  And just as I got back and the bank [Continental Bank, Philadelphia] took me back.  They were happy to have me.  And they had all these great plans for me.  And just as I arrived, I hadn't been back but a few months--and I remember [W.] Wilson Goode [Jr.] was in office.  And he was offering me a job.  He was the mayor.  He was offering me this job as Director of Commerce and City Representative.  And then there was another group.  They were trying to start a bank.  And they had put together some--a minimal cash to try to do a study to see if a bank--minority owned bank would work in Philadelphia.  And it was that group that came to see me.  And then encouraged me to get involved in the creation of my own bank. Hmm.  And so how long did it take to start your... I know it. I [unclear]... United [Bank of Philadelphia]
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah, United.
Speaker 2: Right.  I see... Right.  How long did it take to start that bank?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Five years.
Speaker 2: Five years from the time that they [unclear]...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes. I got back in '87 [1987].  July... I came home in July of '87 [1987].  We started working on the bank in September.  But then in October, there was a stock market crash.  And so nobody was going to invest in any bank then.  It was a bad time.  And so I'll never forget October 19th, [chuckling] 1987.  And so... But it allowed me time to create the business plan and feasibility study.  Do all of that marketing study, et cetera.  And so that by '89 [1989], we then sort of turned up the tempo.  And people were investing again.  The environment was right.  And that's when I started selling the stock to capitalize the bank.
Speaker 2: Now...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And it's a lo-o-ong story.
Speaker 2: [unclear]
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It'll put everybody to sleep.  But it's a long story [chuckling].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You mean this...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] The creation of the bank.
Speaker 2: The creation of the bank.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: You mean what you had to go through and all of that.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was during that five-year period that I never lost the dream.  'Cause my dream was always to create a bank in Philadelphia.  And I never lost it.  And I would continue to do things even while I was out here active working in the bank and helping with community groups and things of that sort.  I still was very active with [Operation] PUSH.
Speaker 2: Now how were you...?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 2: supporting yourself at this point then at, you know...?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] I was working.
Speaker 2: You were...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] at Continental.
Speaker 2: You were working... Okay, you were working...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: all this time while you were...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: you're working on the plans.  Okay.
Speaker 1: But, no.  When I started in '89, I wasn't really. I was just... they were letting me keep the name as though I was still at the bank. But I had to leave.  I had to quit in order to go start another bank.  It was really against the law to be working for a bank and starting another bank.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So for about a year and a half, I lived off of my savings.  And I started raising the capital.  And I just didn't think it was gonna take as long as it did to get it going.  And that almost put me in hot water because the savings was only gonna last so long.  You know what I'm saying?  But as luck would have it, we were able to raise the capital.  The first level, we were only supposed to need three million dollars.  And just when we got at the three million dollar level, the powers to be told us that it wasn't sufficient.  And every other bank started for less than three million.  Every other bank in the minority community.  They said they wanted us to have five million.  So we had to go all the way back to the drawing board and start all over again.
Speaker 2: So...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] But being one not to be deterred again, I made up my mind that we could do it.  And we did it.
Speaker 2: So when you opened the doors of the bank, that was a pretty heady time.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  Yes, very heady.  Very exciting time in Philadelphia.  And it was almost like it had... Things hat reached to a crescendo.  People had been red-lined against.  They'd been losing their jobs.  And you know, ironically Philadelphia was a city that... or is a city that didn't encourage entrepreneurship.  It was really a city where people of color got to be in executive positions earlier than in other cities.  So therefore, they were less likely to think of entrepreneurship.  Because they felt that they had arrived.  They had all of the trappings--the--their own car, a nice expense account, an executive position. So they didn't--they weren't really challenged to go off and start their own businesses.  Who wants to go through the hassles of starting a business?  So in many respects that made us later in establishing businesses in Philadelphia.  Because we were more the executive people at executive mentality.  So--and there were a number of people who were succeeding in the executive position in their big companies.  So they didn't have--they pooh-poohed the idea of creating a bank and being a real entrepreneur.  Everybody said, "There's no way people will help you get a bank going in Philadelphia.  It's just not gonna happen."  I--when I tell you--the nay-sayers were coming out of the woodwork.  But I truly believed that it could happen.  And what made me think that was-- is the fact that I had so many friends in all of the churches.  'Cause I used to do a lot of speaking at... in churches on Women's Day and for different events.  They would always say to me, "If you started an effort to get a bank going, I will support it."  And so I said, "Well--" Because... in early... In '87 when we first started the idea of creating a bank.  We thought we would just take a few wealthy--wealthy friends and start the bank.  But then when we looked at it, we saw... thought if we did that, knowing the culture, people nine times out of ten wouldn't use the bank. Because they wouldn't feel as though they had a vested interest in it.  So we needed to make people feel a part of the development of the bank and the growth of the bank to really become customers.  At least that was my feeling about it.
Speaker 2: That, you know, the whole process.  That people...
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And you know it was important to involve the community [unclear]
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It was important to involve them.  Because in Philadelphia you're dealing with the people who, as I said , who really aspired to being executives.  I mean that was their goal.  Everybody wanted to be an executive in one of the major corporations.  And they never even thought about entrepreneurship.  And in many respects, looked down on it.  So why go and start a bank and plunk it down into the community and say, "You all come."  I didn't think it was gonna work.  So what I decided was--and I--and I really decided this based on my relationship with PUSH. That if you were to look at the supporters that I have.  It was not necessarily the classes.  Even though I lived a good life.  And my friends were the classes.  It was more or less the masses.  It was the people who could take  $10, $500, $50 and invest, would do it.  Maybe they couldn't even afford it.  But they would do it.  Wherein my friends who were the big mahoffs, they didn't see the need to do it.  Because they thought they had arrived.  They didn't really see the need for a financial institution.  The whole idea of controlling your own destiny.  They felt like they didn't need it.
Speaker 2: Now...
Speaker 1: So I went to my base.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And my base came... actually came together for me.  And were very supportive.
Speaker 2: Now what's...?  I'd like for us to talk about the significance of the, you know, this [unclear].  Because you were the first black female?
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 2: Right?  Ever.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.
Speaker 2: To start a bank.
Speaker 1: Right.  I should say Maggie Lena Walker started St. Luke Penny Saving Bank.  Well, I can't tell if she started it. I have a book on my table at home that says she was president.  She was the first president.  But it doesn't say she started it.  But I'm the first black female to start a commercial bank in the United States.
Speaker 2: And also isn't there something about time?  There hadn't been a lot started for a period of time.  Weren't you...?
Speaker 1: That's right
Speaker 2: Okay.  I... Can you... I...
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Right.  In fact in Philadelphia there hadn't been a charter issued since 1950s .  So I mean that's why nobody could imagine that when I was talk--going around the city and talking about the need for the bank and the fact that we could start one, and I thought this was my opportunity to give back to the community and institutionalize what I did at Continental.  So that the community wouldn't always be subjected to programs.  But they would have their own financial institution.  As I talked about that throughout the city, people would say I had lost my mind.  They really thought I had lost my mind.  Because they said, "There's "There's no way Philadelphia, which is very colloquial, would support something like this."  And so as a result it meant that I had to educate the community on the need for the bank, how it could be used to benefit them.  Maybe not their selves.  But their children and their grandchildren.  And it was a constant talking and preaching situation.  And I think in the end, it was people's strong faith in me that got the bank going.  Many of them didn't-- 'cause when we opened the doors people were wrapped around the corner opening their accounts.  But I gotta tell you.  When they got to the desk to open their accounts, they didn't have any idea what kind of account they wanted.  They didn't even know what to ask for.  So that's when I knew that we needed to provide a education program.  But this whole idea of financial literacy started in our bank in 1993.  And I remember going to the government, going down to Washington speaking before congressional groups, congressional committees, about the real need to educate the community about finances, savings and investments.  The importance of accumulating capital by saving and investing.  And I used to go into little groups.  I'd talk to rap groups.  I had people--some kids named a rap after me and--and--about saving money.  And some other kids washed cars.  And people used to have chicken sales.  Chicken dinner sales rather.  And we got together.  And we raised the money.  And when we raised  3 million dollars, as I said.  I mean that was a hard battle at 500 dolllars a person.  It's a lot of people.  We ended up with over 3,000 shareholders.
Speaker 2: That's pretty impressive.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.  It was...
Speaker 2: It was a coming together.
Speaker 1: It was a coming together.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And it took me from '89 [1998] to '91 [1991], two solid years of doing nothing but raising capital to make that happen.
Story_ID: 17153
Speaker 1: I will always remember this.  Reverend Sullivan--Reverend [Jesse] Jackson called me.  Had me to come to Chicago to find out what was going on.  Cause it had taken such a turn for the worse.  And when I told him, he understood.  He said, "But I want to call your pastor."  And he called Reverend [Leon H.] Sullivan and told him.  And Reverend Sullivan arranged to meet me in Washington--maybe a month--maybe two months ago.  And we talked.  And he said, "Emma--" He went to tell me what had happened to him.  Which I didn't know about.  Something very similar had happened to him.  And he said that, that's how the Sullivan Principles were created.  Because they treated him so badly in Africa.  I mean they disrobed him in the airport [while on a business trip as a board member of GM, to Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1974 ].  I mean it was just horrific.  And he said, "I have found out that when people get the green eyed-get their--" What did he say? "--the green eyed devil in their mind, there's nothing you can do with them.  They will even hurt themselves in order to hurt you."  He said, "Jealousy is a terrible thing."  And he said, "That's what you're a victim of.  And so what I want you to do is not be afraid to move.  But listen. You have a lot to bring to the table.  And realize that.  Don't look back and just move forward."  And I took his advice.  Up 'til then, I was feeling sorry for myself and things of that sort.  And wondering... Somebody took--it's like somebody took my child.  You know, I birthed that baby [United Bank of Philadelphia], brought it into the world.  Created it.  Brought everybody--if it had a problem, we fixed it.  But that's what life is all about.  So--and it strengthens you.  And I feel really strengthened and renewed and prepared to move on.  And it was as a result of my meeting with him.
Speaker 2: [unclear]
Speaker 1: It was like it was one of his last things to do.
Speaker 2: It's just a blessing.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] And so when he died [April, 2001, ca. two weeks before this interview], I was in Korea.  And I got home.  I couldn't go to the funeral.  Because I knew-- I'm gonna go, they're gonna have a memorial in Philadelphia next week--or in two weeks.  I'll go to that.  But I just knew that I--there was just no way I was gonna be able to handle it.
Speaker 2: Now what had hap--?  What did he describe that happen to him that the Sullivan principles came out of it?  You were saying--
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] He told me that when he was in Africa it--'cause he took the position that he took against a lot of the things that were going on in Africa with apartheid and otherwise that many of the [South] Africans turned on him.  And that in fact, as he was--he was stopped in the airport in Africa.  I forget which country [South Africa].  And they had him take off his clothes.  So that they could, you know, check him out as though he was taking something out of Africa.  And he couldn't believe how humiliated he was.  And it was because certain people had made a decision that he had too much say over there. And they were jealous of him. He was being respected and appreciated for the message he was bringing. And somebody had made a decision that they didn't like that. And they were gonna challenge it. And the only way they could do it was to humiliate him.
Story_ID: 17154
Speaker 1: You open the doors to the bank in 19--?
Speaker 2: '92. [1992]
Speaker 1: '92.  And ran it up until 2000?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Till 2000.
Speaker 1: 2000.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, June of 2000.
Speaker 1: So what are the things that you're proud that you accomplished during that time?  I mean one, you had tremendous growth in assets.
Speaker 2: The first thing is that I opened the doors. We started from scratch.  We had nothing.  We--I raised $6 million single-handedly.  Opened the bank.  Put every department in place based on my experience of learning what every department did.  So I knew to bring in what kind of people to hire, how to get the department set up, what departments we wanted to start out with.  So it was like the creation of 10 businesses all at once in opening the doors.  And making sure that you kept these balloons afloat so that when you open the doors, they were all prepared to work in sync with one another.  So if you can imagine starting your business.  I started 10 on March 23, 1992.  And that--those 10 culminated in United Bank of Philadelphia.  So we had all those departments to start out with.  Right after that, I acquired two branches.  So--unheard of, especially in minority banks.  So we started out with $6 million in capital.  I raised another $2 million, $8 million--ended up raising a total of $14 million in capital.  And I kept acquiring branches.  Because my goal was to be a $500 million bank in the not too distant future.  Because I had hoped to take the bank public.  That was my desire so that people who put their $10 in would really get an opportunity to make a lot of money.  That was where I was going with it.  And so I was really teaching them how to save, invest and grow their wealth.  That was really what it was designed to do.  So I got the bank to the  140 million dollars with eight branches.  To me that--I mean--hired 100 employees, had 'em all trained.  Had other banks. I mean we got--we were honored throughout the world.  I went all the way to London, England and received the Entrepreneur--Woman Entrepreneur of the World award because of the creation of the bank.  We got not only awards that's--as a person I got awards.  But the bank got awards as one of the fastest growing financial institutions in the United States.  We got the Blue Chip award from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And so to me we had a lot of wonderful milestones.  And to see the growth and development come out of something that people didn't believe was ever gonna happen in the first place was like a miracle.  And to know that I did it as a motherless child and fatherless at this point.  Let me be able to go out and talk to kids in neighborhoods and community groups.  Struggling children who may be poor, maybe parentless and tell them that they can realize their dreams if they believe in themselves.  And as you know, we started this interview with you asking me what would I say.  And I say all the time, "You have to believe in yourself.  If you believe it, you can achieve it."
Story_ID: 17155
Speaker 1: Now you're--at the present day, you're a head of Wall--you know, the Wall Street Project.  But--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering what your plans are for the organization and what you want to see accomplished, you know, on this?  And why you see this as the next, you know, sort of next path?  I mean oh--what--you know, continued path on your road?
Speaker 2: Well it's ironic.  Just today I had an opportunity to have a meeting with Dick [Richard] Grasso, the head of the New York Stock Exchange, together with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson.  And Dick Grasso came up to me at the meeting ended and said, "I am so glad you're here.  Reverend Jack--. You will be great for this organization.  Reverend Jackson needs you."  And it was so funny because when he first broached the subject with me, I was going through feeling sorry for my own self.  Which was--you know, I mean sometimes we get our egos out of line too.  I do believe that we're put on this planet called Earth to do God's work.  And maybe it was time for me to move on.  And he knows that I wouldn't have moved on [from United Bank of Philadelphia] if somebody hadn't moved me on.  But when Dick Grasso said that to me today, right at the New York Stock Exchange, it really was--I guess it sort of certified what I believed when Reverend Jackson offered me this position.  And that was that I could take it to the next level for him.  Because what he is doing is such a great work.  And in many respects, he's an unsung hero.  People would never say that Jesse Jackson is an unsung hero.  But in this regard, he is.  Because they do not have an idea of the many businesses that first of all exist because of him.  And second of all, are successful because of him.  And that is especially in the various minority communities.  Then on the other side, the fact that he can walk into these corporate boardrooms.  And I don't know of any other black man that can do it.  And sit down with the CEOs and talk to them about seeing our neighborhoods as emerging markets as opposed to going into third world countries.  Right here at home are the emerging markets.  And for--I mean, to me it's a natural.  It's the next step for me.  And so if I can bring to bear all that I have learned and experienced as a result of being the founder and the chairman and CEO of a bank.  And now take that and multiply it across the--this country with all of the bureaus that he has.  Then I will truly be giving back something to this--to our race.  And that's what I'm excited about.  I really see this.  And especially now because he is going through a difficult time in his personal life.  And I don't really have any axe to--to--I don't really have any axe to grind because you can never take away from me the fact that I founded this bank.  So now I'm over here helping him take his dream and grow it to the level that it needs--and I don't need--I don't need any recognition for it.  I don't feel like I need any recognition for it.  I feel like I can really undergird what it is that he wants to achieve.  And would never get the opportunity to achieve if somebody like myself doesn't come in and help him.
Story_ID: 17156
Speaker 1: What would you consider success then?  Or what does Reverend [Jesse] Jackson consider success?  You know, what is the end game plan?  You know, I mean a lot of strides have been made already.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes.
Speaker 1: But what is--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think the end game is to grow wealth in the community.  To teach African-Americans and Hispanics and others the importance of money, how to manage money.  This is the same goal that I had when I created the bank.  We kind of take money for granted in our community.  I remember in some churches, they thought it was the worst thing you could talk about--raising money.  He gave us this story just today about the Good Samaritan.  He said, "The reason why the Good Samaritan was able to do all that he did in the biblical sense is because he had resources.  He had money.  He had a vehicle.  And he had a sense of commitment.  A sense of wanting to give back."  I mean you say wanting to give back is a better way of humility.  You know, wanting to help people.  That's what the Good Samaritan was about.  And that's even in the Bible.  But we think, often times that it's a no no to talk about money.  And we just kind of take it for granted.  We either have it or we don't.  But we've got to plan to have it.  We've got to save it.  We've got to invest it.  So that we can grow it.  And have something to hand down to our children.  To live off of ourselves.  It doesn't help us that we don't have any money.  We can't get medical treatment.  We can't get anything.  You live a difficult life.  So until we really focus on the growth of wealth in our community, we're never gonna have anything because we take it lightly.  And so I see it as him wanting to educate, wanting to lift up a group of people--and through the economic system,  'cause we live in a capitalist society--let's face it--without it you're nothing.
Speaker 1: And when you see--when you look at the African-American community, where they are in that process, would you say that we're at the baby stage or, you know, at the toddler stage?  Or where were--where do you--?
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] I think we're at the toddler stage.  In--you see part of what happens is you first work with the--as we talked about the Ariel Capital, John [W.] Rogers and the people of that ilk, who now have a lot of money and they're very successful.  But we have to figure out a way to trickle down--this money.  And one of the things that I'm--I've been thinking about and proposing to Reverend Jackson is that there's nobody really championing the cause for women.  Who's really honing in on women and talking about how we can achieve success financially and technologically speaking?  He could take--pick up that baton.  Because no one speaks better than him.  It's almost like he's got a silver tongue.  You know what I'm saying?  We cannot afford to let Reverend Jackson be killed off at this stage of our development.  So I think if we're gonna grow up beyond the toddler stage and come out of puberty, we need to keep this man in the boardrooms while we develop our businesses.  'Cause in the end, it's our businesses that are gonna hire us.  This is really where it is.  More black people are hired by more black companies than--the statistics bear this out--than anybody else.  So we can't complain about not having jobs.  I used to say to people when I was starting the bank, "I don't want to hear about you not being able to get a loan if you're not willing to invest some money, small amount of money collectively to create a financial institution that can then lend back to you."  That's what the white community does.  They have their banks.  Why can't we have 'em?  So I truly believe that we're growing.  That we're still struggling along as toddlers.  We're learning how to walk.  Reverend Jackson is making sure that more and more of us learn how to grow up in this whole capitalist society.
Story_ID: 17157
Speaker 1: Because you've been able to work with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson very closely and you--you know, you've even shared some things that were enlightening.  You know, enlightening to me, especially with the presidential campaign, you know.  What would you say is his, his brilliance?  What makes him, you know, what he is?  And why will there probably never be another Jesse Jackson really?  I mean--I won't--you know--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah. I think his mind. I think he's a brilliant man.  And very often brilliant people are misunderstood.  Because they are so brilliant.  They are so--Reverend [Leon H.] Sullivan was ahead of his time.  Jesse Jackson is ahead of his time.  But if he--If we can get him far enough along that young men and women who are coming along in his shadow can pick up the baton and run with it then we would have accomplished something.  I think Reverend Jackson is a brilliant man.  And I would not sit here and tell you that I support everything that he says or everything he does.  Because I don't.  But out of what I've--I've never seen a man that can take an idea--like we're sitting here talking.  And you explain circumstances in your industry to him.  And in about 15 minutes, he understands everything that you've been through in your 10, 15, 20 years of being in business. Just like that.  He could go and give a speech on what is going on in your industry.  I've never had--I mean I've met--I traveled to Africa with the president.  I've been around this world with some very powerful people.  With a king in Swaziland, queens.  I've been everywhere.  I've lived a wonderful life.  But I've never met anybody like Reverend Jackson.  Never met anybody like Reverend Sullivan.  These are two giant men.  And so as a result they so often get misunderstood. Because they're not typical.
Speaker 1: Now what would you say they--?  What were their similarities between them?  And what were their differences? 'Cause they're approaches are different, right?
Speaker 2: Their similarities are that they genuinely care about people.  And they do want to do something to lift up the race.  That's their similarities.  I think the difference is that Reverend Sullivan--Reverend Jackson on one hand wants to enjoy it himself as he does it.  Where in Reverend Sullivan, because he was older felt that he had to be more humble in order to be respected for it.  You see what I'm saying?  He felt that he shouldn't benefit from all that he has made available to everybody else.  When Reverend Jackson and his family expects to benefit.  Because he's younger.  And I've worked with both of 'em side by side.  And until I'm talking to you about it, nobody's ever asked me about that.  But that's the difference in the men.  And they're both brilliant men.  Reverend Sullivan was one of the most brilliant people I've ever known.  I used to sit there in church 20-some, 30 years and listen to him every Sunday.  And always want to hear his sermon.  Because it was very practical.  His sermons even though he related--it was very relevant to what was going on in the Bible--what have--in different verses, different chapters in the Bible.  But what was good about it is he related it to what was happening today.  It was very practical sermons. What I like about Reverend Jackson is that he does the same thing.  But on a more economic plane than Reverend Sullivan did.  Reverend Sullivan was about jobs and justice. And Jesse, Reverend Jackson is more about business--finance.  He travels down the same plane.  In any other world, he would be a CEO of a major corporation.  That's where he thinks.  Reverend Sullivan would be the head of a nonprofit. That's how he thinks.  So you see how the two are different.  And I know because I'm now back in a non-profit.  I'm in a nonprofit for the first time.  I shouldn't say back in one.  In one for the first time.  This is very unique for me.  It's different.  Because when you're in a profit-making company, you're thinking bottom line.  You are driven by the numbers.  So you operate differently and it makes you look like you're greedy.  It makes you look like you're--all you care about is money.  Wherein you maybe achieving the same goals on a non-profit side.  But that doesn't seem to be the end product.  Yet we all know that non-profits need to run like businesses too.  So I mean to work with--to have had a opportunity to work with these two brilliant men who genuinely care about people is a great experience for me.  And it's like I'm getting a second time around to come back here--and to come up here and head the [Rainbow/PUSH Coalition's] Wall Street Project.  I couldn't believe it.  I was with some of my white sisters last night when I went home--so--they're considered the wealthiest women in Philadelphia.  And we have a great picture, which I want to share with you.  And when I told 'em what I was doing.  We all sat around.  It was seven of us.  We sat around talking about what we were doing.  When I told them what I was doing.. 'Cause they were worried about me.  And what was going on at the bank. And they couldn't believe people could treat me like that.  And then when I told 'em what I was doing, they thought it was fabulous.  Just wonderful, that I was here.  They felt great.  You're in the right place at the right time.
Story_ID: 17158
Speaker 1: I wanna ask a few more questions and one of them is about you being a black woman in business.  I often, you know, I had my own business and I felt that if you were a black female you were at the end of the totem pole a lot.  But I wonder what your experience really has been.  And what you believe, you know, you know, what challenges do you think black female business owners have?
Speaker 2: Well I still think we're at the end of the totem pole.  But I think the challenges are we've just got to accept them, realize they're there and move on.  They--because it will be a long time.  I don't know if we'll see it in our lifetime, before we get to a point where the challenges are not there.  But if I can go and start out from scratch and create a bank that if you walked into today, you could not tell whether it was a black-owned bank, white-owned bank or whatever.  It's shareholder owned.  Then you can do almost anything.  Because I got no help.  People tried to block it.  Obstacles were placed in my way.  The people didn't believe it.  I ran holes in my shoes.  Only people that believed it were my children.  And I think they just felt sorry for Mom [laughing].  They thought I'd really lost it [laughing].  But the truth of the matter is that we're always gonna have obstacles.  Nobody's gonna give you anything.  But if you really want to do it, then I encourage everybody to be an entrepreneur.  It's the best thing I've ever done.  Other than having my children number one.  The second best thing was creation of that bank [United Bank of Philadelphia].
Speaker 1: And as someone who's been active in the community.  Do you have hopes or concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And my hopes are--my concerns are that we don't take our health seriously enough.  And I think it's because often times, we don't have enough money.  And we don't think about buying insurance.  Making sure that--for example when we were in Chicago the other day, a fellow--did you hear?  A fellow died, dropped dead at the conference.  He--and we're under so much stress when we're in business.  And he'd come there to get help.  And he was getting the help.  But he--it was at a pivotal time in his development.  Did I not find out that he had not been getting medical care.  He dropped dead.  And probably they didn't have much money to even bury him.  Now how can you get to that point?  It's because we put everything else on hold.  We do not do for ourselves.  So you've got the people over here that are not doing anything for themselves.  And then you've got those who are over doing it.  And so I think that if we are to do anything, we need to be talking more to one another.  Encouraging us to do things.  I'm just getting myself on a good diet.  I went through a stressful period and put on a lot of weight as a result of what I was going through.  And I said, "Now the Lord has blessed me to be in good health.  I'm making sure I'm getting this off."  Now that I've got pass the, you know, the whole trauma of the--of not being at the bank and things of that sort.  There's no excuse for it.  And so I'm spending this period making sure that I put my health back in place.  But do we have medical insurance?  Do we have life insurance?  So that we're not a liability on our family and things of that sort.  Nine times out of ten we don't think about it.  We need to think about it.  And I think that we'll be a stronger people if we did that.  The other thing is women need to continue to network.  And be that support base for one another.  And I find that the world is very small.  Women and men who are doing something know each other.  And if we could find a way.  If I believe in you and help you to accomplish your goal, I'm not losing anything because you're successful.  I'm successful.  But so often we get jealous and we don't want to see that.  And so I still think we've gotta get through that. That whole jealousy thing.  But if we could do that, and be the alter ego, be the support base for one another.  And network and give ideas and share ideas.  I think we'd all be better off for it.
Story_ID: 17159
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about, you know, about, you know, churches and--well now we have this whole faith-based thing--.
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yes [laughing].
Speaker 1: And the churches are like running [laughing].
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously laughing]
Speaker 1: They're hoping for pumpkins [laughing] may come in maybe infiltrating the--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: [Chuckling].
Speaker 2: Because if you look back on that [2000 Presidential] election, it was a faith based community that won. That really made [George W.] Bush lose that base when he got to be president of the United States.  And so if we're allowed to--if we're accepting money from the same federal government that we were against?  What--what do you think is gonna happen? Somebody some day is gonna have some say in how you operate. And we will not be able to do the kind of things we've been able to do in the one institution that's viable in our community that we know across the board is viable.  And the one place that we can go to and get the truth.  What--I mean, if we let go of that, what will we do?  And it's scary when I think about it.  And having been in a regulated industry, I know what happens when you take federal dollars.  You are regulated.  No if ands or buts about it.  And you better make sure that your records are clean.  So that's something that we have to think about.  In many of our churches we do not keep the best of records.  We haven't had to.  We better start doing it if you're gonna take federal dollars.  Even though it seems like easy money today.  It could be very difficult in the long run.  It could change every way that we operate.  It could change it over night.
Story_ID: 17160
Speaker 1: Do you think around, you know, religious community--what--because, you know, some people say, "As a people we pray too much."
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Can't pray too much.
Speaker 1: And--but--huh?
Speaker 2: I don't believe you can pray too much. I really don't. I don't believe you can pray too much. I know I have a grandson that was born medically fragile, very sick. And I know for a fact that it was through prayer that this kid today is alive and a terror. It's like nothing ever happened to him. He was born without a sternum. So everything in his chest was just totally out of line, not configured. His lungs were not expanded. The heart was not in the right place. Nothing. Doctors put him all back together. And we prayed for a solid year. And more. He's now seven years old. And if he came in here you wouldn't think there was ever anything wrong with this kid. He couldn't eat the first three years of his life 'cause his system didn't--was working backwards. And he couldn't get the food, you know, to go in right.
Speaker 1: So can you comment some about the--how the religious, you know, the role of the church in the black community. What roles do you think historically--
Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well I think it's still the religious, the spiritual side of the church is the most important. And this is for the church. But beyond that I think it's educational and social. I really do. I think that it's the one safe haven that we have. That we can come together and openly discuss our differences as well as our agreements. And I think that we need that. And anything that could destroy that to me is the enemy. 'Cause we cannot afford--I know if it was not for the church the black community--I would not have had a bank. When I started the bank I went door-to-door, church-to-church, congregation-to-congregation and told my story. And that's where the people lined up and bought the stock. And prayed. We prayed. And cried. And raised money. And we got that bank open. Now if we couldn't do that because we took a little bit of money to start a program that maybe we should do outside of the church. It could be faith based but maybe it needs to be a separate entity. Not part of the church.
Story_ID: 17161
Speaker 1: Your father, you said, "Was alive to open the doors? Or had he just passed?
Speaker 2: No. He died two months before I opened the bank.
Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh. Okay.
Speaker 2: But he... You know. The sad part was the bank [United Bank of Philadelphia] was ready to be opened in November. I was going to open at Thanksgiving. And Dad was holding on to see the bank opened. He had cancer. And finally when he was dying. He died in January of '92 [1992]. And I said, "Dad you can't die. I'm going to open this bank." He said, "I know, Baby. I know you're going to open that bank." And I had driven him by it. Selected my site. And, you know, they say in the black church, "Claim it." I claimed my building [chuckling]. And so I drove him there. And showed him how we had decorated... 'Cause it was so beautiful and everything. And... but the regulators blocked us from opening. We could never get our Charter. So finally I just told them, after Dad died that, either you give me the Charter or I'm going to open the bank. And you gotta come close... tell these 3,000 people to put their money up in escrow. That you are not going to let them open that bank. Give 'em the reason why. And we got that Charter over the weekend. I wished I had threatened that in that year before so that Dad could have seen it. But he believed in me. And he was one person that I have to say that always had the greatest faith that I would achieve whatever it is I sat out to do. He'd say, "You'll be successful with... I have no doubt." He used to tell me. "You'll be successful with whatever you do...if you make up your mind you want to do it."
Speaker 1: What do you think your mother, if she had lived... What do you think she would say about you now?
Speaker 2: She'd probably say, "You go girl!" [Chuckling] because--I was very close to my mother. And I just think she'd--You know. I think it makes all the difference in the world how your parents relate to you. And the love and affection that I got in my house inspired me to do almost anything. I felt like I could do anything. And I've done--tried to do the same thing with my daughters. And now with my little grandchildren, who are five and six years old. It's just--I don't know. It's a sense of well--it gives you a sense of well being that your parents believe in you. And I found myself always wanting to accomplish things so that I could show them what I was doing. And often times throughout my life even after my mother died; I felt like she was with me, encouraging me to keep on.
Speaker 1: A guardian angel.
Speaker 2: A guardian angel. That's right. And my father too. He was definitely there. He used to call me Sis, "Now Sis, you can do that. Well maybe you shouldn't go this way. Why not try another way?" Things of that sort. And so--And I think my sister is the same way--even when I was going through a difficult period. She said, "Listen. This too shall pass." She said, "Knowing you, you'll come right out of this fine." I said, "I don't know. This is a disaster [chuckling]." You know, what I mean? And my brother was saying, "And I told the guys at my work, they don't have to worry about my sister. 'Cause she is going to come through this fine." They believed in me when I had doubt. And sometimes, you know, you can have doubt in your own self no matter how strong you are. And as strong as I am, there were times that I felt, you know, like "this is a bit much" [chuckling]. But now I'm glad that things--that I've moved on. And then I see an opportunity to do an even greater work.
Story_ID: 17162
Speaker 1: I'd like to as--you know, ask you what you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I think first of all that whatever I've achieved, I achieved it as a way of giving back, as oppose to doing it for myself. And what I'd like to see is that my children benefit from it. I've been very blessed to have two daughters, neither of whom have ever given me an ounce of trouble. And they're brilliant young women in they're own right. And my legacy should be that I was a damn good mother.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: (Cut)
Speaker 1: Not only was I a damn good mother but I'm a great grandmother.
Speaker 2: Is there anything else you want to say?
Speaker 1: I love the Lord. And I know he loves me.
