Story_ID: 665010
Speaker 1: I'll start by slating.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I will be the interviewer for The HistoryMakers today.  Matthew Hickey is our videographer.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] law offices at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  Today is September 23rd, 2016.  And I actually would like for you to introduce yourself, Dr. Cooper.  Say and spell your name and tell us your birthdate please.
Speaker 2: My name is Ada, A-D-A, Cooper, C-O-O-P-E-R [HistoryMaker Dr. Ada Cooper].  I was born on October 19th, 1960.
Speaker 1: And what do you do?
Speaker 2: I--I have for the last twelve years been a dentist practicing here in New York--
Speaker 1: Excellent (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in private practice.
Story_ID: 665011
Speaker 1: I'd like to start with what we call some People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a tough one 'cause I love food generally, but I think my favorite is probably pizza, which is sort of a cruel reality because I am both gluten and lactose intolerant (laughter), so I can't eat it as much as I'd like to, but I love it.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think that I generally like the myriad colors of fall, the warmth of it, of sunsets and sunrises.
Speaker 1: Your favorite season (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Fall, without question.  It's--always marks a new beginning.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  In fact, I like most to travel to places that I've never been before.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite quote or saying?
Speaker 2: There are a few, but I think that one of my favorites, the one that I probably repeat most to my children in one form or another is by Reverend King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], which is, the most urgent--, "Life's most urgent and persistent question is: what are you doing for others?"  Similarly, Toni Morrison I think said something like, always ask yourself not what difference you're making for yourself but that you're making for others.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  So, we're--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So, I think the other of my favorite quotes is from Tori--Toni Morrison and I think of it when I think particularly of people who have been honored with a certain degree of trust and power, and that is, make a difference about something other than yourself.
Story_ID: 665012
Speaker 1: And I'd like to start at looking at your family history.  That's very important to The HistoryMakers, and we will talk about both sides of your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's start with your mother's side and actually, let's start with your mother.  You can say and spell her name and tell me her date of birth and tell me a little bit about her.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Edith Blue, Edith Telitha Blue [Edith Blue Cooper].  She was born--
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: T--E-D-I-T-H, T-E-L-I-T-H-A, B-L-U-E.  She was born on March 21st, 1936, and she died in 1978.
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Reidsville, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And--so because we--I know we're gonna go back far in her history, as opposed to telling me all about her now, let's go back to as far as you can go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As I can.
Speaker 1: --in your mother's family and come forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's parents were Henry Sherwood Blue [Henry Blue], H-E-N-R-Y, Sherwood, S-H-E-R-W-O-O-D, Blue, B-L-U-E, and Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E, Watkins, W-A-T-K-I-N-S [Lillie Watkins Blue].  My grandfather, who we called--who was called Sherwood, was born in North Carolina as was my grandmother.  I believe that my grandmother was born in Reidsville, North Carolina, and I'm sorry, I have to correct that my mother was born in Belmont, North Carolina.  My grandmother was born in Reidsville, North Carolina.  My grandmother, Lillie's parents were Sam Watkins and Edith Gravely, E-D-I-T-H, G-R-A-V-E-L-Y [Edith Gravely Watkins], and her father's name was Sam Watkins, S-A-M-U-E-L, Samuel Watkins.  My grandfather, Samuel was born in 1872--my great-grandfather, Samuel, was born in 1872.  Edith, my great-grandmother, was born in 1880.  My grandmother, Lillie, was born in 1905 and she died in 1997.  My grandfather, Henry Sherwood, and I apologize for sort of going back and forth--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --was born in 1907 and he died in 1960, right before I was born.  My grandfather, Henry Sherwood Blue's parents were William Blue and William lived from 1867 to 1927.  And his wife, my great-grandmother, my grandfather's mother was Telitha Blue [Telitha Goins Blue], and I don't recall what her maiden name was.  And she lived from 1871 to 1923.  William Blue's parents, which are now my great-great-grandparents were William Blue and Clara Kelly [Clara Kelly Blue], and they were both slaves owned by families who were from Ireland.
Story_ID: 665013
Speaker 1: And how d- did you trace that back?  How did you all figure that out?
Speaker 2: Well, the Kellys actually have a family reunion every year, and my brother fortunately went to the family reunion about two years ago in 1914, and--
Speaker 1: In 2014.
Speaker 2: Sorry, 2014, yes--and learned of all of this.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't know this before two years ago?
Speaker 2: I personally didn't know it before two years ago, but I think that these family reunions have been going on for a long, long time.  My mom [Edith Blue Cooper] died when we were very young and she had no siblings.  My grandmother [Lillie Watkins Blue], Lillie's siblings died when we were even younger before I think I was even ten.  My grandfather, Sherwood Blue [Henry Blue], died before I was even born.  So, there are I--that I know of two direct cousins that are still alive from my mother's side and they live still in North Carolina.  Most of the information that I've gotten over the last few years I've been able to piece together through means like ancestry.com and things like that, which is a wonderful resource.
Speaker 1: And so--just, I'm curious about your discovering the Kelly family.  Obviously, you knew Kelly was the family name.  What town in North Carolina was your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd have to check my notes.  I don't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --off the top of my head.
Story_ID: 665014
Speaker 1: So, do you know how--I mean, your brother went to this family reunion--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but, how did he figure it out?  Was this through ancestry.com?
Speaker 2: I don't know how he learned of it.  I don't know how he learned of it.  I think that maybe he was in contact with my brother because my, my [maternal] grandfather, Sherwood [Henry Blue], was honored a few years ago by I think the Belmont Gazette [sic. The Gaston Gazette] in Belmont [North Carolina] and the--there's a piece published about him and his life in the Belmont Gazette.  My brother sort of did some research and tracked down the person who--a few names that were mentioned in the article, and through that I think contacted other family members who--in the--on the Blue side who told him of this annual family reunion and he went.
Speaker 1: And he went.  So, this black man shows up at the Kelly reunion, which is a, a white family reunion, correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no.
Speaker 1: No, it's not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  It was not.  It was a reunion of, I believe, the black and white families.
Speaker 1: So, they had already discovered each other.
Speaker 2: They had already discovered each other, exactly.
Speaker 1: And welcomed each other.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: So, his coming was a warm experience?
Speaker 2: Well, and he wasn't the only person from the, what they call the black side of the family, that was there.  He said it was--he said it was quite surreal because he said that they were given a tour--a tour of the, I would say plantation but, of course, the Kelly family doesn't refer to it as a plantation, they refer to it as a farm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was given a tour of the little shack that my great-great-great grandfather [sic.], Willie Blue [William Blue], lived in.  And they were shown on display copies of the papers under which he was purchased, and they were also shown at the same time, you know, the Kelly tartan and the Kelly and Clark [ph.] family crests and things like that, and told the story of how Willie Blue and Clara Blue [Clara Kelly Blue] met, which--
Speaker 1: And these are your great-great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: These are my great-great-grandparents.  And I believe that the story goes something like the Kellys and the Clarks went to church together and from what they told, slaves and their owners all sat together in church.  And at one church meeting, one of the Kelly dogs, you know, left their farm and ran into the church, and one of the Kelly owners asked Billy Blue, my great-great-grandfather, to remove the dog.  And as he was removing the dog, he saw Clara Kelly, who was owned by the Kelly--by the--by the--I'm sorry, Clara Clark who was owned by the Clark family, and then went to, you know, Mr. Kelly and asked to be able to marry Clara Kelly, and they did.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Do you know when they were manumitted?
Speaker 2: No (shakes head).
Story_ID: 665015
Speaker 1: So, your [maternal] great-great-grandparents [Clara Kelly Blue and William Blue] were enslaved.  What were the occupations of your grandparents?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a teacher for a long time and then became principal of Reid High School [Belmont, North Carolina], which was the largest high school in that county [Gaston County, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And this was the black high school?  Or--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause this is during segregation still.  Did--and did you know your grandfather [Henry Blue]?
Speaker 2: No, he died in '60 [1960] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is who died right--
Speaker 2: --right before I was born.
Speaker 1: --right before you--but you--did you know your grandmother [Lillie Watkins Blue]?
Speaker 2: Yes, very well.
Story_ID: 665016
Speaker 1: Did she [Cooper's mother, Edith Blue Cooper] talk at all about her experiences as a young child, young woman in the South?
Speaker 2: She did to some extent.  I have to say that--and she, too, was a teacher, by the way.  She was a professor of math at Johnson C. Smith University, a college in Charlotte [North Carolina].  She first began teaching math at Reid [Reid High School, Belmont, North Carolina], the same high school that my grandfather [Henry Blue] taught at, and then she--they moved to Charlotte and she began teaching in Charlotte's college, Johnson C. Smith, where she was a math professor.  She taught there for many, many years until she retired.  You know, it's interesting.  I, I find it interesting and reflecting on the fact that I think my parents and my grandparents really went to great lengths to shelter us from a lot of those stories.  Whether that was good or bad, I'm not sure, and, and certainly in my life, there came a point when you could not hide from that anymore.  And so, no, I don't remember my grandmother [Lillie Watkins Blue] talking about those things very much.  I do know that we--when we were very young, we left the South and moved to the North, and my understanding was that we left because my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] wanted us to not have to endure some of the things that were being endured down there.
Speaker 1: You mention that your brother was shown the manumission papers of your great-great-grandparents [Clara Kelly Blue and William Blue].  From whom, from where were they purchased?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I'd have to look at them.  I'd have to look at them to get the date--
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: --and the details.
Speaker 1: Do, do you remember if--like, had they just come off of a boat from Africa or were they al- already in the states, do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Story_ID: 665017
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's side of the family.  Tell me about your father, when he was born, et cetera, and go backwards.
Speaker 2: So, my father's name was--he died just a few months ago, this year, was Henry H. Cooper, Jr. [Henry Cooper, Jr.], and his--the spelling is pretty clear, I think.  His--he was born on July 14th, 1925, and he died in January of 2016.  His father was Henry Howard Cooper [Henry Cooper, Sr.] and his father was born in 1884 and died in 1979, I believe, and his mother was Ada Crosland Sawyer, C-R-O-S-L-A-N-D, Sawyer, S-A-W-Y-E-R [Ada Sawyer Cooper].  She was born in 1907 and died in 1986.  My grandfather, Henry Howard Cooper, his mother was Mary Percival [Mary Percival Cooper (ph.)], and his father was Burgess Cooper [ph.].  Burgess Cooper's parents were (air quotes) John [John Cooper (ph.)] and Grace Cooper [ph.].  It's my understanding that John was Wade Hampton III [ph.].  Mary Percival's parents were Colonel Noble Percival [Colonel Percival (ph.)] and his wife was Mary Hagwood [Mary Hagwood Percival (ph.)], who I understand was Cherokee.  Mary Percival and Burgess Cooper were both slaves, born into slavery.  On my grandmother Ada Crosland Sawyer's side, her father was a pretty amazing person.  His name was Edward James Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Jr.].  He was born into slavery in 1854 and died in 1929.  Her mother was Ella Georgiana David [Ella David Sawyer], and she lived from 19--1863 to 1933.  Edward James Sawyer, E.J. Sawyer's father was E.J. Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Sr.], his mother was Charlotte Hall [Charlotte Hall Sawyer].  Ella Georgiana David's parents were Hanaford David--Hanford David and Mary David.
Story_ID: 665018
Speaker 1: Where are they--just following the generations, which generation is this now?  This is--
Speaker 2: The last generation is my great-great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And as I understand it, my [paternal] grandfather's parents [Mary Percival Cooper (ph.) and Burgess Cooper (ph.)] and my grandfather were brought from Florida and sold in North Carolina by a speculator.  My grandmother died at a very young age and that left my grandfather--my great-grandfather, E.J. Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Jr.], with his father, E.J. Sawyer, Edward James Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Sr.].  At ten, of course, you know, he had had--my grand- my great-grandfather had had no formal education and his father, Edward James Sawyer, wasn't particularly interested in education.  And so even--but even though he had had no formal education, he worked at night--this is my great-grandfather, E.J. Sawyer, worked at night in a store and worked at night caning chairs so that he could go to school during the day, and he was pretty much on his own at this point.  In doing that, he managed to save enough money to go to college.  At that time, by now he had gone to--and he went to high school in North--while he was still in North Carolina.  After high school, he moved to Bennetts- Bennettsville, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: To which?
Speaker 2: Bennettsville--
Speaker 1: Okay, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --South Carolina, and he spent some time there, eventually went to college at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina], but eventually had to leave the University of--this was when African Americans were accepted there, eventually had to leave there and finished his studies at Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], and at Allen, he graduated from college and also got a law degree.  And, again, this is somebody who had no formal education until he was ten.  He went on to go to Clafin [sic.], I think, university, where he had a--where he earned a master's [degree].  He then went back to Bennettsville and did really extraordinary, extraordinary things.  He first became the principal of the school there after teaching for seventeen years.  He owned an extremely profitable store.  He was a lawyer.  He was a banker, all at the same time.  He--
Speaker 1: This is your grandfather?
Speaker 2: This is my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: He--my grandmother's father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --E.J. Sawyer.  He was a lawyer, a banker, principal of the school, he edited and ran a monthly publication called the B--P.D. Educator [ph.].  He was the postmaster general for two terms under Hayes [President Rutherford Birchard Hayes] and Harrison [President William Henry Harrison, Sr.], maybe?  He came to own thousands of acres of farm land and had twelve children, one of whom was my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --Ada Crosland Sawyer [Ada Sawyer Cooper].
Speaker 1: And his wife, what--well, she had twelve children, so that was her job.
Speaker 2: That was her job.  She, she--they married as was common back then when she was thirteen years old--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they had twelve children, many of whom died when they were younger, I think a few of whom were physicians.  My grandmother went to Claflin college [Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina] also and then left Bennettsville for a while to come to New York [New York] to attend Pratt university [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] and then she went back and met and married my grandfather.
Speaker 1: And then, did they stay there?
Speaker 2: And they stayed in Columbia, South Carolina, yeah, where my grandfather, Henry Howard Cooper [Henry Cooper, Sr.], had by then graduated from dental school and opened his practice.
Story_ID: 665019
Speaker 1: Who was the first dentist in the family?
Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandfather, Henry Howard Cooper [Henry Cooper, Sr.].  Now, my grandfather, Henry Howard Cooper, graduated from Bennettsville--no, Benedict College in Columbia, South Carolina, and I understand that his mother, Mary Percival's [Mary Percival Cooper (ph.)] teeth were--just tortured her for many, many years, and he decided that he was without bars or barriers going to become a dentist.  And so he--
Speaker 1: And this is around what time?
Speaker 2: This is nineteen o--well, he graduated from dental school in 1909, so this must've been 1906 or so?
Speaker 1: So, this is 1906 in the South.
Speaker 2: In the South, yeah.
Speaker 1: The grandson of--
Speaker 2: Slaves (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) slave people who decides he's gonna go to college in the South and become--
Speaker 2: A dentist.
Speaker 1: --a dentist.
Speaker 2: So, he--I mean, determination--he--
Speaker 1: But then his grandfather was, you know, a slight overachiever, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) So, he went from Columbia to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but--because he wanted to go to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: --for dental school.
Speaker 1: So, he didn't want to go in the South.
Speaker 2: No.  So--but, by the time he got to Philadelphia, he had, you know, eighteen dollars, which is the equivalent of, what, three hundred dollars today.  The tuition at the school at the time was, you know, $150, so maybe three or four thousand dollars.  He had an uncle who lived in Philadelphia and his uncle vouched for him so that he could start school at the University of Pennsylvania.  But, as he was studying, he also worked at a golf club at night, so that by--he started in the fall, so that by that January, he had managed to save a hundred dollars.  He took that to the school as, you know, payment, what he thought was partial payment of his tuition, but the story is that the school was so impressed by his dedication and hard work and diligence and so on, that they accepted that as full payment.  He graduated in 1909 and then returned to Columbia to start his practice.
Speaker 1: And his--was his practice in the black community?
Speaker 2: I believe it was.  I believe it was.  He had three sons.  One was my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] who was a dentist whose practice I later came to manage, another of whom, Noble Percival Cooper [Noble Cooper], was also a dentist, and Edward Sawyer Cooper [Edward Cooper] who is a physician and still living.
Speaker 1: Did you hear stories at all about, you know, what, what made--what, what gave--what was his vision, you know, as, as he decided he was gonna do this, well, his wife, he wanted to correct her teeth, help her (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His mother, his mother.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was his mother?
Speaker 2: His mother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Ah, ah.
Speaker 2: His mother, his mother.
Speaker 1: He wanted to--
Speaker 2: He didn't get married until after he graduated from dental school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it was his mother he wanted to heal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's motivation (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665020
Speaker 1: The--dentistry in the black community has been important.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you describe why you think that's so?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--you know, I think healthcare generally has been important in the black community.  I think that it has always been historically an area where there's been a lot of distrust, for good reason, and for that reason, I think that--and nobody ever actually said this to me, although my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] did at one point say that, you know, to him, what was motivational was the understanding that, that if African American physicians didn't treat African American patients, then who would?  Then who would?  And I think that my grandfather and my father and his brothers [Edward Cooper and Noble Cooper] took the same view.  In--you know, in my family, I think there's always been also this sense, this conviction that as opportunities and my--both of my, my, my grandfather, Henry Howard Cooper [Henry Cooper, Sr.], and my great-great-grandfather, Edward James Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Sr.], both said that, you know, opportunities are opening up for people of color and this was--this was in the, you know, 19--early 1900s, but that those opportunities really would not be lasting and really wouldn't be meaningful if they weren't accompanied by business development and economic development.  And so I think that to a large extent, the motivation for my parents, great-grandparents, and so on, to go into medicine was not only to help provide a service that might otherwise not be provided to the African American community, but also to provide sort of economic wellbeing so that they could then use the benefits of that work to help others in the community.
Story_ID: 665021
Speaker 1: There are so many dentists in the African American community, for those who--if, if we're looking back in the way of your family who were educated early and the--and often those businesses got passed down from one generation to the next.  I'm curious as to--before your, I guess was it your [paternal] great-grandfather was the first--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --dentist--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in your family?  Do you know?  Was there a black dentist in the community even?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was my grandfather who was--
Speaker 1: Grandfather.
Speaker 2: --the first dentist in the family and I believe that there was another.  I don't recall his name.  I don't recall his name.  I got a lot of information about E.J. Sawyer [Edward Sawyer, Jr.] and about my grandfather from my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.], but also from a book that was published in, I think 1918 called 'The Institutions of the American Negro' [sic. 'History of the American Negro and His Institutions,' ed. A.B. Caldwell].  And I think both of their stories, Henry Howard Cooper [Henry Cooper, Sr.] and E.J. Sawyer's stories are written there.  Included in that--in, in that volume concerning South Carolina, and there's a different volume per state, I flipped through it and I did see that there was another dentist in, in, in, in the county.  I don't know if he was in Columbia [South Carolina] or not.
Story_ID: 665022
Speaker 1: Let's go to your parents.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did they meet?
Speaker 2: My father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] went to Howard University for dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], my mother [Edith Blue Cooper] went to Palmer [Alice Freeman Palmer Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] for--Palmer for high school, was a boarding school, and went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for college, and they met at Howard.
Speaker 1: And did your father just know that he's gonna be a dentist?  It was just given--
Speaker 2: I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for him?
Speaker 2: --I--no, no--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --not at all.  I think that my father enjoyed dentistry.  I think that he saw the importance of it.  I think that ultimately, though, he also saw it as a conduit to develop a business, a means to develop a business, and I think that at heart, he was really a businessman.  I think he enjoyed dentistry and he was awfully good at it, but I think in his heart, he really wanted to be a businessman.  And so a lot of--a lot of--before he--before he--after he graduated from dental school, I think he might've practiced briefly for a couple of years in New York [New York], he and my mother moved to New York; my older sister, Nancy [Nancy Cooper] and I were born.  When I was one, he decided that he wanted to explore business development in Africa.  So, he--my mother, my older sister and I moved back down south to South Carolina, lived with my father's mother [Ada Sawyer Cooper] for about a year or so, lived with my mother's mother [Lillie Watkins Blue] for another year or so, it was there that my younger sister [Edith Cooper] and brother were born, while my father worked on developing these business opportunities in Nigeria and they included housing developments, they--and, and coffee mill, textile mill, and he had managed to get a number of financial backers and so on, but then, of course, there was a coup in Nigeria.  He came back and decided--was probably heartbroken, frankly, because it's something that he believed in deeply, and like my grandfather [Henry Cooper, Sr.] and my great-great-grandfather [Edward Sawyer, Sr.], he had a determination that was really unmatched by anyone that I've actually known in my life.  I've heard stories of my grandfather, but my father had a determination that was unbelievable.  But when this sort of uncontrollable circumstance occurred, he moved back to New York and opened his dental practice, and that was when I was five or six.
Story_ID: 665023
Speaker 1: So, this is--he started it when you were one, you said, so this would be 1961.  He started the pursuit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Process.
Speaker 1: --of trying to figure it out.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly.
Speaker 1: This is--you know, we've already had Garvey [Marcus Garvey], you know, some years before wanting to figure it out, how can we go back to Africa and--you know, Liberia is created.  There is tremendous social unrest in the United States at this time because the Civil Rights Movement is heating up.  Still, this is a huge thing to say I'm gonna go to Nigeria and build these businesses.  Did--you, you were very young, but what do--what did the family talk about?  What do you know that the family talked about as, as he's exploring this?
Speaker 2: I think that my mother [Edith Blue Cooper] was--saw his vision, and his vision was that the answer to the barriers that we were facing would only be meaningful if there were black businesses that were thriving and prospering, and I don't think that he ever had in his mind a notion of moving back to Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think that that was the plan.
Speaker 1: It was developing businesses there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  Exactly.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: What kind of businesses?  Do, do you know what he was trying to do?
Speaker 2: Coffee--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --textiles, I think that--
Speaker 1: So, for import purposes?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: With import, export?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And my mom was willing to sacrifice for that vision.  And so she, you know, moved down to South Carolina and moved to North Carolina in the early '60s [1960s], a place that she, I--probably wanted to leave and did in fact leave and moved with him to New York [New York], but she moved back so that he could pursue this.
Speaker 1: And was she working?
Speaker 2: She was not at that time.  Right before they married after she had graduated from college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], she had gotten a master's in education and she was teaching biology.  But, when she got married, my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] was a--had a pretty traditional view of family life, and his view was that she should be home with us, and that's what she did.
Speaker 1: So, you--you're born in, in October 1960, where?
Speaker 2: In New York.
Speaker 1: In New York.  And you--are you--you're not the eldest.  There's someone before you?
Speaker 2: No.  I have an older sister, Nancy [Nancy Cooper], who is thirteen months older.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're very close (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and we were both.
Speaker 1: So, you're very close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were--we were both born in New York and then when I was one, we moved down to South Carolina while my father was in Africa.
Story_ID: 665024
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: There are a few, actually.  (Laughter) My first is kind of a strange one, and I don't know why this, this has stuck with me because it was relatively small, honestly.  But, my mother's [Edith Blue Cooper] reaction was so strong that it just endured and it was something that sort of made me realize (laughter) that hard work in my life was not gonna be negotiable as far as she was concerned.  I mean, I, I could talk to her about pretty much anything, you know, and she sort of was willing to hear me out even at a young age on just about--I mean, she was a great listener.  But, I remember right after I started school, I was in the first grade--it's a small thing.  I was in the first grade and back then and still today--it was public school--back then and still today, there were these gifted and talented classes.  So, I was in one of these gifted and talented classes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: No, this was here in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're back.
Speaker 2: Because by now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by now, the coup in Nigeria had occurred, we'd moved back to New York and my parents also didn't want us to have to go to school down there, so we, we came back and went to school up here, went to public school in New York, P.S. 20 [P.S. 20, Clinton Hill School] in Brooklyn [New York], and I was in one of the gifted and talented programs.  And, you know, I had no idea what that meant, okay, but I did know that there was a classroom next door to ours that didn't seem to get as much homework, okay, that didn't seem to be going at the same pace that we were, and I--it was unimaginable to me that that was not the classroom that I should be in (laughter).  "Why, why am I--why am I working so hard when Ms. Leslie's class is not, mom?"  And my mom was very active in our school always throughout our lives and so, of course, Ms. Leslie [ph.] was my mom's friend, and I would hear them talk about this, that or the other.  "Mom, why can't I be in Ms. Leslie's class?  Why can't I be in Ms. Leslie's class?"  And my mom said to me, "You know, Ada [HistoryMaker Dr. Ada Cooper], you're very smart and because you're so capable, you need to do the most that you can."  And I said, "Well, that doesn't sound like such a great bargain.  I mean, being smart and capable, okay, well what's, what's the payoff there if I'm gonna have to work harder?"  It was just inconceivable to me.  And being smart and capable when you're in the first grade really was, in my view, in my life, in my reality at that time, was mostly about who could get the best hit in stickball.  You know, I was a huge--I, I was a huge tomboy, as they say, and that was--that was the circle of my world, who could have the best skelly top, you know, who could be best at all the street games.  I pleaded and I begged and I pleaded and I begged.  She refuse--she refused to let me change.  And at one point, she said, "Ada, this is not going to change.  This is not going to change.  You are going to work hard in your life.  And you wait, you wait.  You don't understand it now, but one day, you will."  And I've never forgotten that.
Speaker 1: And she didn't say anything negative about the other class.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  So, she was--she would never, she would never, she would never, and I couldn't understand it.  I didn't understand what being smart even meant because I was just like everybody else in my class.  I didn't feel particularly unique.  I didn't feel particularly different.
Speaker 1: Was your classroom integrated?
Speaker 2: Very.  Yes.
Speaker 1: What part of Brooklyn were you living?
Speaker 2: It's 175 Willoughby Street.  It's right--I, I guess it's, it's maybe right next to Fort Greene [Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York].  I think at the time, it was Clinton Hill [Brooklyn, New York].  It's right sort of across the street from Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: So, this is in now, what, mid to late '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Sixty--no, this was sixty--'67 [1967], '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 665025
Speaker 1: The other (pause) very early memory that I have is (pause) 1965, walking into the living room, not really having a sense that there was much of a world outside of 175 Willoughby Street [Brooklyn, New York], and walking in, the television was on, and my mom [Edith Blue Cooper] was crying, and my dad [Henry Cooper, Jr.] was like this (makes face).  And that is how he expressed his, you know, his rage, his sorrow, was like (makes face)--and he was literally shaking.  And I turned and I looked at the television, and there were pictures of dogs and fire hoses and, you know, all of this, and my first reaction was my mom's crying, I immediately started crying, not understanding what was going on, but it couldn't--it, it didn't seem real to me.  I thought, how could this possibly be real?  And, again, I'm five.  How (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --could this be real and why are you sitting here crying watching this?  It must be a movie, so change the channel, change--just change the channel.  And I remember my mom saying, "This channel can't be changed, okay.  This is real."  And I remember being more afraid than I ever have been.  I don't remember being as afraid as I was at that moment.  And I think that what scared me was a few things.  What scared me was, the realization that there was a big world out there that I didn't know anything about and that in that big world out there, there were people who were capable of unspeakable cruelty and unspeakable violence against people who were doing nothing more than, you know, carrying signs that said freedom.  And I couldn't imagine what kind of world was out there that could've created those kinds of people.  And, you know, I talked to my mother mostly about it.  My father was not particularly communicative, particularly about things that he thought would cause pain to us.  His, his method of dealing with it was more to sort of shield us from it.  But, my mother spoke to us openly about it and, you know, she talked to us about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I--I've--I remember getting great comfort from, from some of--from hearing some of his speeches, you know, messages of forgiveness that made me feel that you didn't have to buy into the hate.
Speaker 2: Even at this young age?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 665026
Speaker 1: But then, I remember a few years later, his assassination and his funeral and the riots that followed.  And I remember an ongoing dialogue that I had with my mother [Edith Blue Cooper] where she was--she would--and I don't remember the details of them, but the message that I remember was this is why you need to do whatever you can to become educated, and she sort of did her best to explain to a child, and it's a hard thing to do, what causes that level of violence, hate, bigotry.  It's hard to--it's hard to put those in words that a child can understand.  But the message that--I left that horrible fear with--I think actually gave me a lot of strength becau- and that often happens, I think.  Once you see something that is your greatest horror, right, and you face it and you understand it, what usually results is profound strength in some ways, and I think she did an amazing job of developing that in that moment of fear.  Because what she constantly said was, this is why you need to educate yourself, this is what ignorance is, this is why you need to understand that there's a world outside of 175 Willoughby Street [Brooklyn, New York], this is why you need to get out into the world, understand different people, understand different religions.  This is why we moved to New York [New York], so that you could see all that there is that the world has to offer.  And I think that--I think that--I, I think that the messages that she delivered during those days have resonated with me throughout my life, and that's one of the reasons that throughout my education, I've tried not so much to focus on becoming good at something, not to focus so much on becoming proficient at things, but I've tried to think and I've tried to encourage my children to think critically, to understand the thoughts that other people have even if you disagree with them profoundly, even if you find them patently repugnant, to at least know what they are, to be able to hear them.  Because only if you can do that do you have really any hope of doing the things that you need to do in the face of conflict, hate, violence, and that is to try to sort of form a consensus, mold a consensus, bridge gaps.  You can only, I think, do that--and, and I think the message that she was trying to impart upon me back then was, this is happening because there are ignorant people in the world.  Do whatever you can to not be one of those people.
Speaker 2: A profound message from her for you as a young child to take in, and, and at the same time, the, the unrest lasted for a long time.
Speaker 1: Lasted for a long time.
Speaker 2: I mean, arguably hasn't ended, but, but the intensity of it nationally with the rioting after King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death and--
Speaker 1: As you witnessed the explosion in civil rights and you're also being a kid, living your life, doing your sports, going to school, being in a hard class even though she told you--even though you didn't want to, as, as, as you would see these moments of the intensity of hatred, did you ever doubt that education might not be enough?  Did it ever--did, did, did it continue to scare you?  Because it was very present.  It--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Pause) I don't think it did.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I don't think it did.  I don't think it did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you talk to your siblings about what was going on?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: This is really something that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --happened--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --between you and your mother and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And, you know, it was New York.  It was New York, and everybody that I knew was equally outraged, you know.  We didn't have a lot of debate in my classroom about what right was in this situation, you know.  I, I, I remember--I remember that there were some instances where, you know, there were elections and, you know, for example, the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], McGovern [George McGovern] election, and I remember everybody that I knew was a McGovern supporter.  And so, of course, you know, that was gonna be our next president.  I was floored, floored, floored to discover that there were a lot of people who didn't see it that way.  You know, I think to, to a large extent--I think to a large extent, my parents' message was through education--without education, your horizons are gonna be limited, and I don't mean horizons in the sense of the profession that you'll be able to enter, I think that they meant it more broadly in terms of your capacity to think long term and critically.
Story_ID: 665027
Speaker 1: So I want you to go to 175 Willoughby Street [Brooklyn, New York] as a little girl and what, what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember being extraordinarily happy.  I remember playing.  I remember playing all the time outside of school and on the weekends.  I remember (laughter).  I remember playing all the street games that you can imagine, punch ball, stick ball, skelly, Ringolevio.  Do you know that one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's that?  No.
Speaker 2: I, I--it's so clear.  I remember--Ringolevio is a game somewhat like catch or tag, but there were teams and you had--you designated a particular place in your playing area, and our place was a little sort of alley between the apartment building that we lived in and the beginning of a sitting area next to the playground, and that place was designated as the jail.  And you had teams, and you would run around, catch somebody on the other team, and bring them to the jail.  And if everybody on that team ended up in jail, then your team won, but the catch was that if somebody while your team was out chasing other kids on the other team, if somebody from the other team got into your jail and yelled--and there were lots of--I mean, it took on lots of different sort of articulation, but yelled something like--we used to say, "Oko-levio, one, two, three, one, two, three, one, two, three," and that let everybody out of the jail and then you'd start all over again.
Speaker 1: Jail.
Speaker 2: Hours and hours--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --and hours.
Speaker 1: So, your home, is it a detached home?  Is it a--is, is it brownstone?  What, what is--
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: Where--Willoughby Street (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was growing up?  It was an apartment building.
Speaker 1: Apartment building.
Speaker 2: Apartment building--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with fourteen stories and there were three separate apartment buildings.
Speaker 1: And, so, describe your home.
Speaker 2: From the time that I started kindergarten until the eighth or ninth grade [at J.H.S. 104, Simon Baruch School; M.S. 104, Simon Baruch School, New York, New York], it was a three bedroom apartment, kitchen, dining area, living area, and three bedrooms, two bathrooms.  When I was in the eighth grade, we moved to a brownstone on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] on 93rd Street where my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] continued to live and where we continued to live until, until he died.
Speaker 1: So, there are how many children?
Speaker 2: Five.
Story_ID: 665028
Speaker 1: So, at one point, there are five children and two parents living in a three bedroom apartment.  How--can you describe how that worked?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Well, my sisters [Nancy Cooper and Edith Cooper] and I shared a room, my two brothers shared a room, and my parents shared a room.  When we had company, usually my grandmother came from North Carolina, my mother's mother [Lillie Watkins Blue] came to New York [New York] to visit for over--for Christmas, and she'd stay for weeks at a time.  And during those times, I seem to remember that one of my sisters would sleep in my brothers' room with her, my brothers would sleep in our room, and then they would switch back when she left.  And honestly, I don't remember it feeling particularly cramped until I got older and my parents started actively looking for bigger space except my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] was somewhat of a perfectionist and he--they looked for years and years and years and years and years until they finally found the house that was absolutely perfect for him.  My mother [Edith Blue Cooper] was extraordinarily frustrated throughout the process.  But finally, they--
Speaker 1: So, when you say years and years and years and years, how many?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--this must've been her full time job for at least two years it seemed.  It went on an eternity it seemed to me, but I'm sure it wasn't that long.
Speaker 1: And where did you end up--you moved into a brownstone where?
Speaker 2: On 93rd Street--
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn [New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) on the Upper East Side, in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: In Manhattan?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ah, got it.  So, the move to Manhattan from Brooklyn, that's a big move.
Speaker 2: Well, by then, I had been going to school in Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started at P.S. 20 [P.S. 20, Clinton Hill School], which was in Brooklyn, then I went to junior high school in Manhattan, J.S.--J.H.S. 104 [J.H.S. 104, Simon Baruch School; M.S. 104, Simon Baruch School] in Manhattan, so I had been commuting back and forth to Manhattan for a long time by then, as had my sisters and brothers.
Story_ID: 665029
Speaker 1: When you move to east 93rd Street, what is the racial composition of your neighborhood now?
Speaker 2: When we moved to 93rd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --Street?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was largely white.  And I remember the, the--frankly, the biggest change because, you know, most of my classes because they were these gifted and talented classes, most of my classmates, although not all, most of them were white.  That was not--that was not--being in an environment where, you know, there were few black kids wasn't unusual to me, what was really impactful to me was that when we moved to the Upper East Side [New York, New York], we were used to going out and playing all these games.  We did that for the first couple weeks when we moved to 93rd Street and my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] said, "No, no, no, no, no, unh-uh.  It's a different world.  You're not going out in the street and playing."  "Yeah, but all the other kids in the neighborhood are doing it."  And these were all the other white kids in the neighborhood.  "All the other kids in the neighborhood are doing it."  "No," (background noise), "that's not what you're gonna be doing."
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we didn't.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: That ended that.
Story_ID: 665030
Speaker 1: Your family moves from Brooklyn [New York] to Manhattan [New York].  Was it a conscious decision, like they knew that they were gonna come to Manhattan as they--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were looking for a house?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know why?
Speaker 2: Well, I think our lives were pretty much in Manhattan at that point.  My--
Speaker 1: You weren't just in school, but the rest of your family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--the rest of my siblings were in school in Manhattan, my father's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] practice was in Manhattan, the apartment was too small, and it seemed like the natural thing to do, to move closer to our lives than further away from--
Speaker 1: And when--and this is in what year?
Speaker 2: This was in '74 [1974], '75 [1975], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in junior--
Speaker 2: Junior high school [J.H.S. 104, Simon Baruch School; M.S. 104, Simon Baruch School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --high school.  And you move to the Upper East Side [New York, New York].  Can you describe, what does the Upper East Side look like at this time?  'Cause you're in a house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it looked very different than it does today--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --frankly.  I remember it being very warm.  I knew all the--we knew all the kids on the block.  Most of the homes then were occu- were single family homes.  So, we knew, you know, the family who lived next door, we knew then and still to this day know the family that lived across the street, their--you know, the Griners [ph.].  I babysat for, you know, kids who lived, you know, three doors down on the south side and four doors down on the north side.  So, it, it--I wanna say that it seemed very much like sort of a suburban life in some way, but I don't know what a suburban (laughter)--know what a suburban life was, it was just the life that I--that I knew.  It didn't--it didn't seem--it didn't seem--I would imagine that growing up on the Upper East Side today was very different than it was back then, would be very different than it was back then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Story_ID: 665031
Speaker 1: Suburban except you couldn't play outside.
Speaker 2: Well, we could have, but I think that my father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] thought that it was not appropriate.
Speaker 1: Not appropriate--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) as opposed to unsafe.
Speaker 2: Dangerous, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --meaning he thought it was dangerous or?
Speaker 2: He thought that it was inappropriate--
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: --not unsafe, inappropriate.
Speaker 1: So, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he was very--(pause) he was--he was very aware of what he thought the responsibility was of our family living in a neighborhood that was largely white.  And, frankly, although all of the other kids seemed really anxious to go out and play, he felt that it was not appropriate, that it would be unseemly for us to be out in the street playing stickball and all the games that we typically played.  And it's funny because when we--when we went to put his house on the market just a few months ago, a broker came to me and said, "You know, I remember your family well, and I remember when you guys moved in and I remember that you used to have a dog who used to--and you guys used to play out in the street with the Griners [ph.] across the street and the Golds [ph.] next door, and the McGowans [ph.] down the street, and I remember seeing you guys and feeling so joyful that you were out there having fun, and I remember that it brought such life to this neighborhood, and then I remember when you stopped."  And she said, "I remember going up to your dad at one point and saying, 'Where are the kids?  Why aren't they playing anymore?'"  And he said--she said "He just looked at me and walked away," (laughter)--and walked away (laughter).  That was my dad.  That was my dad.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you keep the house?  His house?
Speaker 2: After he died?  Lots of reasons.  Lots of reasons.
Story_ID: 665032
Speaker 1: Since you're not playing outside anymore, do you join sports teams or--'cause you're the athlete.  What do you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, by then, fortunately for me and my, you know, athletic inclinations, fortunately by then, I had started high school and I went to--this was, I guess, probably by ninth grade by now--
Speaker 1: So, around--
Speaker 2: --and I went--
Speaker 1: --seventy-four [1974]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And I went to Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York] and by then, there was really not a lot of time to play.  Workload was tremendous and 100 percent of my time and energy was devoted to school.
Speaker 1: While--as--at what point do you form the idea of what you want to do with your life?  Is it as, as a child, in Stuyvesant?  Because, you know, many kids start thinking, oh, this is what I want to be when I grow up.  What did you want to be when you grew up when you were young?
Speaker 2: I don't have any--I don't have any firm recollection of saying when I was, you know, eight or nine like some kids do, I wanna be this, I wanna be that.  I think that when I started high school, the classes that I enjoyed the most were the sciences and I loved math, loved math.  And so I think that the earliest memory that I have of sort of setting a career goal for myself was probably somewhere around the tenth grade, eleventh grade, and that was to go into medicine.
Speaker 1: So, medicine was the focus and it had obviously been part of the family tradition.  Where--your, your father's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] practice you said was in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where was his practice?
Speaker 2: At that time, his practice was in the General Motors Building on 5th Avenue and 59th Street.
Speaker 1: So, his patients are--what--what's the racial composition of his patients?
Speaker 2: Both, mixed, every--
Speaker 1: As Manhattan is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's reflected of your--yeah.
Speaker 1: When you're in high school, your, your mother [Edith Blue Cooper] passes.
Speaker 2: My mom died of colon cancer in my senior year of high school.
Speaker 1: Was she ill for a long time?
Speaker 2: Was she? I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Ill for a long time?
Speaker 2: For a year, for just a year.  She was forty-two years old, so young, so young, which is why I feel so fortunate to be here, honestly, forty-two years old.  And, so she was diagnosed in '77 [1977] and she died in the spr- very early spring of '78 [1978] and my dad was devastated, as we all were.  It was hard to even explain what was going on (laughter) honestly in any of our minds back then.  And I think that, you know, as a parent--well, as a child, I couldn't quite understand I think my father's approach to it, which is to just sort of buckle down and power on.
Speaker 1: What men do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was very much his, his way of dealing with it, buckle down and power on, and so that's what we tried to do.  That's what we tried to do.
Speaker 1: There are five children, three of whom were younger than you.  So, how, how old was your youngest sibling when she passed?
Speaker 2: My youngest brother [Edward Cooper]--I was seventeen, so he must've been ten, ten, eleven.
Speaker 1: Now, the matriarch of the home who was really there with the children is gone.  You say your father buckles down and powers on, but does someone come in to help?  Or how--
Speaker 2: My grandmother, my mother's mother [Lillie Watkins Blue], came to help for a while and I think that she probably stayed with my father and my two brothers and sister [Edith Cooper] who were still at home after I went to college for a few months, and she went back to North Carolina, and--
Speaker 1: So, you and your eldest sister [Nancy Cooper] are gone at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're in college in by now.
Speaker 1: --this point because you're in college.  You, you went to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there ever a point when you thought maybe I can't go?  I mean, you--this--you--your mother passed right before it's time to go to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In retrospect, that probably would have been the best thing to do in retrospect as a, a parent in the year 2016.  That's probably what I would have urged my children to do.
Story_ID: 665033
Speaker 1: How did you manage your first year in college?
Speaker 2: It was tough.  It was very tough.  It was very, very tough.  It was not only tough because my mother [Edith Blue Cooper] had just died, but it was also the first time that I'd ever been away from home.  So today, you know, my kids, my daughter is in the tenth grade.  You know, she spent two weeks in Costa Rica, you know, she's been away from home many, many times.  I had never really spent the night away from my parents by then (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  And so I was dealing with the loss of my mother and also being away from home for the first time.  There's a lot of adjusting that had to--had to happen quickly.  And I, I--you know, I just--it's funny.  It's funny in a way.  Not funny ha-ha, but interesting, I guess because I didn't think that I had the focus at that point to continue doing work in--that I had to do for premed, but it--the next thought that I had immediately was, so I'll go to law school.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Can't go to medical school.  Okay, I'll go to law school, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: And do you know why law school?  Like, what--
Speaker 2: Because by then, I had started to take a lot of political science classes and I had decided to become a political science major, and there are elements of political science in medicine that I found very similar that I still find similar today now that I've left the law and gone back into healthcare.  I liked problem solving.  I liked--I liked writing.  I liked thinking.  I liked sort of critical analysis.  I liked putting myself in other people's shoes who have a problem and coming to the most sensible, efficient, empathic solution possible.  And I figured, well, if I can't do that in medicine, then I can do it in law.
Speaker 1: Now, choosing Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] at this time.  The, the school had only been a few years coed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it was still kind of the new frontier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What made you choose Am- Amherst as opposed to some other school?
Speaker 2: My, my older sister, Nancy [Nancy Cooper], had gone to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge Massachusetts].  My father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] very much wanted me to go to Harvard.  I had been at Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] now for, you know, three, four years, a very big high school, and I knew myself well enough to know that I wanted to be in a smaller school.  One of--one of my mom's last gift, mom's last gifts to me was to convince my dad that it was all right, in fact a good idea, for me to go to Amherst instead of Harvard.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you knew in advance and you and your mother were lobbying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I knew in advance that I didn't want to go to Harvard.  I applied to two schools, Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and Amherst.  Those are the two places that I wanted to go.  I got into both and I ended up choosing Amherst partly because it was a smaller school, but there were lots of other small schools.  There was--at that time, the head of admissions was a man called Ed Wall, and he was remarkable.  He had a remarkable ability to talk to students and connect with them in ways that really got to the heart of who they were.  And it's funny because I am still in contact with a lot of my classmates from Amherst and we all had the very same impression and went for the same reason.  He was an amazing recruiter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, when you went to visit, you met him?  Is this how--
Speaker 2: No, he came to Stuyvesant to recruit--
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: --students.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: And I met him, went to visit, and I was sold.
Story_ID: 665034
Speaker 1: So, year one is difficult, but you, you change your major--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it, it, it works for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, the other--the other thing that--you know, it was a tough time, but the thing about--that I have remembered since then about tough times, is you get over it.  You move on.  You don't necessarily heal immediately, but you get stronger, right.  And when you face adversity that--that's that profound, you really do move on with the feeling that there's not much that I can't--there's not--there's--there are not many greater hurdles than this, and if I can get past this, I can get past just about anything.  And that's kind of the idea that I've carried after that experience throughout.
Speaker 1: Do you--right after graduating from Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] with your B.A. in political science, you immediately go to law school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And now you choose Harvard.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: For that one, I gave into my dad [Henry Cooper, Jr.] (laughter).  I gave into my dad for that one.
Speaker 1: And had your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think I applied to any other law schools, in fact.
Speaker 1: Had your family, early on, talked about going to the Ivies?  Was that just understood that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this is what you would do?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And did all of your siblings go to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  In fact, they all went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] except for me.  And they all went to Hunter [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] from elementary school through high school except for me.
Speaker 1: Well, so, interestingly you went to public school in New York City [New York, New York] and then to the most elite colleges afterward.  Why--do you know why the decision to go to public school?  'Cause there were so many children?
Speaker 2: No, because--
Speaker 1: Or what were public schools like then?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that my parents were able to make public school work for us because, firstly, we were in the gifted and talented programs, secondly, my mother [Edith Blue Cooper] devoted most of her life to making sure that her children were getting what they needed even in a class of thirty kids.  I think that had she not made the sacrifices that she made during those years of the time and of her own career, that it might not have worked as well as it did (pause) (nods head).
Speaker 1: You graduate from Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in what year?  Eighty-five [1985]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985].
Story_ID: 665035
Speaker 1: Then where do you go to work?
Speaker 2: I went to work at a law firm in Chicago [Illinois] called Jenner and Block, and I was there as a summer associate my second year after law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I went there and became an associate there after I graduated in '85 [1985].  I was there for twelve or thirteen years, but for a couple years when I went--when I left Chicago and went to another firm called Jones Day, then went back to Chicago and back to Jenner and Block (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what type of law were you practicing?
Speaker 2: Litigation, trial work.
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're climbing up the ladder at this company.  You become a partner how, how soon?
Speaker 2: Seven years.
Speaker 1: Is that the typical--
Speaker 2: Well, at the--at--you know, there are many associates who didn't get to that point, but it's the first opportunity that I had to be considered for partnership.
Speaker 1: And just for context, how many blacks are there?  How many women?  How many black women?
Speaker 2: At the time that I joined the firm, I think that there were two other African American attorneys, one partner and another woman who became a partner shortly before I did, and I think there were three hundred and something attorneys there in total.
Speaker 1: What did you like about it?
Speaker 2: I loved the work.  I liked being a litigator.  I liked--I liked the pro bono commitment that the firm had.  That was tremendously important to me.  In fact, that's why I chose the firm because it had an unwavering commitment to public service and to pro bono work and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And everyone participated?
Speaker 2: Everyone not only participated but I believe was required to participate.  You had to do a certain number of pro bono hours.  And the firm's sacrifice of bottom line in order to enable people to do that I think spoke volumes.  I had tremendous amount of support from other partners who were ahead of me.  I liked the commitment that partners had not just to me, but to other associates.  I think the practice of law then is very different than it is now and I can't speak to all of the details of how different it is now, but my understanding is that it, it is different in a lot of ways.  One of the ways that I understand that it's a little bit different is that when you joined a firm back then in the '80s [1980s], it was sort of understood that if you did good work, you showed commitment, diligence, sweat and all of the things that you needed to do on behalf of your clients, you were willing to make the sacrifices that your clients needed you to make, that, that the firm would remain committed to you, and I think Jenner and Block had a wonderful track record of doing that.
Story_ID: 665036
Speaker 1: I remember--you know, I remember small things and acts of real genuine appreciation.  I worked in a group that was headed by a man named Jerold Solovy who died a few years ago and I remember being a first or second year associate and I was at the office really late working on a memo that I was writing for something, and Jerry and a number of the other partners were on trial, and they were out of town and they called.  It must've been one or two o'clock in the morning.  I don't know why I was there, but I was there.  And he called and he talked to the operator because he was looking desperately for an associate to research a particular question, okay.
Speaker 2: At one or two o'clock in the morning?
Speaker 1: And he searched around and they searched around and I was there.  From that moment on, he was one of my absolute ardent supporters.  I think that what he appreciated was not the fact that I was there at one or two o'clock in the morning alone, wasn't necessarily the fact that, you know, I got the right answer or whatever it was, I think that what he really valued was commitment, was commitment, and, and the hard work that comes with that.  And since that's something that had been instilled in me from the time that I was five, it sort of came naturally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to work hard.
Speaker 1: --and easily to me, you know, came easily to me and that's something that I could do.  That's something that I could do easily.  So, I was very happy.  I was very happy.  There were some cases that I think were more gratifying than others.  Some of the cases that I found most gratifying were the habeas corpus cases where I knew that the work that I put in had, you know, a direct effect of having somebody who had been accused of a crime represented with, you know, skill and success.  There were others that were disappointing, disappointing not because of the way that the firm [Jenner and Block] handled it by any means, but because I became acutely aware of the fact that your hard work, your diligence in the legal system doesn't always pay off.  And some of the instances in which my hard work didn't pay off and resulted in a bad decision were very difficult, were very, very difficult, and I found it difficult to become the kind of lawyer that could see practicing law just as a sport, you make your good argument, the joy and the thrill comes from the argument itself and not from the result.  I was much more I think psychologically tied to the result and losing became really defeating, honestly.  And I have to say there weren't many losses and there were some cases that I thought, we probably should lose, honestly, and in those instances, you give your client what they deserve, which is the best conceivable representation.  But there were some instances where I really thought that we should have won.
Story_ID: 665037
Speaker 1: I remember one case in particular that I won, but that started to make me aware of sort of the injustices that are sometimes built into the justice system.  I was representing a man whose name I will never forget but I won't repeat who had been accused of shooting someone outside of a Kentucky Fried Chicken and the man was homeless and there were only two witnesses, both of whom were also in jail for something or other.  And I remember going down to interview my client and he, he, he was just absolutely honest and I felt truthful that he was not there.  "Well, where were you?"  "I was in the street.  I'm homeless," you know.  "Well, did anybody see you?"  "I'm homeless.  I was in the street."  And so I went to talk to one of the two witnesses who were--was willing to testify against my client and I drove, you know, two hours to the prison that he was in and nobody was with me and I have to admit to being a little bit, you know, scared.  But I also told myself, look, you know--and this is--this was really naive maybe, but at the heart, you know, these are people.  These are people.  These are people, okay, and they're people who are in bad situations, but still they're people.  And I had the maybe naive view that most people at heart are good people, okay.  And so I thought, well, I'll just go and I'll just talk to this man and--as a human being.  And so I went and I talked to him and I said, "So you understand that the prosecution is using you as their primary witness because they tell me that you're saying," da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, and he smiled.  And I said, "Is that true?"  And he said, "No."  He said, "No, it's not true."  And I said, "Well, is that what you've told the prosecution?"  And he said, "Yeah, that's what I told them but that's not true."  It turns out that he was having gang problems and he was willing to testify against my client to get transferred because he had been given this agreement that if you transfer--if he--
Speaker 2: If he lied.
Speaker 1: --that he--if he were willing to testify against my client that he would testify that blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  I don't think--I'm not accusing any prosecutor of--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Supporting perjury and so on and so forth, all right?  So I don't know that he told the prosecution, "Okay, I'll lie for you."  But, it probably went down more like, "You're asking me if I know anything about this particular case?  Yeah, I know something about it, but what am I gonna get if I tell you about it?"  "Well, what do you need?"  "Well, you know, I've got this, that, and the other problem.  Can you get me out of here if I tell you what happened?"  "Sure."  "Well, here's what happened, okay."  So he basically told the prosecution what he thought they wanted to hear.
Story_ID: 665038
Speaker 1: Cut to the time of trial and I happened to be walking past the judge's chambers and the judge is in his chambers talking to the prosecution outside of my presence about the case.
Speaker 2: Which is against the law.
Speaker 1: Which is--sorry, which is entirely inappropriate.  But at that moment, I thought, oh my gosh, this poor man is going to be sentenced to the death penalty because that was what the prosecution was seeking for something that he didn't do and the judge and the prosecution are there sort of conspiring as to how to make this case stronger.  The amazing thing that happened is that the prosecution called the witness who I had visited in prison and put him on the stand, and for some reason that I still don't understand to this day other than maybe my naive view that all he wanted was somebody to talk to him like a human being, he refused to testify on behalf of the prosecution, refused, and my client was acquitted.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Great result, but it made me realize that hard work isn't always the answer and that the stakes are awfully high, and I wasn't intimidated by high stakes if the playing field is even, but if the playing field is inherently tilted against somebody who was poor and homeless, than my tendency to become so vested in the result would in the end not be particularly gratifying.  And so I wanted to find something that was more gratifying I think on a more granular level.  I was working long hours.  I didn't have--you know, I wasn't married, I didn't have children at the time.  There was really no reason that I couldn't think more broadly about the kind of life that I wanted to have.  I think, you know, the other--and so I made a career change.  The other thing I think that motivated me to make that career change was that I didn't like--it's strange for a lawyer to say, I didn't like arguing with people for a living.
Story_ID: 665039
Speaker 1: I want--before we leave the law firm [Jenner and Block], I, I want to take another look inside.  So, you told me things that were positive as well as kind of what jaded you a bit, but just in terms of, you know, the proverbial glass ceiling for women and also for African Americans, do--did you feel like it existed there?
Speaker 2: To some extent, I think that it did.  One of--and, and, you know, there were a series of events I think that sort of led to me looking long term.  You know, I, I, I felt very fortunate.  I felt that I had people who were vested in my success, and I think that you have to have that, then at least.  You had to have that in order to be successful.  You could be the smartest, hardest working lawyer, but if you didn't have people and relationships with people who were vested in your success, then, you know, you probably would not get in terms of your career opportunities the things that you needed to have in order to advance, experience, trial opportunity, you know, front row seats when it comes to dealing with clients, people who had the confidence in you to put you at the conference table and give you a (air quotes) speaking role.  And I was fortunate enough because of that--possibly because of that one night, but also other things that I showed that I was willing to do to have people who supported me in that way.  I was also not married, I did not have children, and I remember one of my partners who was a woman--
Speaker 1: And were you a partner at this time?
Speaker 2: I was a partner at the time.  She was a--she was a partner senior to me, probably five, six, seven years senior to me, deciding that she wanted to start a family.  By then, she had had two children who were both young and she spoke to people at the firm, and she was one of the smartest people I have ever known, one of the best lawyers I have ever known.  She was amazing, willing to do whatever it took.  She was one of the mentors that I remember being most helpful to me in terms of showing me the path.  And she explored the possibility of working part-time, working limited hours.  She was an equity partner.  She explored the possibility of becoming a non-equity partner but maybe I, I, I don't remember the details, maybe a set salary partner.  I know today, there are lots of different tiers that I don't think existed then, but she started to explore those possibilities.  And she said, "You know, if I--if I can't do this, then I'm going to have to leave," and she left.
Speaker 1: They didn't figure it out.
Speaker 2: She left.  And I remember thinking a lot of things, but I remember thinking, you know--I remember--I remember having my view broadened from where I was in the partnership to what it would look like five, six, seven years down the line.
Speaker 1: And about how old were you at this time?
Speaker 2: I had been a partner for probably three or four years, and I became a partner in '91 [1991], so this was '95 [1995], so I was thirty-five.
Story_ID: 665040
Speaker 1: And were you at this time thinking about your future, that you might get married, that you might want to have children that--you know, what, what, what--
Speaker 2: I wanted to have the option.  I wanted to have the option.  I was never so certain that I wanted to be married.  I was always certain that I wanted to have children.  And so I wanted to have the option.  I wanted--I wanted my options to be open.  But, that experience made me realize that I would be giving up a lot if, if I wanted to have that option.  I think that things--I don't know, but I think that things might have changed since then.  I think that there are lots of options now that didn't exist then.  I think that people are increasingly aware--I mean, I hope people are increasingly aware of the value of diversity, not just for the sake of diversity but for the sake of the conversations and the breadth of view that diversity brings, that the benefit is not just to the firm, that it's to clients, that you see problems and solutions very differently if you come at it from different backgrounds and perspective.  You're able to better understand your clients if you have a greater pool of resources and experiences to bring from in your workforce.  I, I hope that companies are more aware of that now.  I think that Jenner and Block to a large extent became aware of that much sooner than other firms did and I think that the firm is very vested in diversity, again, not just for the sake of diversity, but to the bene- for the benefit that it can bring to clients.  But, you know, the reality was and I think still is that you have to have people who are willing to show you the path, you know, not necessarily prepare the path for you, but prepare you for the path to let you know what it's going to be like so that you know what your sacrifices will be to let you know what's possible, to let you know what's not possible.  And if you--if you don't have those people and you're young and you don't have those people in the firm and you don't have those people in your family life, then it's hard to see the way.  It's very hard to see the way.
Speaker 1: Well, and at that time in American culture, probably--I mean, we were--been the leaders in this regard at least in some ways.  You know, I remember there were many articles in business magazines and women's magazines about breaking the glass ceiling.  It was--it was a big conversation in--around that time in the early, mid-'90s [1990s] with a question mark behind it.  You know, they--with many women making the choice to forego having families in order to get to the top and then also when they left, then there was this notion that that reinforced where we were going to invest all this time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: --in you and you're not gonna stick--
Speaker 2: And you're not gonna stick around--
Speaker 1: --around anyway.
Speaker 2: --to benefit us.
Speaker 1: So, it was a double edged sword.
Speaker 2: Right.  We had no payoff for our investments.
Story_ID: 665041
Speaker 1: And so I'm wondering, as, as you were making up your mind that it's time for you to make a different choice, did you have any feelings of guilt about the possibility of leaving and, and you being one of those people who, oh, they invested in me and, and--
Speaker 2: It's funny.  No--well, I think that when I left, there were lots of mixed feelings among the people that I worked with.  A lot of people thought that it was sort of wasted talent.  I think that Jerry Solovy who was a--just a really amazing mentor to me thought that I would be back, thought that I would be back.  And, and I, frankly, wasn't certain that I wouldn't be back.  I always held out the possibility in my mind that I could always go back to practicing law.  And so when I first decided to change careers, I had to do all the premed things that I didn't do my freshman year in college [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], and I started to do those in Chicago [Illinois] while I was still a partner [at Jenner and Block].
Speaker 1: Did you tell anybody you were doing this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: So, how in the world--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did you find time if you're still sometimes being at the office at one o'clock in the morning?
Speaker 2: Here's the thing that I found, that the things that I did in--that, that I did in college and high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] were a lot easier at that point because I was a lot more mature, I was a lot more focused, I was a lot more organized, and because I had been practicing law for so long, I was able to cut through the nonsense and identify really quickly what mattered in various subjects, and that made the work a lot--a lot easier and a lot less time-consuming.
Speaker 1: Well, and people have said that preparation to be a lawyer really can prepare you for anything.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  And, and, and, and preparation to be a lawyer and taking the bar required learning volumes and volumes and volumes of material and sitting through, you know, two or three day exams, and with--even as you're practicing law, each case that you have requires you on some level to become an expert in whatever the subject matter of the case is, and you learn to become an expert really, really quickly.  And so the training that I got in practicing law and becoming a lawyer and passing the bar and then practicing law made it a lot easier for me to take those, you know, college courses, and, and devote, you know, whatever time I had to it, at night while I was still practicing.
Speaker 1: Where did you study?
Speaker 2: I started taking courses at Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago] in Chicago and after doing that for about a year, I resigned from the partnership, told people what I was doing, resigned from the partnership and moved to New York [New York] where my father's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] practice was at the time, and took courses at NYU [New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New York] and Hunter [Hunter College, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 665042
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had you talked to your father [Henry Cooper, Jr.] about this plan, that you were, you were shifting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: I had.
Speaker 1: --what were--what were his thoughts about it?
Speaker 2: He, he was thrilled.  And, you know, it was coincidental actually because I told you that for many years, twenty-five years, his office was in the General Motors Building [New York, New York] on 59th [Street] and 5th [Avenue].  Just as I had started ruminating about making this career change, he was ruminating about finding new office space, and he was on the verge of signing a lease for this big office.  At the time, he was probably seventy-five.  He was struggling with whether he should retire or sign another ten year lease for another big office space, so my deciding to go into dentistry really gave him the relief that he could continue to practice.  And I honestly don't know what he would've done with his life had I not decided to do this because he's--he was the kind of guy who needed to be doing--he needed to work.  He needed to be doing something.  He was not somebody who I ever remember taking a vacation, who I ever remember relaxing, ever (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he ever remarry?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  Nope.
Speaker 1: Because he was young when your mother [Edith Blue Cooper] died.
Speaker 2: He was fifty-two.  They were ten years apart.
Speaker 1: That's young.
Speaker 2: He was fifty-two.  He was young but I think he was heartbroken and he had five children to raise, and he had a practice to run, he had a business to run, and he had, you know, at various points, three, four college tuitions to pay.  And he was--he, he, he was the hardest working person I've ever known in my life, in my life, and that's what he--that's what he devoted himself to.
Story_ID: 665043
Speaker 1: How long is the education process to become a dentist?
Speaker 2: You first have to do all the pre-dental courses and that requires taking biology, chemistry, organic chemistry, physics, calculus, I think one or two other premed courses, and then the dental school curriculum is four years.
Speaker 1: But you don't have to become a medical doctor and then a dentist.  It's, it's--
Speaker 2: The curriculum in dental school is merged to some extent.  Your first two years is spent doing the course work that is done in medical school and then the last two years are largely spent doing clinical work--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and clinical course work.
Speaker 1: So, what--when do you finish dental school [New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: And were you then going full time after you come back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: To school, yes.
Speaker 1: You're going to school full time.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are you living?
Speaker 2: Park Slope in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: So, you didn't go back to the family homestead.  You, you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --found your own--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so when you finished, you joined your father's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] practice?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665044
Speaker 1: What's it like working side by side with your dad [Henry Cooper, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: It was (pause) great in some ways and challenging in some ways.  It's a complicated relationship.  And, you know, he had been practicing dentistry at--by that point for over thirty years.  He was an amazing dentist and, and to this day, patients continue, who were his patients, continue to be my patients and continue to tell me what an amazing dentist he was, which is really gratifying, sets a high bar.  He was a perfectionist, but I was used to that.  He was very hands on in every aspect, and that became frustrating sometimes.
Speaker 1: And was it just the two of you at the practice?
Speaker 2: There--the two of us, there was another dentist--there were other dentists off and on for various periods of time.  There were also specialists that came in, an orthodontist and a periodontist from time to time, and it was--and it was hard to divorce sometimes the family dynamic from the professional dynamic.  I think, though, that I would probably today be a very different--well, I don't know if I would've been that different.  I think--you know, the things that he taught me I still remind myself of from patient to patient to patient.  He was very traditional, very stern.  He was somewhat rigid as a parent.  As a dentist, he was totally different, totally different, and it was kind of amazing to see.  He was very warm, very loving, very gentle, and from time to time, seeing him as a dentist in that way sort of shed new light on him as a parent.  I think as a parent, he tended to resort to the traditional, to the rigid mostly out of fear for the sake of protection because when you--when you do what you know, the risks are a lot smaller and when it came to his children, I think that he wanted to do everything that he could conceivably do to protect us, even if in the long run, protection was not warranted or necessarily the best idea.  As a dentist, he was very different, very, very different, and seeing him in that way I think made me think about whether--why he was so different in each capacity to maybe better understand the different pressures and obligations that he had in each--in each setting, which I think was really helpful.
Speaker 1: Do you think that you ever felt--I don't know if the description, like, jealous of that relationship that he had with--the, the gentle relationship he had --
Speaker 2: Of course (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with patients.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Of course.  Of course.  And I--and I--and, and that's why I started thinking about why, why, why, why do you seem to, you know, have this sort of dichotomy in your personality?  And that's what started making me think about it and what I just described to you is the sense that I was ultimately--
Speaker 1: And did it--
Speaker 2: --able to make.
Speaker 1: --soften your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Over time, I think it did.  Over time, I think it did, and having children of my own.
Speaker 1: So, now, when--so, when did you start working with your father?  What year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002] when I graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is--
Speaker 2: --from dental school [New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --also--so, did you already have one child?
Speaker 2: I had one child.  I had my first child, my oldest daughter in 2001 when I was a third year in dental school.
Story_ID: 665045
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you marry?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: So, while you were in dental school [New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New York], you--how, how did--tell me that story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who--so, so--
Speaker 2: It--yeah, I mean, you know, it's funny because so many--I was married at the time, I'm not anymore, and I wanted to have children, and I did (laughter).  And I did.  You know, a lot of the things that you're asking and, and it's--I, I--other people hear the same thing and they'll--the look on their face is exactly what yours is.  But, at the time, it didn't seem particularly remarkable.  And it's funny because it's not until I went back and read about my [paternal] great-great-grandfather, E.J. Sawyer's [Edward Sawyer, Sr.] story, that I kind of came to a clear understanding of how it feels.  It's, to me, pretty simple.  I want to have a child (laughter), I have this, that, and the other to do, this is how I'm going to do it, and I do it.  And that--and, you know--and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just like everything else.  I mean, you--
Speaker 2: Just like everything else.
Speaker 1: --you, you juggled the--you have juggled many things in--
Speaker 2: And it's--and it is--it is a lot easier to do it if it's something that you really want, right?  So, at the time, I wanted a child.  I wanted to finish dental school.  I wanted to be a dentist.  I didn't just want to finish dental school, I wanted to do well and I was older.  You know, by now, I was forty and it's a much, much greater level of maturity than you have--well, that most dental students have when they're, you know, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three and going through dental school.
Speaker 1: Well, and also there's the reality that if you want to have children, you better go--you better have them.
Speaker 2: And there was--there, there, there were not a lot of--there were--you know, exactly.  This is what I want, this is the only way to do it, so you do it.
Speaker 1: And so you wanted to have children.  You have two children.  You got married, but in, in the mix, that didn't--that didn't last.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that difficult for you?
Speaker 2: Very.  Very.  I think the--I think what was most difficult was how my children would handle it, how they would recover from it.  I got divorced three years ago, 2013, and at that time--
Speaker 1: So, you were together for a long time.
Speaker 2: Ninety-eight [1998] 'til--yeah, 'til--four--thirteen years, maybe?  At the time, I had a--my daughter who was born in 2001 was, you know, eleven, twelve, my son was ten, and it was a tough time.  It was a tough time.  Do you remember when we talked about my mother's [Edith Blue Cooper] death?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the notion that, you know, fear breeds strength and grit and resilience, and tragedy can sometimes give rise to a tremendous courage?  I think that that's sort of the feeling that I had throughout the divorce, that this is--that this is something that I can get beyond.
Speaker 1: So, your--and recently, you lost your father [Henry Cooper, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665046
Speaker 1: That's skipping ahead a little bit.  In your dental practice, in addition to your being in the practice working with your father [Henry Cooper, Jr.], you also become a public face of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --dentistry.  Can you describe how that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's--that is one of the most gratifying things I've ever done, honestly.  I did well in dental school [New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New York] and my achievement in terms of grades and so on came to the attention of the then dean of the dental school, and I had been given a full scholarship based on merit to go to dental school.  And so when I finished dental school, I maintained a relationship with some of the people that I had developed a relationship with while I was there.  I was asked to do a taped recording, recruitment film, for the school about the school, my experience there, and I did.  And unbeknownst to me, the dean of the dental school, who I did that interview with, was asked by the American Dental Association for recommendations of people, alumni, who might be good candidates to be national spokespeople and consumer advisors for the organization.  And Dean Alfano [Michael Alfano] sent my taped interview to the American Dental Association, and someone from the American Dental Association called.  I was between patients and he probably called a few times because it didn't connect to me that he would be--somebody from the American Dental Association would be calling me for, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is the general market as opposed--the American is everybody, National [National Dental Association] is black folks, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the general market.
Speaker 2: Right.  And so I return the call and they explained that they were looking for a spokesperson, consumer advisor, and asked if I would be interested in, in considering it.  And I'd never done anything like that before.  I have--I, I am by nature I think very shy and reserved.  I don't particularly enjoy public speaking.  But I thought, you know, that I would give it a--give it a try.  And I--and, and more, more, more than that, I felt that I sort of owed it to the dental school that had so generously given me a full merit scholarship and I also thought that it might be a way of reaching people that weren't actually able to come into the office.  And so I did a number of, you know, auditions, and I've been a spokesperson since, I don't know, maybe 2004?
Speaker 1: And you remain a spokesperson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 665047
Speaker 1: So many other industries, I guess or fields, dentistry has changed dramatically, and I'm, I'm curious in, in your working relationship with your father [Henry Cooper, Jr.], you know, as technology has changed, you know, there's just so many different methods of solving problems.  How were you two learning these things and how were you working through just what could be a generational question about using different methods?
Speaker 2: My father was traditional in a lot of ways, but he also had an amazing ability from time to time to think way outside the box, like going to Nigeria to start all of those projects, and he was very, very anxious not necessarily to try the newest technology, particularly if it was unproved, unproved, but to provide sort of the highest quality caliber service to his patients and so he really made it a point to try to be in the forefront of technology in every conceivable way.  He was, in fact, really instrumental in developing some new technologies for dentistry.  For example, he owned a few patents.  When cosmetic dentistry first began to soar, people noticed that when they smiled and had restorations in their mouth, crowns, bridges, and so on, that when they smiled under certain lighting circumstances, fur- fluorescent lighting, that the porcelain restorations appeared dark as if the teeth were missing.  And so he developed a porcelain that fluoresced like natural teeth so that--and he used it in his patients so that patients who were public figures and so on could go out in the public and smile without hesitation, without fear that it would appear as if their teeth are missing.  So, he was--he was--when I say that he was traditional, he was mostly traditional when it came to his children (laughter) and his household, but when it came to sort of breaking the boundaries in business and dentistry and in other realms, he was--he was very anxious to, to be among the first (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Story_ID: 665048
Speaker 1: Was his [Cooper's father, Henry Cooper, Jr.] practice and is now your practice one--is, is it an insurance accepting practice or is it a concierge type practice?  'Cause that's very popular today, you know, concierge medicine.  You have high profile client--patients.
Speaker 2: We have a mix.  I have a practice and his practice was and is one that participates in some insurance plans, but we don't participate in all insurance plans.  There are accommodations that we provide the patients who don't have insurance.  There are accommodations that we provide to patients who have insurance but who, you know, have a difficult time submitting claims to insurance companies and all of that.  We do all of that for patients.  I have lots of patients who are on very strict budgets, who are retired, who have been patients for, you know--
Speaker 1: That you inherited.
Speaker 2: --fifty years--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for fifty years who, you know, I know are of limited means, and for those patients, although we may not accept their insurance and the fee schedule that their insurance requires, you know, I make a point of working with people so that the needs that they have can be met.
Speaker 1: It's kind of going back to your pro bono work [at Jenner and Block] or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --close.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Exactly.  You know, there are other patients who, you know, I know are more fortunate, and--but there are some patients who don't have the financial means that others do, and I, I, I don't think that I, I have ever turned a patient away who says, "I can't afford your fees."  You know, there are limitations to that, of course.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Right?  You know, because, you know, I have overhead, the, the--I have staff and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where is your office?
Speaker 2: --other things, but--it's on 55th [Street] and Park [Park Avenue, New York, New York].  So, it's sort of a combination of the two.  It's a combination of the two.
Story_ID: 665049
Speaker 1: The practice is solely yours now for a relatively short period of time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your vision for your practice as you look forward?
Speaker 2: I would like to find a way to provide my service to a greater number of people, and there are a number of different ways that I've explored to do that.  I have started to explore global service opportunities.  It's very difficult to--for a dentist to go from New York [New York], for example, to Alaska where there is, you know, really urgent need for dental care in some of the remote areas.  It's very difficult to do that because their licensing requirements and things like that.  But, it's much easier for a dentist to go from New York to Africa, Asia, Latin America to contribute, establish dental clinics at very low or no cost.  I've started to explore those possibilities.  Just, just in--just in May, for example, my daughter and I went to Myanmar, which is sort of a newly emerging (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In May of 2016?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  My daughter and I went to Myanmar to explore those service opportunities, visiting monasteries and orphanages to try to assess what the need is and how feasible it is to provide care at those places and those institutions for free.  My kids are older.  They are away for a good amount of time in the summer.  And I may be again harkening back to what attracted me to Jenner and Block, what attracted my [paternal] grandfather [Henry Cooper, Sr.] to dentistry to begin with. I--I would really like to do something to fill that global void.
Story_ID: 665050
Speaker 1: As you look at your life and career, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would like for people, my children in particular, to, to remember that I have, and to know that at every turn, I've--you know, we're--aside from what I've accomplished, my careers, my education and so on and so forth, that I have at every turn treated people with dignity and respect, honesty and candor and empathy.  There's a saying, one of my favorites and I--you've probably heard it, that people will remember--people won't remember what you do or what you say, but they will always remember how you make them feel.  I think that's 100 percent true.  I can see it in sort of the eyes of my patients who were my father's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] patients, and when they ask how he's doing and hear that he's died.  You know, he made people even in--even in his--even in his, you know, sternness as a parent, he managed to make people feel very, very comfortable and understood.  And he put the same energy and I try to put the same energy into every patient that I have and every person whose path I cross, whether they are, you know, the guy that I went to visit in prison, the homeless person that I represented, somebody who has no money but who needs urgent dental care, somebody who, you know, has almost seemingly unlimited means, I, I, I really strive to treat them all with the same level of dignity and respect and empathy and compassion, and I'd like people to remember me for that.
Story_ID: 665051
Speaker 1: So, you've had two distinctly different career tracks.  So, I'd like you to speak to each of them.  If, if you were talking to a young person interested in going into law, interested in going into dentistry, what advice would you give them?  And if it's the same, that's good, too.
Speaker 2: I think it might be the same.  I think it might be the same.  Because really the two fields are not as different as you might think.  At, at, at, at--in, in the--in--you know, the essence of both of them is really problem solving.  You just use different tools to solve the problems.  You've got different kinds of problems and you use different tools to solve them.  But, to do either, you have to be able to listen to people, understand them, understand not just what they say but what they mean, what's motivating them, and you have to be incredibly empathic and compassionate to do that.  You've sort of gotta get your self out of the way and just receive what they're saying in a, in a, in a, in a, in a, in a very, very direct way.  And then you've got to understand what their problem is and what the best way for them to get there is.  And to do that, you've gotta be able to communicate, right?  You've gotta be able to be clear, concise, and speak in an understandable way, speak to--speak to--speak to where they are, and that takes a lot of effort, it takes a lot of time.  It sometimes takes hearing and listening to things, as I said earlier, that you don't agree with, that you may actually find repulsive, right, but you've gotta do it in order to get to a solution that you're--that you can both live with.  Because in the law, you know, you've gotta execute what it is and you've gotta feel okay about that, right?  And in dentistry, you've got to be able to physically do what it is that they want you to do and you've got to--you've got to be--you've gotta stand by it, okay?  And, so in either field, what I would say is you've gotta hone those skills.  You've gotta hone those skills.  And those are life skills; those are not just professional skills, frankly.  Those are life skills, those are relationship skills, those are parenting skills.  (Nods head) I think that's what it would be.
Story_ID: 665052
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's a good one.  (Pause) I think that I regret--I'll have to think about that one.  I think that, you know, I have daily regrets.  I mean, you know, I have a fifteen year old daughter, okay, so I, I--you know, and, and raising children is like a constant waltz, so I have regrets sometimes about the things that I say to her that I believe 100 percent in as a parent and sometimes I think, well, maybe I should've backed off on that a little bit.  I regret--I don't think I have any professional regrets.  I don't regret--I, I don't regret leaving law.  I don't regret going into the law.  I don't regret getting married even though things didn't work out in the end.  Sometimes, I regret not being able to reflect more clearly on my dad's [Henry Cooper, Jr.] traditionalism, which honestly as a teenager into my twenties, I could not understand, could not understand.  But as a parent, I'm starting to get a better understanding of it, and I wish I had been able then to understand it as clearly as I do now.
Speaker 1: Were you able to mend that bond before he passed?
Speaker 2: I think so.  And he was not a man of many words.  He was certainly not a man of tremendous sentimentality either.  But, I know that we did because whenever he felt in his older years lost--not, not literally lost, figuratively lost, whenever he had a problem that he couldn't quite think through, he called me.  He called me and I understood what he was saying.  We may not agree, but I trust your judgment, and that--
Speaker 1: That says a lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it did.
Story_ID: 665053
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would like to share that I have not asked you?
Speaker 2: I think you've covered a lot (laughter).  It's been three hours.  I think we've covered a lot.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: I, I, I, I--we haven't talked a lot about my children.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, please (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and, and I don't want to but--'cause any parent can talk endlessly about their children.
Speaker 1: Well, but--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --you have two--you could--
Speaker 2: But, yeah, I think you did ask what my proudest--you might've asked what my proudest accomplishment, what my greatest accomplishment is, something like that--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me.
Speaker 2: --and they are up there at the top, up there at the top, by far.  They are--
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: My son's name is Aaron [ph.], my daughter's name is Avery [ph.].  Avery--and they're totally different, and I'm glad for that.  I'm glad for that because it shows me that they feel comfortable and loved being as different as they are.  My daughter is willful, independent, opinionated, ridiculously organized and disciplined.  She sort of gets a view to what she wants and she is often undaunted in, in, in achieving it and that can be very frustrating, but that's as it should be I think.
Speaker 1: Were you like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, very much so.  My son is, is, is incredibly warm, funny, genuinely and deeply loving, incredibly loyal, has an amazing gift of being able to, you know, bridge gaps.  I remember for his birthday last year, he has tons of friends, many of whom don't get along with each other, and they were arguing about this, that or the other in the car and Aaron just suddenly started talking and everybody forgot what they were arguing about.  He has--he has a way of having people gravitate to him, and the amazing thing to me is that he is--he is not particularly outgoing, he is not particularly outspoken, but he has a very laid back, gentle presence that just draw--and kindness that just draws people to him.  And I'm proud to say that I'm--that I'm a part of their lives and that I'm their mom.
Speaker 1: Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.
