Story_ID: 99011
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for today for the HistoryMakers.  The videographer is Scott Sterns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Julius, J-U-L-I-U-S, L. Chambers, C-H-A-M-B-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And could you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 6, 1936, Mt. Gilead, Montgomery County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Twelve, six, '02 [2002].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of Ferguson, Stein, Chambers Law Offices [Charlotte, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99012
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five People magazinish type questions we always ask just to loosen things up, I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm--mm.
Speaker 1: They just require a short answer.  The first question is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sea foods, shrimp, scallops.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well I guess I'll have to go with my fraternity of, yellow and black.
Speaker 1: An Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], okay.
Speaker 2: Alpha (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not really, anytime when it's warm enough to play golf.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like the islands, almost any one of the islands, Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Nothing, except don't have a heart attack.
Story_ID: 99013
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter), all right.  Let's talk about your family background.  You--how far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: Well you know I really haven't done that.  There was an effort that is still ongoing by one of my cousins who went back to just before the Civil War and we just haven't pursued it, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any stories or songs or anything that came from your parents or grandparents that kinda harkens back to, you know, the days of slavery or the nineteenth century or Reconstruction, anything like that?
Speaker 2: Any stories or songs?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Nah, it's just my father [William Lee Chambers] who's--who told us about a lot of his experiences and his family's experiences as he was growing up.  And I think we sorta reconstructed some of those experiences from the stories that he told.  But I don't know of any other particular event that sorta marks that history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so nobody really talked about it?
Speaker 2: No. No (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your mother and father.  Can you give us your father's name and spell his name for us, sir?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My father's name was William Lee, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Chambers.  My mother's name was Matilda, M-A-T-I-L-D-A, Alma, A-L-M-A.  Bruton was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her maiden name?
Speaker 2: M--Bruton, B-R-U-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right and when was your father born and where?
Speaker 2: My father was born May 10, 1903 and my mother was born October 19, 1910.
Speaker 1: Were they both born near Mt. Gilead [Montgomery County, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well I guess it would be near Mt. Gilead.  My mother was born in Wadeville, North Carolina, which is in Montgomery County.  And my father was born really in Richmond County which is next to Montgomery County.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99014
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what was your father [William Lee Chambers] like and what did he do?
Speaker 2: Well he was a mechanic, an auto mechanic who learned the hard way how to repair automobiles.  And I think he was a very good mechanic.  He was at least recognized in the community as one of the best mechanics there.  He never got beyond the third grade and he wanted to make sure that all of his children obtained a college degree.  So he worked diligently to make sure that happen, fortunately he succeeded.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he--did he operate a garage of his own or did he have a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he started off working with a white person there in Montgomery County [North Carolina] with the mecha--repair shop and then was able to buy his own or build his own shop, which he did, and he was very proud of it.  He was the first one in my county to be able to get gasoline and oil to sell retail because most distributors wouldn't sell to minorities.  And my father was able to get that worked out.  So he had a kind of service station and garage.
Speaker 1: Oh that's good.  What did he call it?
Speaker 2: Chambers Garage.
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 99015
Speaker 1: Okay, so how were race relations in the town--what was it, in Mt. Gilead?
Speaker 2: Mt. Gilead, mm-mm.  They were typical race relations across North Carolina at the time.  We were pretty rigidly segregated.  Blacks had a row and whites had a separate row and the ambitions of black kids were limited by the segregated society.  So it was pretty interesting, but rigidly segregated experience.
Story_ID: 99016
Speaker 1: Now did you father [William Lee Chambers] talk about how he was able to get, you know, I guess the concession to sell gas and oil, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah he talked about it and he went to--it was Ex-- Esso at the time to try to get gasoline and oil and they would not sell or the wholesale distributor would not sell.  And he ended up with Amoco, and Amoco was very receptive and he was rather elated that he was able to get that opportunity to sell gasoline.  So he did that for like what twenty, thirty years, selling gasoline.
Speaker 1: So you think it was like competition between the two oil companies that he benefited from or, or--
Speaker 2: Well I think it was more the owner, operator of the wholesale distributor.
Speaker 1: Which was different from the other?
Speaker 2: It was different, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a breakthrough, you know, to be able to get that kind of concession in those days--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --it was a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was for him and he was excited about that possibility.
Story_ID: 99017
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about your mother [Matilda Bruton Chambers], you know, what did she do and what was she like?
Speaker 2: My mother finished high school and she kept the books for my father, but she previously had taught elementary school, she was not a college grad.  To teach in black schools at the time you didn't need to be.  And she always wanted to get a college degree but she decided to, to work with my father and help him keep his books and taxes.  And that's--and she was happy with that.  So she was, I thought, an intelligent person.  She worked hard and helped with the garage operation during the day and she went home and did homework at night.  She raised four children in the process, and she's still living now at ninety-two years of age.  So I think she was strong, I think she was intelligent, I think she didn't have the opportunities that a lot of people dreamed about, but she did the best she could with what she was able to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how many brothers and sisters did you have?
Speaker 2: Three, two brothers and one sister, four of us in all.
Speaker 1: Okay are you the--
Speaker 2: I'm the next to the last kid.  I have an older brother who is a practicing physician here in Charlotte [North Carolina]; OBGYN. I have a sister who is a retired nurse in Texas, Texas City, Texas and I have a younger brother who is, excuse me, who is a laborer in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 99018
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back and kinda give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Mount Gilead [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well there weren't a lot of sights and sounds, it was a rural community, population of about 12-, 1,400.  It had one major factory, a textile factory, and several of the black males who were considered lucky worked at Alcoa [Alcoa Inc.] in Badin [North Carolina] which was about ten miles away.  There weren't a lot of social activities the--I guess the most exciting thing was men playing baseball and we had that, a sandlot all of us.  And we didn't do very much between seasons in baseball.  We were not very far from Pinehurst [North Carolina], but during that time I was growing up the only thing we could do in Pinehurst was if we were lucky, to caddy.  Never could play or we would work in the restaurant or some catering or so--
Speaker 1: Is this Pinehurst?
Speaker 2: This is the Pinehurst [Resort], North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Pinehurst and Southern Pines [North Carolina] are right there together and--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?  People are gonna see this and not gonna know what it is.
Speaker 2: P-I-N-E-H-U-R-S-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One word.
Speaker 1: And this is the famous Country Club, Golf Club here in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Southern Pines is the adjoining city and we had--some people who worked in the cafeteria or restaurants or whatever in those areas and it was nineteen miles away, but it--that was an outlet.  Other than that and whatever the high schools did, they had football, they had basketball and baseball.  There were not very many outlets.  We have a movie house in Mount Gilead, with black folk upstairs and white folk downstairs.  There was a movie house in Troy [North Carolina] which is a town very nearby with the same kind of situation.  And, and that was about it, you know, I have told people time and again it was difficult to even dream about being able to do things in life because of the rather rigid segregation that we had in the community, we didn't think about being bank presidents or lawyers or doctors.  We didn't have any influ- we didn't have the role model.
Speaker 1: Who was--who were the, I guess the highest members of the black community at that point--
Speaker 2: Teachers.
Speaker 1: Teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, teachers and principals of those schools.  And that was about it and I guess some people would argue that the ministers were, but considering what we pay them (laughter) it's difficult to think about them being that high on the totem pole.
Story_ID: 99019
Speaker 1: Did your parents [William Lee Chambers and Matilda Bruton Chambers] have a story about how they met that they passed along to you?
Speaker 2: Well they did have and I think my mother grew up in rural area of Wadeville [North Carolina], Wadeville was smaller than Mount Gilead if you can imagine it, and my father saw her at one of these events, baseball or something, I can't recall.  And they agreed to date and they did and growing out of that they got married.  It wasn't one of those really, romantic experiences that would allow a movie producers to make a movie.  But they were happy with it
Speaker 1: It was romantic enough for them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99020
Speaker 1: All right.  Now did your father play baseball?
Speaker 2: No.  No he wasn't athletic at all.  And nor did my mother play softball.  But--
Speaker 1: Women played softball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah they played.  But neither one of them played, but it was a pastime for black people because the only place they could go.
Speaker 1: Did the towns play each other or did, was that the way it worked, or did--
Speaker 2: Well sometimes communities I would put it more.  You couldn't get that far, because you didn't have enough money to transport a baseball team.  Most of the men who played then would play Albemarle [North Carolina] which was sixteen miles away, but would have to drive themselves to get and they weren't about to drive 100 miles to another location.
Speaker 1: So it was right around, you know, local?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99021
Speaker 1: So what kind of little boy were you, what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well I liked to read.  I think I joined a "Book of the Month Club" back years ago when I was in elementary school [Highland Elementary School].  And I would subscribe, I would work in the- my father's [William Lee Chambers] garage and put together enough cash to buy a book and I would buy a book and read it.  I loved the movies and I guess it was like 35 cents or something like that to go to the movies.  I started playing baseball in elementary school and then in high school.  And then I tried to play football, and couldn't play basketball so I guess it was typical for a kid of my environment trying to play sports and I played a little bit.  I loved to read and I tried to keep up my grades, which was sort of an insistence on my father's part.  And I went to church which was something my mother [Matilda Alma Bruton Chambers] insisted on and that was basically it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you involved in the church activities, you know, in terms of responsibilities (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Nah, I went to church, frequently.  My mother was a Sunday school teacher, my father was superintendent of Sunday school, but I didn't hold any position.
Speaker 1: So did you- you know- with all the reading that you did, I mean I would suppose you'd probably be unusual, most kids - there are a lot of kids who like to read, a lot, even until today, you have to kind of give them something to do--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm, mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --but you- did you find that you looked at the world a little differently than people?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I like to read, I did fairly well in the school.  I dreamed about being able to go to college, but I didn't think of myself as unusual or that different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You pretty much felt you fit right in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99022
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me about school.  What school did you attend and what was the school like and remember you're talking to people in the year- well in the 21st century.
Speaker 2: Well schools were then very segregated.  I went to an elementary school that was a wood frame building that had limited space and we had books that we got from the white schools, we had buses that we got from the white schools.  We--in elementary school did not have a library, we knew nothing really about science, but I went to high school we had one microscope and my biology experiences consisted of dissecting a frog and it was a frog we had to catch in a pond around the house.  And my English classes were spent mostly carrying money from the lunchroom to the bank and it was not a great high school experience, not an educational one.  But again I think our people were doing the best that they could with little resources they had.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school at something later called Highland Elementary School.
Speaker 1: H-I-G-H?
Speaker 2: H-I-G-H-L-A-N-D.  It previously had been, from all that I know, been call Mount Gilead Elementary School for Negroes and it later became Highland Elementary School.  I went to high school at Peabody High School, P-E-A-B-O-D-Y, which was the high school for black people in Montgomery County [North Carolina] and those were two schools that I attended, you know, elementary and high school.
Story_ID: 99023
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you were in school, either elementary [Mt. Gilead Elementary School for Negroes, Montgomery County, North Carolina] school or in high school [Peabody High School, Montgomery County, North Carolina], were there teachers that took an interest in you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in elementary school, I had a teacher, one of my favorite teacher named Ms. Blue and for the life of me I can't think of her first name right now, but she took an interest in me and like my father [William Lee Chambers] made read more made me do more academically.  And in high school I had a teacher who taught science, biology primarily that I really liked and she really worked with me to make sure I did what I was supposed to do in school.  Her name was Cowell, Rosetta Cowell [ph.].  And--so I had the elementary experience.  I also had an elementary school a teacher who lived next to our home, Ms. Green, who sort of looked after, you know how people look after children to make sure they were doing what the parents expect them to do and that was her role.  And in high school I had one or two teachers who had played a similar role, but Ms. Cowell [ph.] was the one I really admired and Ms. Blue was the one that I really admired in elementary school.
Story_ID: 99024
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you involved--well you said you were involved in sports in high school [Peabody High School, Montgomery County, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Mm--mm.
Speaker 1: --on some level.  Did you participate in debates?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well such as we had.  We had a group called the New Farmers of America, yeah, I think that was the black group.  Whites were Future Farmers of America and we were New Farmers of America.  And in that group we had debating competition and speaking completion and I participated in both and won some awards for public speaking.
Speaker 1: So what were your topics, can you remember?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.  Not that far back I can't.  You know, I don't even remember what we were talking about, but I do remember participating in a couple of the programs and where was--in high school at the time.  One was against Morrison Training School.  Morrison Training School was a school for delinquent black children and we had a competition with them.  We had competition with another school called Wadesboro, that's W-A-D-E-S-B-O-R-O which was nineteen miles away, but I don't remember topics.
Story_ID: 99025
Speaker 1: Now you, from what I read, this may be true may not be true, from what I read, you have a reputation for being very cool and unflappable, you know a person that doesn't get excited about things other people might get excited about sometimes.  Is this true, or had this trait emerged in high school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter), gee I don't know, I am told that that is something people look at and think that I do.  I developed a practice of not getting that excited about things years ago because I thought it prevented one from being able to think really clearly and being able to do what one needed to do and also I think just approaching the problems coolly enables one to sort of think through things, well and look at the pros and the cons of different actions and it's better.  And finally I think it's the best way communicating with people.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a model for that kind of behavior when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I had, well one after law school with a guy, Jack Greenberg who was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Association of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, and I really admired the way that he operated.  Thurgood [Marshall] was quite a contrast, but Jack [Greenberg] was very thoughtful and not too, too excited when things didn't go his way.
Story_ID: 99026
Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, so when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Peabody High School, Montgomery County, North Carolina], did you know what you wanted to do with your life or where you wanted to go to school or had it been set up?
Speaker 2: I think pretty much. I had a brother who had gone to North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  I had gone several times to visit the campus and was impressed. I knew about several other campuses, but I really wanted to go where my brother had gone.  So I went to North Carolina Central.  I didn't know what I wanted to major in, but I did know that I wanted to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about North Carolina Central. I mean who set it up, how--do you know anything about the history of it or what--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was founded by Dr. James E. Shepard and Dr. Shepard was an interesting person somewhat a minister, a pharmacist, who came along at the time they were setting up North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company or another--a black bank, what is it, Mechanic and Farmers Bank, a black savings and loan, Mutual Community Saving Bank it is now.  And he was instrumental in the establishment for these three facilities, but he also wanted to do something about helping blacks with higher ed [education] and he got started with a program called the National Chautauqua that trained really first blacks for two years to go into teaching.  And then it expanded to a four year institution.
Speaker 1: Didn't Chautauqua-- doesn't Chautauqua have something to do with public speaking or--?
Speaker 2: Well I am really not on that one.  I--
Speaker 1: About what year did he set up?
Speaker 2: 1910.
Speaker 1: 1910.
Speaker 2: That's when it--then it became a state supported institution in 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And took on the name of North Carolina College for Negroes and became a part of the university system in 1962.  In any event he started the program.  He followed the traditional path like Booker T. Washington, going around meeting with white folk and white folk to give some money to help black people get an education.  And it was considered very unusual because blacks didn't want to see black people, I mean whites didn't wanna see black people learn through an educational program like that, but he was able to get it started and it became a very competitive intuition and it still is.
Story_ID: 99027
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. So how did you--you were somewhat familiar with it already because your brother had gone to school there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had been on the campus before?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How far was it away from here?
Speaker 2: One Hundred Forty miles [140], Fifty miles [150].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From my home in Mt. Gilead [North Carolina] to Durham [North Carolina]
Speaker 1: So were-- did it meet your expectations?  What was it like when you started?
Speaker 2: It was I think a very competitive educational program for black people.  We didn't have the resources.  It was started really to accommodate the educational needs of black kids so they wouldn't be going to Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  It was then the alternative for black people to Chapel Hill, UNC Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].  And it never got the resources that Chapel Hill got, but it was able to offer an education and I think a competitive education.  And--but I left North Central and went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and I saw then early the differences in educational programs and experiences.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Michigan while you were still attending North Carolina Central?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I went to Michigan after I finished North Carolina Central.
Story_ID: 99028
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you asked what kind of educational program it was and I was telling you that I think it was a competitive program.  But I saw the stark difference when I went to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] after North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: What was your course of study at North Carolina Central what did you major in?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: History?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Did you have a--who where your professors and did they--?
Speaker 2: I had three or four but two stand out.  One was Dr. Helen Edmonds and I'm not certain if you know who she was, but she was a very nationally known black historian who seconded the nomination of [President] Dwight Eisenhower when he was nominated for president.
Speaker 1: So she was involved in Republican politics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was.  Another one was Caulbert Jones who was, I thought, a scholar for African history. And--
Speaker 1: Caulbert Jones?
Speaker 2: Caulbert Jones.
Speaker 1: C-O-L
Speaker 2: C-A-U-L-B-E-R-T
Speaker 1: C-A-, C-A-U--
Speaker 2: A-U-L-B-E-R-T
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jones.  Who studied--specialized in African history.
Speaker 1: There were very few black historians or anybody, that specialized in African history in those days.
Speaker 2: At that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: We were talking yesterday at Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] about William Leo Hansberry at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] being one, but Caulbert Jones, I never--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: So he taught African History on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was interesting to me because I took gee, four, five courses and when I went to Michigan they wouldn't recognize the courses.  We apparently didn't care about African History.
Speaker 1: It's ironic now because University of Michigan has one of the biggest African Studies program in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's a lot that's ironic about Michigan.  (Laughter), but I took Caulbert's courses and he taught other histories as well, but these were two history professors who stands out.  There was another guy named Joe Taylor who taught history but he was in fact chair of the department, but he didn't really write any books and I didn't know anything he did that was that outstanding.
Speaker 1: But the woman was, I forget her name.
Speaker 2: Helen Edmonds.
Speaker 1: Helen Edmonds, okay.  Did she write any books?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She wrote "Fusion Politics" which was a popular book.  And it's about fusion politics in North Carolina during the 19--early 1900s.
Story_ID: 99029
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  So and how did you end up at University Mic--you went to school in Michigan, you did say you didn't say University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: It was University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: It was University of Michigan, okay, alright. How did you--did you graduate from North Carolina A and--Central?
Speaker 2: Largely through--I graduated from North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and I wanted to go to law school, but I got a Woodrow Wilson fellowship to study graduate--work on a master's degree and I wanted to go work on a master's degree in history.  So I went to Michigan largely at the urging of Helen Edmonds and it was a great experience.  Studied that because I also knew that I was going to go to law school after finishing the master's program.
Story_ID: 99030
Speaker 1: So what, is there a--were you surprised at the--well there's a contrast between Michigan--you spoken to it on some level something already, the contrast between University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]. What was the most starling thing that was different?
Speaker 2: Well to start with the library and the collection at Michigan and the quality of the facility.  The competitiveness of students was another.  The fact that this school had money that would enable students and faculty to do a lot of things we couldn't do at North Carolina Central was another.  We had a fantastic athletic program at Michigan, they still have.  We didn't have those kinds of resources and North Carolina Central.  But I tell you I really was impressed with what North Carolina Central was able to offer with what limited resources it was given.
Speaker 1: Who was the president at North Carolina Central?
Speaker 2: Alfonso Elder throughout the time I was there.
Speaker 1: You think they did a really good job with what they had.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mm-mm.
Story_ID: 99031
Speaker 1: Alright, so who were some of the professors or people that you met at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] that stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh gee, you know, I don't know.  I remember a lot of the professors at North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and I don't remember any of them ever at Michigan, not the names.  I had a--two or three history professors who were considered very good professors.  I don't remember their names.  I really got turned off a little bit with Michigan when I tried to enroll in the law school and was told that Michigan had admitted its quota for the year.  They were admitting one black student per year and they had admitted a friend of mine, Amalya Kearse, who's now on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals.  But they had the quota and really got turn off.  Plus the admissions officer then told me that I should look in Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] or at some of the other black law schools.  It was okay.  I learned that Michigan had the same kind of racial problems that other places had had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there any professors there that reached out to you, specially to try to help you?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  I don't recall any, you know.  I had money from the scholarship programs to pay the tuition and fees.  I had gone in with three other frat brothers to rent a house that became sort of the gathering place for black students at Michigan at the time.  The black students there were very isolated.  The football players were having problems staying on the team, particularly if they dated or talked with white students so it was kind of a problem.  But it was my first experience in an integrated school.
Story_ID: 99032
Speaker 1: Okay. So when you--where did you finally end up going to law school? Did you--?
Speaker 2: One year after finishing North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] I did a one year program at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got the master's degree and then moved to law school at Carolina [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yeah now--at North Carolina?
Speaker 2: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Speaker 1: That seems strange that they wouldn't admit you at University of Michigan [Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] but you go to University Carolina at Chapel Hill to law school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well Chapel Hill--
Speaker 1: I didn't even realize they had black students in there those days.
Speaker 2: Well Chapel Hill had admitted three or four black students two or three years before I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a big deal or big fight associated with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was kinda a lawsuit, made a big deal (laughter).
Speaker 1: Kind of a law suit (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah. But that too was an interesting experience. But--
Speaker 1: Do you remember the details of that?
Speaker 2: About the lawsuit?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the lawsuit.  It had to be something you were thinking about then, well, you know, I guess so.
Speaker 2: Well the initial lawsuit-- well there was a lawsuit in the 1940s that the parties lost, the court just ruled against them, threw them out.  Then they filed a lawsuit in the 1950s that succeeded.  That lawsuit though was initially addressed to the undergrad program and the court directed that the black students be admitted and we had three, four, five black undergrad students there.  The law students transferred from North Carolina Central's law school [North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] and they threatened a lawsuit and the state sort of appreciated that they would lose and so they admitted Harvey Beach, Kenneth Lee and Floyd McKissick to the law school.  And there was one other black student who went to Chapel Hill before I got there.
Speaker 1: Now about what year is this (unclear) Floyd McKissick and them?
Speaker 2: I got--Floyd got there 1950--oh gee, three [1953], two, '52 [1952], '53 [1953], something like that.
Speaker 1: That's before Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99033
Speaker 1: Right, is North Carolina, I guess, you know, people from the North, I know maybe one of them, who look at the South as a block, as "those foreign countries down there" we used to say in the sixties [1960s], what they were doing.  Is there--what's the difference between North Carolina, say, and Mississippi or Alabama, or, you know.
Speaker 2: North Carolina has generally been considered more moderate.  We had all not quite as many Klansmen as Mississippi, but we had some.  And they affected the attitudes of people about as much as they did in Mississippi.  Although a lot of people weren't quite as bold as they were in Mississippi.  But it has had some progressive leaders who have opted to follow the law and Constitution rather than stand in a school house door.  And those things have led North Carolina to be considered much more liberal than many of the other southern states.  And I think in a sense it is, so-- and it's continued to with that image over the years.
Story_ID: 99034
Speaker 1: In terms of the law school's [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] admissions, we had some pretty progressive people in the law school throughout and they--we had a dean who was, I thought, very good.  He was the one who brought me to Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Now who was that?
Speaker 1: Henry Brandis.
Speaker 2: How do you spell the name?
Speaker 1: Brandis, B-R-A-N-D-I-S.  He was a graduate of Columbia Law School [New York City, New York] and he believed you had to treat black people equally so he reached out and did it even though he was down here in this conservative environment.
Speaker 2: Now he was not from North Carolina himself?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: From New York?
Speaker 1: I don't think he was from New York and I don't exactly where he was from.  But I also don't think he was from North Carolina.  But he had gone to school in New York, but I don't think he was from New York.  But he was a good guy and he was on the Board of Education in Chapel Hill [North Carolina] when the Board voted to integrate the schools in Chapel Hill.
Story_ID: 99035
Speaker 1: All right, so, well how did you--so you felt welcome, at least from the law school itself, I mean the law school faculty itself is welcoming on some level.
Speaker 2: Some faculty, some didn't and many students did not.  The dean [Henry P. Brandis, Jr.], whom I admired told me in the first part of my law school that I should not go to any of the social events and I shouldn't date a white woman and that would make it easier for me to stay in school.  And I followed his advice, not--well because I wanted to do something else, but I didn't want to do anything else, but anyway that was sort of typical of what went on in the law school, law school students, were not the most open people and they didn't make life easy for the black students.  I know that I finished in the top of our class and the tradition had been for one to become editor-in-chief of the law review and to move into one of the major law firms.  But no major law firm was ready to open its doors to a black law graduate at the time.  So you had those kinds of problems.
Speaker 1: But how did all that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Very disappointed, very hurt and you--in my, my situation I felt that I should do more to try bring the races together and help people appreciate the differences and be more respectful of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99036
Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened next, how did you get started professionally they wouldn't, you know, nobody reaching out (unclear) what happens?
Speaker 2: Well, when--I did receive the appointment as editor in chief of the North Carolina Law Review and with that Thurgood Marshall and Jack Greenberg asked me to come with the Legal Defense Fund and I was more than happy to do that.  I told them I had to work out one problem with the pledge to do two years of service with the Navy because when I went to law school at Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] my selective service board didn't want any black folk going to Chapel Hill so they issued letters for me to come in the armed services (laughter).  And the only way I could stay out of armed services at that time was to go into a reserve program.  And I went into a reserve program that required two years after I finished law school.
Speaker 1: Do you think--do you think that the selective service board and law school were in--actually in cahoots?
Speaker 2: Nah, nah, not the law school.  I think it was the selective service board.
Speaker 1: And the university [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Nah I don't think the university had anything to do with it.  I think it was the selective service board in my home town one way to keep you out of Chapel Hill was to put you in the service.  And I don't think the university had anything to do with that.
Speaker 1: Makes you wonder.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  But those things happen.  And so I had to deal with that and the way we dealt with it was I had also been invited to join the Department of Justice with Bobby Kennedy as Attorney General and I talked with them about the possibility of transferring to a reserve program that had less time than the two years.  And they worked out a transfer from the Navy to the Army and then the Army had six months.  But then after transferring they told me that I had already done two years of active, I mean duty with the Navy and I didn't need to do the active duty with the Army and didn't care to argue about it so (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you didn't have to serve?
Speaker 2: I didn't have to serve, not, not the continuous six months I stayed in the reserve.  But what later happened was they put me in the JAG [Judge Advocate General] Advocates program and the only JAG Advocates program available was one in Columbia, South Carolina and they didn't want any black folk so they told me to stay home (laughter).  I stayed home and they eventually discharged me honorably they say.  So that was my Army experience and that was my experience in going to law school, part of my experience of going to law school here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99037
Speaker 1: So now, now what happened to this invitation from the Attorney General's Office.  Did you, I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Oh I told him that I wanted to go with the Legal Defense Fund rather than with the Department of Justice.  And he was receptive and told me to go with the Legal Defense Fund.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't--
Speaker 1: So this is the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund.
Speaker 2: Right, mm-mm, mm-mm.
Speaker 1: So this is about 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Three [1963], well what was it, it would have been around 1963 or '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I went to the Columbia School Program in '62 [1962] and '3 [1963].
Speaker 1: Was it '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]?  Alright, not '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: No '62 [1962], '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long did you stay in the--you were at Columbia first before you went to the Legal Defense Fund?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: okay.
Speaker 2: I was at Columbia for a year '62 [1962] to '63 [1963].  Then I went internship program with the Legal Defense Fund in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: And doing that internship is had you started thinking about the situation in Charlotte [North Carolina], you know?
Speaker 2: No.  I--the program was the Legal Defense Fund required that I spend a year in New York [City, New York] learning about the practices of the Legal Defense Fund.  And then located in a city that was mutually acceptable to the Fund and to me and I had already advised the Legal Defense Fund that I wanted to go to Charlotte because I wanted to come back to North Carolina and so that was worked out before I went to New York with the Legal Defense Fund and so I did the year with the Legal Defense Fund and then was transferring back to Charlotte.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99872
Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, how did you meet Thurgood Marshall and Jack Greenberg?
Speaker 2: Well I met them through Kelly Alexander who used to be President of the North Carolina branch, or conference of branches of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I was elected as editor in chief of the North Carolina Law Review and that made the press around the country and I received a call from Kelly about coming to work or doing some with the NAACP and then later through some calls that he had made, I received a call from Jack Greenberg about a meeting with them to talk about coming to work with the Legal Defense Fund.  And then I was invited to meet with them in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the annual meeting of the NAACP and the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.  And I met Thurgood and Jack at that time and we talked about my interest in coming with the Legal Defense Fund and I was elated and agreed to do it.
Story_ID: 99873
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--I think we closed the last portion with you coming to Charlotte [North Carolina] in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And what--you worked a year and came here in '64 [1964] and open up an office in August?
Speaker 2: In August.
Speaker 1: With the Legal Defense Fund here in Charlotte?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  It was a private law practice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With an affiliation with the Legal Defense Fund.  I was known as a cooperating attorney.  And as such I would assist the Legal Defense Fund as a local attorney with cases that the Legal Defense Fund was interested in this particular area in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So tell us about, I know that central, maybe the biggest case or the most famous case you've been involved in was Swann vs. the Board of Education [Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education], Charlotte-Mecklenburg.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well part of the work that I was involved in, involved litigating cases to desegregate the public schools.  And I had done some of that before coming here with work the Legal Defense Fund in New York [New York City, New York].  I worked cases in Alabama primarily, and Virginia and after I got here I was told by several clients that they wanted to bring a lawsuit against Charlotte-Mecklenburg [County, North Carolina] to desegregate the school.  Charlotte [North Carolina] had just implemented a plan that would draw single member districts or single districts for each school and they also incorporated freedom of choice plan that permitted white kids who were assigned to black schools to transfer out to white school and the same for black students who wanted to transfer out of integrated schools.  The result of the plan was that kids remained in segregated schools and we filed a lawsuit based on the fact that they had not taken adequate steps to desegregate the schools.  Darius Swann was a minister who taught in the theology school at Johnson C. Smith [University, Charlotte, North Carolina] at the time and his wife was very active in the community and they had children and they wanted their children to go to integrated schools and they were prevented from doing that through the plan that the board had adopted because their kids were assigned to black schools and they couldn't transfer out of those school to another schools and they really wanted to be assigned to integrated schools in the first instance rather than using some freedom of choice method to get through integrated school.  And then we had Dr. Hawkins who was a community activist, Rev. Moore who was also a community activist and in all somewhere around twenty-seven plaintiffs who joined in the lawsuit and we styled it Darius Swann vs. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education.  That was because we had learned that it was better to pick a person as the lead plaintiff who would not be subjected to a lot of political and physical pressure.
Story_ID: 99874
Speaker 1: And Darius [Swann] as a minister didn't have to worry about that so he was the lead plaintiff in the case and it became known as Swann.  And we began litigating the case and collecting the information and we had an initial row with Judge Braxton Craven [J. Braxton Craven, Jr.] who really didn't want to force communities to do very much, but who wanted to be fair in what he was doing, but he felt in the initial round which was '65 [1965] or something that it was sufficient if the board adopted a plan that allowed people to voluntarily integrate rather than being forced to integrate.  And we appealed that decision to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals which affirmed because the Fourth Circuit was also pretty conservative at the time and we decided not to try to get a review in the Supreme Court at that time because the Supreme Court was not taking many school cases anyway and we waited another year or two. In the meantime Judge Craven was elevated to the Fourth Circuit and Judge McMillan [James Bryan McMillan] was appointed to replace him and we--additionally the Supreme Court had decided two cases that suggested the school districts had to achieve the greatest degree of desegregation and they had to do it now.  And we went back to court seeking additional relief arguing that the plan that the court had approved didn't comply with what the Supreme Court had subsequently directed.  And we really went out and got some evidence about how segregation was perpetuated by the school district and how segregation was adversely affecting the black students particularly.  And that moved Judge McMillan to direct more relief for the black plaintiffs and to impose a busing requirement in order to achieve a greater degree of desegregation.   And that went up to the Fourth Circuit and then to the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Supreme Court affirmed and we had the famous busing case as they call it.  In the meantime, we had a lot of changes in the community that helped to promote further integration in the schools and a better relationship, I believe, among people in the community.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this case persuaded the Supreme Court that busing is an acceptable way to integrate the schools basically?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I like to put it differently that it persuaded the Supreme Court that in order to disestablish the effects of segregation, school districts had to do more than simply adopt some racially neutral plan.  They really had to move forward and implement a plan that would promote integration including busing of students or pairing or clustering of school zones and because it was possible to get a greater degree of racial mixing through use of some of these other interventions like busing, like clustering school districts.  And the court said that that was appropriate and was required in order to disestablish the effects of past segregation.
Story_ID: 99875
Speaker 1: Okay. Now there were, I know in places all around the U.S. [United States] there were very mixed reaction to this, to busing not only in the white communities but in black communities too.  People felt that in some cities that only the black students were bused, you know.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: I mean, what were some of the problems in busing? I know you weren't directly involved in those but do you in reflection do you see what it--what does it look like in hindsight?
Speaker 2: Well. One, we were involved in some of the oppositions because even here we had an (unclear) our order that said that the court would not abandon the Constitution just because there was opposition toward it.  Where I have seen black people generally disturbed with integration, it's where they are not fully accepted or treated fairly or freely in the integrating settings and we have a number of instances of that.  Even in Charlotte [North Carolina] we had black students shouldered with a greater degree of busing than whites.  To some extent, I think we had to expect that because blacks made up about twenty seven per cent of the population and if you're gonna integrate every school, you're gonna to expect more black kids to be bused than white kids.  And that was understandable, but then we had some other inequities built into the plan of desegregation.  For example we initially had no white kids being bused in black areas who were in elementary school.  The fear was the white parents would flee the system if their young kids would be bused into inner city black areas.  That's just an example some of the inequities built into the desegregation plan that created appropriately opposition from black people.  Then you had a number of black kids who just weren't just treated fairly.  You would in school assignments place blacks disproportionately in special educational classes, you would not place blacks appropriately in gifted and talented programs.  You wouldn't call on the black kids as you did on the white kids to perform in the classroom.  You wouldn't have a black queen or black king.  And so there were a number of inequities that were going on in the school system that, excuse me, that caused, I think, black people to be opposed to some of the desegregation plans and as those were addressed, some of them were addressed, we began to have less of a problem.
Story_ID: 99876
Speaker 1: I think finally there are some blacks who really don't believe that you need to integrate, they believe that it's just not appropriate, or necessary for blacks to be mixing with white people or whites to be mixing with black people.  And on the other hand and from what I've seen is that from the mixing that we've had here in Charlotte [North Carolina] and in North Carolina we have removed a lot of the barriers that have kept blacks back and we have made it easier for blacks to really move among the various racial and ethnic groups and for the various racial and ethnic groups to move among black people because they get to know each other as they get together and they appreciate the contributions that each can make.  I think and I don't know where the Supreme Court is going to go with the affirmative action case, but that we will see more contributions to America when we fairly bring all racial groups into the picture fairly and have their contributions to particular topics.
Story_ID: 99877
Speaker 1: Do you have and thoughts on the move I guess of white parents to send their children to parochial schools as a way of getting--of avoiding, you know, busing and desegregation.  You have any thoughts on that? 'Cause I know that was--
Speaker 2: I think, I think it's horrible, I think it's what we have seen in this community and in the state and across the country.  Namely whites fleeing to avoid integration and if that is what the country wants to promote I think it's gonna be bad for the country as a whole.  And the degree to which we can encourage people to be more respectful and tolerant of others who differ, the better off I think we all will be in this country.  And that's what integration has meant to me and one of the objectives we obviously have been trying to get better schooling for black kids and for poor kids, but people have been opposed to it.  And we have had enough white flight from the schools to avoid it, we are still having that.  We have a president who is advocating it with vouchers and other programs that are now in vogue and it's terrible but that's what we have been fighting over the years.  Either we're gonna have people able to live with each other or we've gonna have a divided America which I think is terrible.
Story_ID: 99878
Speaker 1: Well let me move on then maybe to other cases, too. There's one other case that's significant in Charlotte [North Carolina] was Duke Power Employment Case [Griggs v. Duke Power Co].
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of our employment discrimination cases that we were able to convince the U.S. Supreme Court required an interpretation of Title Seven that permitted, or prohibited a company from using a test that disproportionally affected blacks adversely.  What do we mean?  If blacks were taking a test and were performing more poorly than whites and if the test didn't measure one's ability to perform a job, the court found that objectionable and that's the principal holding in Griggs [v.] Duke Power [Griggs v. Duke Power Co].  We had a company that said it was employing a test to determine who should be able to operate machines and this electricity generating facility.  We had a number of whites with high school diplomas or less, we had a number of blacks with high school diplomas and--or less and the company was simply treating them differently and it said it employed it's testing after the Title Seven became effective and so for those whites who got on the machines before the act, it was like they were grandfathered into those jobs.  And blacks who were there when those whites were moved into those jobs simple were not able to get out of those jobs.  The coal handling jobs they were in. And the company said, I mean the courts said that was not permissible under the act and directed relief, and it was a very pervasive ruling because it cut across employment practices and other practices across a number of areas including things like who should get admitted to Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] or to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or who should be able to work in particular jobs or even how you decide what programs you can or should promote and those you shouldn't.  If the programs have a dispropiate adverse affect on minorities then you ought--have to justify.  And we are still really arguing about the effects of Griggs [v.] Duke Power.  It's involved and the affirmative action cases that will be argued in the Supreme Court in a few days.  Can you employ some criteria for admission to a school that only disproportionally affects a racial group or an ethic group without having to demonstrate that those criteria really measure one's ability to do well in school.  And so we will see what the Supreme Court does with it.
Story_ID: 99879
Speaker 1: Now there was a-- you, I've read that you reflected on some of the changes here in Charlotte [North Carolina] and for the most part you think that Charlotte's made some positive change in the last, since 1964?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm, mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And there's one particular incident I read about, about a man had a barbeque place in New Bern [North Carolina] he was sued by the Legal Defense Fund, or sued by the--
Speaker 2: Not serving the black people.
Speaker 1: --refusal to serve black people.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Sure, it a thing we called Moore's Barbeque.  Moore's Barbeque operated a major barbeque facility in New Bern and would not--Mr. Moore would not serve black people or allow black people to come into his restaurant.  And Title Two was passed that prohibited discrimination in places of public accommodation and we sued them.  And Judge Larkins had the case and he didn't-in order to come within the statue one had to demonstrate that there were products that traveled and interstate commerce and all that, and we had to go through and do that and fortunately we were able to do it and the Court directed Mr. Moore to integrate or open the place up and, I think he removed the seats and just served, just sold barbeque and people had to take the order and leave.  Now whether they've changed that today I don't know; in other words, whether they have seats in the restaurant, I don't know, but the initial response was simply to remove the seats and--
Speaker 1: So that nobody could sit down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, nobody could sit down.
Speaker 1: So he subsequently changed a little bit, didn't he?
Speaker 2: He personally?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's good you put a little bit, he did change a little bit.  He was adamant initially that he would not trade with black people and he changed somewhat later and agreed that it was the right thing to do.
Story_ID: 99880
Speaker 1: Okay. And subsequent to that, I don't know, some disgruntled people in New Bern bombed your car.
Speaker 2: That was--I don't know how much that was tied up with Moore's Barbeque, but at the time we were suing Moore's Barbeque we also sued the Craven County Public Schools and--for desegregation we also served an employer in Craven County [North Carolina] to challenge the employer's exclusionary practices of black people.  We all-- I think we sued the public housing in New Bern [North Carolina] that was maintained on a segregated basis so we had enough law suits down there to create some concerns.  But I think they have made some major strides in New Bern or Craven County, as well.
Story_ID: 99881
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell me about, there was a case in Durham [North Carolina] that you had sued the school board in Durham, I mean you were trying to consolidate the City of Durham with the county?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: School to integrate them and it just didn't work.
Speaker 2: Well we didn't win, we lost the case.  We had started a proceeding against Durham many years ago to first integrate Durham City Schools.  We later filed a law suit against Durham County to integrate the Durham County Schools and Durham City became largely black and Durham County was largely white.  It was like a school system eighty nine, ninety percent black surrounded by a school system that was eighty nine, ninety percent white.  And as typically happens the resources were going out of the city to the county for the schools and we also saw that we would never be able to get the kinds of schools that were needed in Durham City if Durham County remained segregated from or separate from Durham City.  So we started proceeding similar to the Detroit litigation to force the city in the county to merge and we thought we had enough evidence to make that kind of showing and the District Court didn't feel convinced and ruled against us and the Court of Appeals ruled against us and the Supreme Court wouldn't review it so particularly after the Detroit case and we later worked with groups in Duran City and Durham County to affect merger politically and the county commissioners and they political leaders in Durham encouraged the County and the City to merge and they are now merged.  And it think it's--the school system is better as a result.
Story_ID: 99048
Speaker 1: Okay. I've read about your commitment to legislation as a way to change, to make social change and I know that people always say, and this is, you hear it all the time and they would say it in the '60's [1960s] you can't legislate morality, you know, keep saying that, you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well I still think you can't legislate morality but you can encourage legislators to enact some legislation that will help them bring people together and in doing so you do encourage people to develop different respects, or different appreciations for others and it's that kind of thing.  It the same think that you can't dictate that somebody loves somebody through a court decision and you probably don't, but you can certainly do something to bring people together to encourage respect, and eventually you began to change attitudes.  I remember when I first came to Charlotte [North Carolina] and this community was rigidly segregated and we begin with some efforts to break down some barriers and to bring people together and it was watching attitudes harvest as Harvey Gantt ran for Mayor or as Fred Alexander and some of the others ran.  It was interesting looking even at people like Hugh McCall who used to be a CEO [chief executive officer] of Bank of America talking about why diversity was so important for businesses and others.  That's a major change from attitudes that existed just twenty, thirty, forty years ago.  Did it come about by legislation or by court decisions?  I think court decisions effected changes that made it possible but it was both of those attitudes to change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And protected people on some level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 99049
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were--you became Chancellor of North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At a certain point.  Now I don't want to skip anything, but is there any cases you would like to mention that we haven't discussed?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  I guess we had some interesting cases like Albemarle Paper Company v. Moody or like Coppedge v. Franklin County Board of Education or like the NCTA v. Asheboro City Board of Education.  We had some, a lot of interesting case that have affected change, but we wanted to move on with the interview (laughter) and get through with it.
Story_ID: 99050
Speaker 1: Okay, well how did you become Chancellor of North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well the school had some problems and including a gentlemen who was accused of misusing federal moneys that came into the university. And we had some problems with what the president of the university system considered mismanaging t funds and we had lost a reputation in the community and there was a need for someone to come in to help revive the reputation of the school and to help bring some order and business organization to the school.  And I think the president then thought that I had had enough activities in the community and across the country to bring some respect to the way that we operated and some integrity to the program and he encouraged me to come, to do that and to leave the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund to do that.  And I had the long affiliation with NCC [North Carolina Central University], it was my alma mater and I wanted to see it grow and prosper and I agreed to come and do it.
Story_ID: 99051
Speaker 1: Okay. Now I think I left something out in the chronology that was you being the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund, you followed Mr. [Jack] Greenberg right?
Speaker 2: Yes, mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Jack Greenburg. As the third--
Speaker 2: Director-Counsel as we called it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you did that for how many years?
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: Eight years?
Speaker 2: Yeah it did that from 1984 through 1992.
Speaker 1: Now what are the highlights of those years?
Speaker 2: Those years were primarily trying to preserve what we have been able to gain.  We had the Reagan years and a major assault on the judicial precedents that had been established.
Speaker 1: Reagan [President Ronald Reagan] was not for affirmative action, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He was against it.
Speaker 2: He was against it.  And we had--he was not for busing of students to integrate schools.  In fact there was the beginning at least a major retreat on a lot of the Civil Rights things that had been accomplished beforehand including Title Two, the public accommodation section, Title Seven, employment discrimination section, the schools as we mentioned, voting rights among others.  So it was a major effort to try to preserve what we had.  We did make some changes that helped to improve some opportunities, for example in voting rights we talked about establishing districts that would enable blacks to elect a representative of choice and through that effort we were able to get, gee, over forty blacks elected to the State, to the Federal Congress and Senate.  We had a number of blacks elected to State elected positions and that was a major step during that era.  We also had some further favorable development with school desegregation and with employment segregation.  The Supreme Court had been encouraged by the Reagan Administration to cut back on some of the employment desegregation decisions and the court did in 1989 and we were able to get the Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1991 that restored some of the law as it was before the Supreme Court's '89 [1989] decision and that was helpful.
Speaker 1: Yeah, significant, yeah.
Story_ID: 99052
Speaker 1: Tell me when you--are you-- from what I understand, and correct me if I'm wrong, that you are getting ready to direct University of North Carolina's Civil Rights Law Center [University of North Carolina School of Law Center for Civil Rights, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], is that--or have you begin to do that?
Speaker 2: I've begun doing that already we established a Center for Civil Rights and during last school year.  We had our first conference in August that turned out very well, I may say, was on re-segregation on the public schools and we did it in conjunction with the Harvard Education Project, Civil Rights Project, and with Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  We also had, what is it, Minnesota, with john powell [HM], got involved with that.  It was a great conference.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him.
Speaker 2: You did, yeah.  He's a good man. And we sponsored this conference and there is a lot of interest in whether schools will be re-segregated.  But the Civil Rights Center itself is getting off the ground and we got our first grant the other day from Z. Smith Reynolds [Foundation] and we look forward to it becoming a viable entity on the campus at Chapel Hill [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 99053
Speaker 1: Okay.  Having being involved as a Civil Rights Attorney for these many years, do you see Civil Rights as the number one, or one of the major crises in life here in the United States, or is there something else?
Speaker 2: Well there are obviously retreats.  I think with President [Ronald] Regan and then Bush [President George H. W. Bush] and others there were efforts to just cut back on emphasis on civil rights and just assume that race was no longer a problem.  And that is a major effort underway now.  At the same time we continue to see a number of the problems that affected black people or people of color over the years.  Still very active and we have to address it. The problem is bringing Civil Rights activists together to deal with it.  Is it gonna be the same as in the 1960s? I doubt it.  I have also been asking myself whether people really want to learn to live with each other or whether we can expect black and white people or black and brown people or all of us to really want to be tolerant and respectful of others.  And I know...I know that I won't change in my belief that it's absolutely essential that we do and I hope that others will believe the same and we will continue working toward that but it is gonna be a major challenge and it's gonna be worse now that we have an administration that is as hostile to civil rights or equal opportunities as we have.  We have efforts to appoint people to the bench will, I think, cut back on the rights on people that have been able to obtain.  I have been appalled at the--we would be able to appoint and confer a person to the Supreme--Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals who is openly hostile to treating people fairly and equal.  I don't know what the Supreme Court is gonna look like five years down the road and if people can't turn to an entity like the court system to get what they believe to be fairness and justice then I don't know where else they turn and I don't know what kind of peace and harmony we can expect from our country under those circumstances.
Story_ID: 99054
Speaker 1: Along that line I couldn't help thinking of Justice Clarence Thomas, what are your thoughts about him and what are your thoughts about the Supreme Court as it is composed?
Speaker 2: Well I think it's very insensitive to the problems that poor people and problems that the minorities bring to the court.  I was really appalled that the court would even get involved in the election, but then I heard that there were some justices who were actively involved and who wanted to make sure that the right person got the presidency and they would ignore all precedents and make sure that happened. It's gonna be interested to see what the court does with the president's [President George W. Bush] war on the individuals we claim are our rebels or trying to tear up the country or destroy the country.  We in the process will abandon all protections of the Constitution to carry on that war and it's frightening.  I hope that we will sort of collect our senses and sort of look at what we're doing to ourselves and to people and try to make--or preserve what we have been able to establish here in this country, but it's gonna be a fight and sometimes people are more interested in making sure that blacks are kept in place than in making sure that everybody is treated fairly.
Story_ID: 99055
Speaker 1: Sir, what do you--you look back at your years, what do you consider your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know.  I hope that I have helped open up some opportunities for people and I believe that I have.  I hope that we've opened up some opportunities for folk in education.  We've seen it; it isn't through all court decisions, a lot of it is through this negotiations and discussions.  We've opened up some employment and we've opened avenues for public accommodation and more importantly for me, we have been able to encourage others to get involved to make sure that opportunities are open for others who come by so what legacy I hope it's one that shows that we have really done something to make it possible for others to succeed.
Speaker 1: Sir, your mother [Matilda Bruton Chambers] is still alive right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were telling me she's in her nineties?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: She was at least fifty percent responsible for you to do what you were able to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how is she--is she proud?
Speaker 2: Oh sure.  I think she is and I see her fortunately quite, almost every day now and she has gone with me to some of the programs that have--where I been given some recognition including the one the other day where I received the North Carolina award and she's been quite proud of that.
Story_ID: 99056
Speaker 1: Now you have reputation of keeping cool under fire.  Have you given any thought to how you would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I don't really worry about it.  Again I hope that we're opening up some opportunities for people.  I think we have.  I hope we can continue doing that and I know that no one will be able to do very much and have everybody supportive and singing praises, but, and I therefore like to go ahead and do what I think can be done to help people and forget about the rest of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99057
Speaker 1: Now is there--Has there-- for the future, I mean, have-and I guess I'm asking this, I guess in retrospect too, have you ever been offered a judgeship, or have they ever suggested that you run for office or--?
Speaker 2: Well all of the above.  I am first not interested in a judgeship, I did at one point completed an application for the commission that was looking for candidates for consideration for the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. Other than that, I--and that was back quite a few years and I ended up in that process telling the commission members that I really supported another person for the judgeship.  I have been encouraged to run for office but I made it clear I'm not interested in running for office.  You know, I think that I can do more out of that arena and I just rather be free to do what I can do to, to help.
Story_ID: 99058
Speaker 1: Do you see many young lawyers focusing on Civil Rights these days?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I--more than people now because the same avenues for getting involved in Civil Rights are not necessarily there today.  The focus isn't there the people aren't thinking that much about it.  But there are a number of young lawyers who do wanna take on some of these Civil Rights issues and are taking on the Civil Rights issues.  We are continuing to encourage more lawyers to get involved with it.  One of the reason we are in with the Center for Civil Rights at Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina School of Law Center for Civil Rights, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] is that it offers us the opportunity for encouraging other lawyers to become involved in Civil Rights and it isn't necessarily that important that one take on a mantel as one did back in the '60's [1960s] as a cooperating attorney with the Legal Defense Fund.  We have some Civil Rights litigants now with some of the major law firms in the country.  We have some of the professors at major law schools who are doing Civil Rights work.  And one can get involved in this area of Civil Rights from different vantages than one had to do back in the 1960s and '70s [1970s].  And it's being done.
Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for young lawyers who are thinking about going into law?
Speaker 2: I think the best advice or any of them is to first make sure that they are prepared to practice, know the law, know how to use it and then dedicate one's self to using it to improve the lives of people.
Speaker 1: Thank you sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
