Story_ID: 5740
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer, and Zachary Houston is observing.  Today's interview is taking place on Tuesday, June 15 at 2112 Constellation Way in Finksburg--.
Speaker 2: 2912.
Speaker 1: 2912 Constellation Way, in Finksburg, Maryland.  Now, if you would, Dr. Cortada, please, for the record, tell us your full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Rafael L. Cortada, R-A-F-A-E-L, middle initial is "L", C-O-R-T-A-D-A.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what the initial is for?
Speaker 2: Leon.
Speaker 1: And could you also tell us your date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: February 12, 1934 in Columbus Hospital, New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Story_ID: 5741
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Rice and beans.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I have one.
Story_ID: 5742
Speaker 1: Please tell us a little bit about your mother, starting with her name, where she was born and where she grew up and how she grew up?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother was born Yvonne Benier, Bernier.
Speaker 1: Could you please spell that?
Speaker 2: Yes, B-E-R-N-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: And Benier?
Speaker 2: And her mother was Clara Hernendez [Bernier].  My mother was born in Trinidad.  Her mother had come over to Trinidad from Venezuela and my mother grew up in Panama.  My grandfather [Luis Augustus Bernier] was a footloose civil engineer.  So he went through the Caribbean doing various civil engineering kinds of jobs, including by the way, the Panama Canal.  So she grew up in Panama and actually, after that job was completed, that's how the family came to the United States, through Detroit.  In fact, Colonel [George Washington] Goethals I think was able to facilitate my grandfather's getting a contract to do a feasibility study for the Detroit subways.  So the port of entry for us is Detroit.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about her growing up, what life was like for her growing up, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, it was so very different from the life we're leading in New York that she constantly drew contrasts.
Speaker 1: Like, can you give us some examples, share some stories with us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up in a multilingual environment.  She herself spoke, French, Spanish, English and something called Potaw [Potawatomi] that she spoke with my grandmother.  And, we, of course, I learned Spanish as my first language, but later on, I learned English and became monolingual.  So she felt we really had lost something by not being more bicultural.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: A very determined person, a disciplinarian.
Story_ID: 5743
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your father, starting with his name, his background, where he was born, and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: His name was Rafael Cortada.  All of the men in my family are named Rafael.  His father was named the same because we only have one male per generation for about the last hundred and fifty years.  So my son and my grandson are both named Rafael.  He was born Ponce, Puerto Rico.  His father was Rafael Cortada who was a rum distilling engineer.  And his mother, Maria Forgas was a teacher.  And he was orphaned early, probably around the age of four or five and was raised by his sisters.  And he came to the United States in about 1921 after he had served in the U.S. army in World War I.
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about growing up, what life was like for him as a little child, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: He said it was very hard.  He called Puerto Rico a poor house.  And he was very much of an American patriot and a Republican.  We really used to butt heads about that.
Story_ID: 5744
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your ancestry?  How far back can you trace your ancestry, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I am pretty familiar with my grandparents, although I only knew actually one of the four.  And I know virtually nothing about anything before that.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your maternal grandparents, starting with their names, just whatever you can tell us.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, my maternal grandparents married in Venezuela and my grandmother's [Clara Hernendez Bernier] family was involved in politics.  And they had to leave the country very quickly.  One of her uncles had become dictator, and he ran into real problems, and the family had to get out.  So the family migrated from there to Trinidad.  And we still have relatives by the way in both Trinidad and in Venezuela.
Speaker 1: And what were your grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: Luis Augustus Bernier and Clara Hernandez Bernier.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Bernier for us?
Speaker 2: B-E-R-N-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  What can you tell us about your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: They married in Ponce, Puerto Rico and lived in Ponce.  My grandfather was a fun-loving, bad boy.  And my grandmother was a teacher, and a rather straight-laced person.  And my grandfather's infamous among all the women in the family, and it's mostly women left in the family.
Speaker 1: Tell us some of the stories.
Speaker 2: Well, they raised my father [Rafael Cortada], and my father was considered kind of (unclear).  Ponce was a rather small town then.  So his sisters actually shipped him off to New York where there was another sister waiting to take him over.  So he was always viewed as kind of incorrigible.  So the old ladies in Puerto Rico have always looked at me very carefully watching for alcoholism, womanizing and all the things about which they warned my wife [Selonie Head] before we married (laughter).
Speaker 1: And he was a rum distiller, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, Puerto Rico grows sugar cane.  And the island produces not only sugar for export, but from the sugar, they create, they produce rum.  In fact, there's a brand of rum, Barrilito, which is only drunk on the island.  And the islanders love their own product.  I think that is part of the culture.  I enjoyed wine with meals from the time I was four years old.
Story_ID: 5745
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: In New York City, when I started school around the age of six, my grasp of English was marginal, and I spoke mainly Spanish, but I could also read Spanish.  So the school system in 1940, '41 [1941] didn't really know what to do with me.  Here was a kid who could read and write another language and couldn't do English.  I have no recollection of learning English.  It came rather quickly.  But I do remember kind of stumbling along in the early days, learning the language, even though at home they use both.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what daily life was like in your house as a child?
Speaker 2: My mother [Yvonne Bernier] and father [Rafael Cortada] both went to work.  I went to school, and I came home--and until 1945, I spent the rest of that day with my grandmother [Clara Hernendez Bernier], my maternal grandmother.  And she kind of put me to work reading, listening to the radio and basically spending time with her.  Then when my par--when my parents came home, they would kind of review my homework and get me ready for the next day.  So it was really very much of at school and at home, they didn't allow me to run the streets the way kids do today.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your parents do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a seamstress, and my father was a postal clerk.
Speaker 1: And can you share some other stories with us, like holidays and special occasions, what were they like in your house?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in several houses in the Bronx.  And, well, from Manhattan the family moved to the Bronx, and we finally settled in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s] with three apartments, two aunts and my mother living in three different apartments in one building in the Bronx.  So I used to kind of go through the different apartments having meals in different ones and so on.  And it was very warm, very secure.  Everybody had jobs, everybody worked.  And there was a straight and narrow.  You were expected to do certain things, perform--my mother was very insistent.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your siblings names and birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: I only had one sibling.  I was born in 1934.  In 1925, a sister was born, Natalia.  And her married name is Natalia Eveleno.  She passed away in 2001.
Story_ID: 5746
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about--do you remember the name of the street that you lived on and can you describe your block and what your community was like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember all the streets.  Prospect Avenue is a very large boulevard in the Bronx.  And it was a large, oh, maybe seventy-five to a hundred apartment buildings with a large courtyard in the middle.  And there was an elevator, and basically, we had three family members living in three different apartments, one on the first floor, one on the third, we were on the fifth.  And I had keys to all the different apartments.  So I was really a latchkey kid.  My grandmother [Clara Hernendez Bernier] lived on the third floor with one of my aunts.  And basically, I moved through the apartments.  One aunt was in show business, so she was in and out of town.  The aunt on the first floor had two sons, my cousins.  And they were fun guys.
Speaker 1: And what was the community like?  What was--?
Speaker 2: The community, as I look back now, I realize--I had no sense of poverty at that point, but it was hard-working poor people.
Speaker 1: And do you remember like any particular stores and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I remember the 845 Club which I was told never to go near, don't even walk by it.  In the days before drugs, a raunchy bar was about the worst you had in the community.  Otherwise, you had all of the normal retail stores (dog barking).
Speaker 1: We were talking about your block in your community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this, Dr. Cortada, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Prospect Avenue is a large urban boulevard, but it ended in Crotona Park.  And I grew up with a Great Dane, Duchess.  So we had a Great Dane in this apartment.  But Duchess was my constant companion, and we would walk about eight blocks up to Crotona Park, and it was there that I'd meet other boys.  And we'd play ball.  And Duchess would normally sit on the bench or by the bench and at some point in the game, it would become irresistible to her to get into the game, and she'd run and get the ball, slobber all over it (laughter).  But basically, I grew up accompanied by that dog, and through Prospect Avenue, again, you had all the retail stores.  So you had Victor's at the corner, a grocery store, or a bodega as it became.  It was very multicultural.  You had basically black American, West Indians and the beginnings of a Hispanic community.  And you still had the Irish and some Italians in the area.  So it was very, very bicultural and very mixed.
Speaker 1: And what sights, sounds and smells remind you--any smells in particular?
Speaker 2: The smells from the grocery stores, the Italian sausage, the unique smell that you get from some of the Spanish food, the rice, the beans that they would sell in big barrels and so on.
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Traffic, very urban, very accustomed to that.  In fact, too quiet kind of makes me uncomfortable.
Story_ID: 5747
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years.  What was the name of your elementary school, if you remember and what was it--what was elementary school like for you?
Speaker 2: I started in PS-99, then went to PS-39.  Colin Powell was about a year behind me in PS-39.  We didn't know one another.  We met years later.  From there, I transferred to St. Anthony's [School] where I had Maryknoll nuns.  And the nuns kind of pushed me very, very hard.  I was a lazy kid who would be content to kind of slide by and play baseball in the summer and basketball in the winter.  Those were the two seasons, but the nuns were relentless in pushing.  And they also made, you enabled you to play sports.  So I was taught a hook shot by Sister Xavier Marie, who would hold her skirt with her right hand and throw the elbow in trying to show you how to, (chuckle) how to play the pivot.  So the nuns were very much involved with us.  From there, my parents chose to send me to [St. Francis] Xavier High School, which was an elite private school and the last place I would have chosen for myself.  I wanted to go to Cardinal Hayes [High School].
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit more about elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you and what kinds of--how did you spend your day and what kinds of things were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I was very interested in sports, not very good at them.  Interest in girls, not at all.  I was a little bit shorter than most kids because when I went from the public school to the Catholic school, they moved me up a grade.  So, for example, I got out of high school at the age of seventeen.  So I was six months or a year younger than all the boys in my elementary school class.  So the girls were desirable, attractive, but unachievable for me (chuckle).  But basically, I tried to perform for them, you know, to catch their attention.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers and was there any particular teacher in elementary school who influenced you?
Speaker 2: Sister Rose Benigna who was a benign human being, very kind, and no matter what I did, she told me, you can do better.  To me a B was really about all you'd want to spend time achieving, and she would always say, you could do better, you could do better.  This essay, rewrite this ess--you can do better.  And I didn't mind her pushing me.  When she complained to my mother [Yvonne Bernier], that was unfair baseball (chuckle).
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, during the elementary school years, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yes. I wanted to play third base for the [Los Angeles] Dodgers, and that was about it.
Speaker 1: And did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What were those experiences like?
Speaker 2: Roman Catholic church in Latin, very formal, so church was something that you dressed up for, and the whole family would go.  We didn't have a car, so we kind of walked over to St. Anthony's.  And my mother made sure that I sat there for the whole Mass, and that you knelt properly.  You couldn't kind of lean back, and basically, you had to pay attention.
Speaker 1: What about junior high school, what junior high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Didn't go to junior high school.  Catholic school then ran K [kindergarten] through eight.  So I went through eight years of, of parochial, four years of public school, four years of elementary--of Catholic elementary school, and then I went directly into high school as a ninth grader.
Speaker 1: And during the junior high school, school years--.
Speaker 2: Seventh and eighth grades, yes.
Speaker 1: --Seventh, seventh and eighth grade, who were some of your friends, and who was influencing you at this time in your life?
Speaker 2: At that time, New York City was a marvelous place because I had all kinds of friends.  I remember a Hungarian Jew that I ran around with.  Dennis Edwards was a Jamaican kid who played first base on our team.  Arthur Eisencher was a kid who had catcher's equipment.  Therefore, he became the catcher on our team, even though he couldn't catch.  And his mother didn't want him catching because he played the piano.  But basically, a wide range of kinds of people and became very comfortable with them.
Speaker 1: And at this time, were you thinking that you would do something different with your life or--?
Speaker 2: Never gave it a thought.  Again, New York City wasn't what it is now.  At the age of eleven or twelve, I had access all over the city.  We can go to a Yankees game which was very nearby.  Right across from it was a polo ground, so you can go to a Giants game, although I rooted for the Dodgers.  When you really wanted to pray, pray to the shrine, you took the subway and went to Ebbets Field.  And you get into a game for fifty cents, seventy-five cents.  So we really had the whole city, but we also used all the city libraries.  We were very familiar with the museums, the aquariums and things of that sort.  So the city was wonderful.  And it was considered to be safe.
Story_ID: 5748
Speaker 1: What about high school?  What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: St. Francis Xavier High School, which was military.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: It was a Jesuit school, academically very demanding.  In terms of the student population, basically, elite, Irish kids from the Long Island suburbs, with a few Italian kids barely tolerated, and I think I might have been the first black or Puerto Rican to go there.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: Very lonely.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: But it made a better man of me because I really decided I didn't need friends, didn't need of those guys, and basically, I could compete with them.  There were also other minorities in my entering class--it was 1947.  I knew that there were two black kids there and one other Puerto Rican.  Oddly enough, we didn't communicate much with one another until later in life.  So we were quite isolated from one another.  But the high school experience was very intense.  As I said, it was military so you were graded on a military basis.  And you were evaluated and awarded a rank as a senior.  So it was quite demanding, and I really learned how to operate and live on my own, without depending on others, most important role was not depending on peers.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what kind of high school student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I learned at that point that I can compete very well, cause as I said, these were elite kids, and when you came back in September, they talked about their trips to Europe and what have you.  But I was getting better grades than they were, and I was in the honor section.  They actually, unashamedly grade peo--actually, identified an honor section.  They didn't worry about the feelings of other people.  So I was in the A group.  So the group that I was in was really the fastest of all the competition on, on the--in school; only eleven hundred boys and the Jesuits knew you by blood type, by eye color and by name.  So you really couldn't get away with much.
Speaker 1: And what kind of young man were you?  What kind of, of person were you at this age in high school?
Speaker 2: Highly militarized.  It was a military high school, and I wanted to excel so I learned how to do what I was told, being a Jesuit school, they also asked--trained you to challenge what are being told.  So it wasn't really a matter of blind obedience.  So you were taught to use logic.  But once you took on a project, you were taught to finish it, do it right and do it to the limit of your capabilities, not somebody else's standards.
Speaker 1: And at this time, were your dreams and aspirations still the same or were they starting to change?
Speaker 2: Not crystallizing.  I was really not even pretty much aware of the world beyond New York City at that time.  And things were very nice.  I never thought I'd leave New York.  Why would you?
Speaker 1: Were you thinking you would go to college?
Speaker 2: That was always an assumption.  With my mother [Yvonne Bernier], I couldn't think otherwise.
Speaker 1: Where were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: I was thinking of playing baseball.  And I even had a, a crack at a contract when I was seventeen.  And my--I couldn't sign because I was seventeen, and when I approached my mother about it, I got a death threat.  So that was the end of that (chuckle).  She didn't value sports.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: Gerald Werkell was a Latin teacher.  Mr. Cunningham taught me geometry.  There was a Fahey who was a track coach, and coached baseball, some very good people.  And again, even though it was a racially charged situation, we weren't allowed to think of it as such.
Speaker 1: And did--and who was influencing you at this stage in your life?
Speaker 2: My mother, very much of an influence, and she believed that men should perform, men should work, you know, and do your best and what have you.  And I really had to answer to her.
Speaker 1: And how would, how did you spend your time?  What kinds of things did you enjoy doing?
Speaker 2: Well, at Xavier, you've got three hours of homework per night.  And with my parents, with my mother on my back, on my case, you really had to do that, at least that.  Beyond that, I liked to play sports whenever I could.  But much of my time was being taken up in school, and with sports activities after school.  So if I got home at 5:00 o'clock, it was a matter of have dinner and then go to the books.
Speaker 1: Were you a member of any clubs or sports teams in high school?
Speaker 2: Intramural teams, that was about all.
Speaker 1: What about clubs in high school?
Speaker 2: Baseball team.  I had no interests beyond sports.
Story_ID: 5749
Speaker 1: As you were getting closer to making the decision about where you would go to college and what you would do with your life, what were thinking you would do with your life?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I considered was the priesthood.  And, of course, I passed that up very quickly.  That was a passing thought, and I let it pass very quickly.  But I liked the Jesuits very much.  Economically, I couldn't afford to leave New York City, but again, you don't have to leave New York City.  Everything is already there.  So one of the schools that the Jesuits tried to channel, channel their better students to was Fordham University which is right in the Bronx.  So I was awarded a one-semester scholarship that at least enabled me to get into Fordham.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Fordham?
Speaker 2: Well, to begin with, I became a different kind of student when I started college.  I had to pay for it myself, so I began working four to six hours a night in the post office, from freshman year onward.  And basically, again, it became a matter of school, homework, work, back to school.  But there's some advantages.  I was able to accumulate some cash.  I was able to buy a car when I was eighteen.  Tuition was only two hundred and fifty dollars a semester.  So I kind of saved that up myself, being paid a dollar seventy-five an hour at the post office.  So the college years were very full.  Again, they were filled with my activities without depending on peers or anyone else.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things did you enjoy doing, other than working and going to school?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed--began to enjoy music much more, and I began enjoying socializing with other people much more.  I really began to enjoy meeting young ladies at that time.  So I would say that my early college years were filled with the eternal quest for women who were attainable.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what kinds of classes you enjoyed most in college?
Speaker 2: I went there initially with the view to becoming a math major.  And I very quickly decided that I wouldn't want to do any kind of work that involved math for the rest of my life.  And one of the teachers that I liked most early on was a history lecturer named Sam Telphier (ph.).  So from that I decided to consider history, but I also seriously considered economics.  And when my mother [Yvonne Bernier] began pressing me in sophomore year to be a maj--what my major would be, I tried economics with her, but in her universe, economics meant home economics.  So she thought her son had been going to college learning to cook.  And I couldn't quite get her to buy economics.  So I said, history, and that was okay.
Story_ID: 5750
Speaker 1: We were talking about your years at Fordham [University], and just tell me a little bit about what it was like being at a university in New York in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: These were the '50s [1950s].  So things were much more calm.  Basically, you find roles are much more defined, and to a very large degree, being a student at that time was one of being able to be quiet and to chill out.  If you remember what was going on in the country at that time Joseph McCarthy was active and so on.  This was the generation that did not protest, okay.  So I think that's very significant.  We were just really becoming aware of what society, what the country was all about at that time; very deeply involved in studies.  During this time, I really began more and more groping and trying to define myself.  I evolved toward the major in history in which I began limiting and deciding the directions in which I go professionally.  One of the areas in which I excelled, largely because of my background at [St. Francis] Xavier [High School] was in the Reserved Officers Training Corps [ROTC].  Cold War period, everybody had a military obligation.  If you didn't do ROTC, you were subject to being drafted.  So I went into ROTC.  When I finally graduated, I was a distinguished military graduate and was awarded a regular army commission.  And as I approached my twentieth and twenty-first year, I began thinking that the military might be my career.  That was one that my father [Rafael Cortada] was very happy about, and my mother [Yvonne Bernier] was quite unhappy about.  She had visions of me doing something more productive in the human sense.
Story_ID: 5751
Speaker 1: After you graduated from Fordham [University], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: After a few months of play time, I immediately went into the army.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in the army?
Speaker 2: Reality hit.  For the first time, this boy was taken out of New York City and sent to Fort Benning, Georgia, Fort Benning, Georgia in 1955.  You remember we're nine years away from the Public Accommodations Act.  The military was only one year from being a segregated army.  And here I am on this army post, a kid from New York City, meeting my first people from other parts of the country.  When I met my first Southerners, I was horrified.  And the music they listened to.  Being a second lieutenant, I found that most of the sergeants were World War II retreads and their respect for second lieutenants was very marginal.  So you had to learn very quickly how to enforce your will without being so overbearing about it that they got you hurt, cause sergeants really knew where things were.  So you really had to begin learning how to provide leadership to people who didn't respect you, didn't like you, probably wanted to get you killed, so you had to make yourself essential.  I completed things well at Fort Benning, was reassigned to the 77th regimental combat team, but I, at that point, decided I did not want to stay in the United States if it had to be Georgia, that I was likely to initiate the Cold War right there.  So I volunteered for service in any place that I can go.  I volunteered for the Operation DEW Line, the Distant Early Warning line, which would have put me in Greenland and I also volunteered for duty in Korea, which would have put me at the thirty--thirty-eighth parallel, just about the time that the fighting had ended.  Gone, they'd gone into a twilight war, and I was quickly reassigned and sent to Korea.
Speaker 1: What was Korea like for you?
Speaker 2: Again, more--.
Speaker 1: And what year was it?
Speaker 2: --reality.  This was 1955.  The fighting ended in 1953.  The cease-fire expired in 1954.  So it was kind of a twilight war.  And again, it was reality, seeing a foreign country for the first time, again, being with these same people I couldn't stand in the United States, suddenly being in a life or death situation with them in Korea.  And we suddenly find we could tolerate one another much better.  Basically, I found Southerners willing to accept leadership from anybody who would keep them alive.  So there were ways to earn their respect.  You learned how to rely on the sergeants.  It was a good experience.  And keep in mind, during this time, it wasn't a volunteer army.  You had a draft.  So your typical recruit might have anything from an eighth grade education to a university degree.  So it was a very different kettle of fish.  The American units in Korea were all at about half strength, and the other half was filled in with what they called Koreans Attached to the U.S. Army, KATUSAs.  So the infantry, platoon, and then the company that I commanded within about six months was fifty percent American, fifty percent Korean.  And I had to begin learning how to deal with people of a totally different language, culture and what have you.  And all of this is making me, as a kid, really who wanted to be back in New York, grow up very fast.
Speaker 1: What were some of the differences you saw in dealing with, you know, a whole new culture opposed to dealing with just different kinds of people, as at Fort Benning?
Speaker 2: A totally diff--well, different culture, you mean in terms of the Koreans?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The Koreans accepted people as people.  But they were looking at the way in which white Americans treated black Americans.  So they began adopting some of those values, but the Korean soldiers, KATUSAs in my company, they accepted and respect authority.  And to a large degree, at that point, I really had to learn how to provide leadership and exercise authority.  And as you look back to high school, this is what I'd been trained for since I was thirteen.  So it was really a matter of trial and error and of learning.
Speaker 1: Did you ever find that for some people, some people may have been a little bit more accepting due to your Puerto Rican heritage?
Speaker 2: In some cases, a Puerto Rican is more despised than anyone else because you find many black Americans don't like Puerto Ricans.  So it's a quadruple minority.
Story_ID: 5752
Speaker 1: After you left Korea, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Came back to New York City and began to looking forward to a year or two of useless drifting around.  I arrived home on a Saturday evening.  Sunday, I was able for the first time to have a drink with my father [Rafael Cortada].  And on Monday morning at 6:00 a.m. my mother [Yvonne Bernier] woke me up and said, get up.  I don't go to work and leave a grown man sleeping in my home.  She gave me breakfast, got me dressed, walked me to the subway with her, go find a job.
Speaker 1: And, and what happened?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: That was her expectation.  I went down to Columbia University and enrolled for a Master's.
Speaker 1: And what was your, what were your experiences like at Columbia?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I learned in the army was that I enjoyed teaching.  I enjoyed teaching the men about weapons, about tactics and what have you.  So I went down to Columbia to get a teaching license.  And I enrolled in a Master's program in that area to teach history.  Columbia was again a very different environment, grown up, much more professional.  It was a school of professional studies.  I was meeting and dealing with other teachers.  I had a different set of experience--experiences from them.  Many of them had been in the classroom.  I had just come immediately from college in the army.  But I began getting to know more and more people in teaching.  At that time also, I began enjoying graduate studies.  In fact, my first real job came about as a result of someone whom I met at Columbia who was my mentor for student teaching at Albert Leonard Junior High School in New Rochelle, Frank Agresta (ph.).  And he and I became friends from our time in Columbia together.
Story_ID: 5753
Speaker 1: After you left Columbia [University, New York, New York], what was next for you?
Speaker 2: Then I went to work in New Rochelle [New York].  And again, that was a stop that I thought I would be, would be at for life.
Speaker 1: And where were in New Rochelle?
Speaker 2: In New Rochelle, I taught at the high school.  I was there for seven years, enjoyed it tremendously.  And again, this is--these, these were the '50s [1950s], moving on toward the '60s [1960s].  Things were changing a wee bit.  The Civil Rights Movement was beginning.  The Cold War, intervention at Lebanon, things were very active around the world.  New Rochelle was just beginning to have a diversified student body.  And in the, one of the things that I noted was in the homogeneous grouping of students, you'd almost get the income and ethnics distribution of the school.  So in all of your College Prep I classes, you'd find basically white Jewish kids.  In your College Prep III classes, you'd find the Italians.  In the business classes, you'd find the Italian girls, and in the non-regents classes you'd find the black students.  And I began raising questions about this and what the vocations were.
Speaker 1: And that was back in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Right, that was starting in 1957.
Speaker 1: And do you think that things have, have changed a great deal today?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  New Rochelle was using homogenous grouping to avoid integration.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean just in general.  Do you think--I, I think you go to a high school, and you, you know, see who's in the college prep classes, who's in the vocational classes, that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, they had segregation by curriculum, right.  Now, we have segregation by school because you find that with white flight, with population movements of the suburbs further and further out, you find people are able to segregate themselves by communities.  So you go over here to Finksburg, and your elementary school will have no blacks; go to a elementary school in Baltimore, you'll find no whites.  So Brown v. the Board of Education is, in effect, undermined, which is, I think, precisely what some of our political leadership intended.
Speaker 1: And what do you think about Brown v. the Board of Education during, you know, its fiftieth anniversary?
Speaker 2: I think it missed the point.  Integration should never have been the goal.  I think desegregation should have been the goal.  And there's a world of difference between the two.
Speaker 1: In your opinion, what's the difference?
Speaker 2: In desegregation, you find people have choice in terms of where they go to school.  So you can have an all-black school, but it wouldn't be limited by law or necessarily by any other factor to one race.  For example, at Hastos Community College, to get, jump ahead of the story, we desegregated by curriculum.  The university [City University of New York] deliberately put its only radiological technology program at Hastos Community College in the South Bronx.  And ipso facto, it drew white students as well as students of every cultural group to the school in the South Bronx.  So there're ways to do it, but it was never done in a secondary school.  If you put a, the right curriculum at a given school, and use that as a magnet, you find students by curriculum will basically desegregate themselves.
Story_ID: 5754
Speaker 1: After spending several years teaching on the high school level--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --why did you decide that you wanted to teach on the college level?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time I also took on new responsibilities.  I met Selonie Head, and we were married in 1961.  And we had children, being good Catholic people, we had our first children, twins [Celia and Natalia Cortada] in 1962.  So while I was teaching in high school, I also took a second job teaching as a charter member of the faculty at Bronx Community College.  So I taught high schools during, during the day.  I took community college at night.  And other nights, I went to my doctoral program at Fordham [University].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like teaching at city, City University of New York, your first full-time college?
Speaker 2: That was part time.
Speaker 1: Oh, that was part time at City?
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was even harder because you just arrive at night.  You got to nail down your coat, and--.
Speaker 1: What were some of the differences you found in teaching high school students and college students?
Speaker 2: Tremendous difference.  Number one, I found that having learned how to teach effectively at high school, that made me a better teacher in college. Throughout my life, I've always been prone to hire somebody who had taught in a high school because what you have to learn there is selectively.  You can't do the brain dump and give a high school student everything you know.  So you have to be selective in what you teach and how you present it.  The same thing is useable in college.  What I liked about the college students is that they were older.  Many of them were adults, and they were very serious, and they were doing what I was doing.  They were going to school at night trying to improve themselves.  So a secretary might be in a nursing program, but required to take this random history course.  And I had to understand that this woman wants to be a nurse.  She's gonna give me the minimal amount of time and what have you.  How could I make this experience worthwhile for her?  So I really enjoyed that kind of a challenge, dealing with those kinds of students.
Speaker 1: And after, and then you went on to the University of Dayton, in Dayton, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: What was life like in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Again, more reality.  How to describe Dayton, Ohio in the early '60s [1960s]?  We had twin daughters at that point in time.  We found housing easily.  We lived in garden apartments.  Later on, we were able to buy our first home.  But in the shopping mall, somebody approached my wife and said what beautiful Korean children.  They would take the children for anything but black or Hispanic.  Another woman came up to me and said, oh, what lovely children.  I didn't know you had twins in your race.  So to a very large degree, being in Ohio is like being in a foreign country; hasn't changed at all.  The university was excellent.  The courses I taught were excellent.  I was really able to begin, begin learning my field, learning my discipline.  I was just finishing my doctorate so I was doing dissertation research on one hand while teaching a full load in history on the other.  I was focusing in on Caribbean and Latin American history, but being in Ohio was a real problem.  And Selonie and I questioned whether we wanted the children to have to grow up there.
Story_ID: 5755
Speaker 1: You took a slight detour and went to the State Department.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Why?  How did that change come about?
Speaker 2: A lot of idealism in government at that point.  If you remember [John F.] Kennedy came in with the--.
Speaker 1: Cause this is in 1966.
Speaker 2: Right.  John F. Kennedy started the Peace Corps.  John F. Kennedy's assassination made many more people feel, "What can you contribute?"  The war in Vietnam was a real mess.  The Civil Rights Movement was moving on.  And I really wanted to be much more involved.  I had a friend in foreign service, and he said, you really should try the Foreign Service.  You are theoretician.  Why not do it in reality?  So I was ultimately offered an appointment in the Foreign Service as a foreign service reserve officer.  And I enjoyed that stint very much.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what you did in the Foreign Service?
Speaker 2: I was a foreign--foreign intelligence analyst, and I worked basically in Cuba, Haiti, Dominican Republic and the West Indies associated states.  And that really involved simply analyzing intelligence information from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], Defense Intelligence Agency, the newspapers and what have you and drawing up analyses of events in those various countries.  Very interesting work.  And the State Department, though, like typical of--typical government agency, could not leave you in an area of competence.  So at some point in 1965, I was transferred to work on Middle Eastern affairs, an area where I had no language skills and very little competence.  In fact, I was the intelligence desk officer during the Six Day War.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the differences you saw in terms of Middle Eastern affairs and Caribbean and African countries?
Speaker 2: Middle Eastern affairs were colored by the fact that you had, number one, Israel, very aggressively moving toward nuclear weapons on the one hand and the presence of oil.  Toward the Caribbean and Latin America, you find--I found that the United States had pretty much of a laissez-faire, ignored attitude, if it doesn't bite.  And basically, the American state department wouldn't interested in an embassy until there was an assassination attempt.
Speaker 1: And were you being gratified by this work?  Was this work all that you had hoped it would be?
Speaker 2: It was gratifying on one level.  On another level though, I began to look at a foreign service career.  And at that time, the foreign service, I think, had about 6,000 people.  There're only about 13,000--thirteen blacks and no Latinos.  So I didn't see much of a career option there.  I did apply to go overseas, for an overseas assignment.  And I felt that would improve my--and enhance my ability to go overseas.  That, though, involved the physical exam of my wife [Selonie Head] and each of the three children which were scheduled 7:00 o'clock one morning.  And my wife tested with high blood pressure.  And, of course, she got three children prepared to go to a 7:00 o'clock doctor's appointment, I wonder why her pressure was high?  In short though, I was declared ineligible for overseas assignment, which was a career killer.
Story_ID: 5756
Speaker 1: Were you missing teaching at all?
Speaker 2: Well, I was doing some teaching.  I taught at Howard University in Caribbean Studies while I was in the State Department.  And I enjoyed that course very much.  And in 1968, they were opening a new school in Washington, D.C. called Federal City College.  So just as a lark, I floated an application to Federal City College and lo and behold I was hired.  I became a charter member of the faculty.
Speaker 1: And were you excited about the opportunity of teaching full time again?
Speaker 2: Very excited, very excited about teaching in Washington, D.C., very excited about teaching an adult, minority population, and very excited also about a school that had aspirations to provide a quality education.  A lot of idealism was involved at that point.
Speaker 1: And what was it like teaching students in the late '60s [1960s] in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: You're very conflicted.  You find the Civil Rights Movements had created a lot of unreasonable, unrealistic expectations in terms of black power and where education could take you.  It also created quite a conflict about what education should be.  Many people felt that education should really consist of total immersion in one's own blackness.  And having seen what I had seen in the army and in the State Department, I believed people had to be immersed in an effort to be competent.  So there was quite a bit of conflict involved.  I supported black studies on the one hand, but I was also considered a conservative because I believed language skills, computational skills, multilingual skills to be extremely important, and language skills beyond Swahili.  So we had bitter, bloody faculty battles about why a black person should study Arabic, Chinese or Russian, when Swahili is really what we should be doing.
Speaker 1: And when did you start becoming involved in, or start developing an interest in black studies?
Speaker 2: At that time.  In my dissertation studies which was on the government of Spain under Joseph Bonaparte from 1808 to 1814, I ran into a couple of things.  Number one, touched upon the Haitian revolution.  Number two, the Spanish empirical holdings and the Spanish empire.  And once you begin doing that, you begin running into the slave trade, which really colored these Spanish colonies.  And you begin running into the multi-racial societies that the Spaniards are building.  In fact, that's where I first encountered my last name in historical context.  But I began looking into Spain, but I also began looking into this much broader picture.  And to a degree, I think I was looking also at my own ethnicity as I looked at the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about how receptive your colleagues were, students were to learning about black studies.
Speaker 2: At Federal City College, very, very accepting.  The students--I can't say enough good things about them.  That first class was able, exceptional.  They were very serious, and they were willing to tackle tough jobs.  And the more demanding you were, the better they performed.  And in moving off into new discipline, which was quite controversial, and controversial within the faculty, students were willing to go in a new direction.
Speaker 1: And how do you think students back then benefited from learning about black studies?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they were the first generation which had--which had something that the generation now doesn't.  I find today's students are losing a sense of who we are, how we got here and what came before.  Those students really were looking at American history from a non-judgmental, but a factual point of view.  And when you come right down to it, I taught America about America, as a tremendous experiment in which all these different people are trying to perfect this thing.  And, yeah, things were very bad in the '60s [1960s], but look at where we started a hundred years earlier.  So you have to look at black studies from that point of view.  To a degree, I began teaching American History from the point of, you're looking at different ethnic groups.  So I integrated black studies into my American History class, but I also began looking at how the Irish got here, how the Italians got here, Jews got here.  It's a very interesting mosaic, and you're not focused on presidential elections, but you're really looking at America from the streets.  And I began struggling with developing courses from that point of view.
Speaker 1: And how do you think white students would have benefited from having the same type of infusion into their American history and history courses?
Speaker 2: They found their grandparents in there too.  You know, when we--when I taught, for example, about the draft riots in which Irish immigrants attacked blacks in New York City.  The people who attacked those blacks were the grandparents, great grandparents of some of the kids sitting in class.  And you can't be judgmental about it.  You know, you don't hold these kids liable but why were these people rioting?  Well, they'd just came out of starvation in Ireland, and here they are being sent off to fight a war over Africans that they didn't own.  You know, the onus of fighting that war fell on Irish immigrants, who really had nothing against anybody when they got here.  They wanted a job.  So, no, I found students to be very receptive.  One of the problems that I ran into, though, was with colleagues, because it's non-traditional.
Speaker 1: How did you overcome it?
Speaker 2: Probably never did.  I just did it my way (laughter).
Story_ID: 5757
Speaker 1: In 1974, you--after teaching at several other colleges in New York, you moved to [Metropolitan Community College] Minneapolis.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you and how did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: At Federal City as a rambum--Federal City College as a rambunctious faculty member, I began drifting into administration.  One of the things that the board had said, was, you broke it, you own it.  So I became at Federal City College an associate provost.  I moved on to City University of New York as a dean, became a vice president there.  And the next logical progression is the presidency.  And in 1974 I attended the Institute for Educational Management at Harvard [University], and I also began applying for presidencies.  And I was awarded one in Minneapolis at Metropolitan Community College, which at that time was the oldest, unaccredited public school in the United States.
Speaker 1: And what was life like for you in Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: Very pleasant.  It's a lovely city.  The college itself was, is a work in progress.  They didn't have accreditation, also didn't have a campus.  So I had the, the joy of being able, in my initial presidency, to begin planning a new building, which I'd never done before, began planning the funding of the new building, which I'd never done before and accreditation of an institution.
Speaker 1: And were you pleasantly surprised about Minneapolis and the attitudes there and the people there?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  It was a lovely city.  The climate is something let loose from Hades.  It's like hell frozen over, but I found the people to be very congenial.  Culturally, the city is very much alive, and the snow in the winter didn't keep people from doing things.
Speaker 1: And was there any resistance to having a minority president at the college?
Speaker 2: Very little that I, that I sensed.  You always got the grumbling during this time.  Racism is never far below the surface in America, but for the board, for the leadership of the community college system and for most of the faculty, there was no problem.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your accomplishments in your first presidency position?
Speaker 2: We got our first accreditation.  We got state approval for the funding of our first building and of our entire campus.  I had the joy of going through the city process to close a street so the campus abutted a park, which gave you a different kind of urban setting.  I was able to go through the planning process so that I could really visualize the building, cause I had seen the plans and basically, I was able, at that point, to get the beginning of the construction work done, buy the compression of the land--Minneapolis is built on peat moss.  So you can build, they've got to squeeze all the water out.  So for two weeks this compressor was out there pounding the dirt downward building what was in effect, gonna be a basement level.
Speaker 1: And did you find any difference in the students there in Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: Basically, poor white students, a lot of Native Americans.  I learned how to relate to the Native American community at that time.  They were a very significant group, and basically, whatever black population you have.  They were really all at the urban college.  Whatever minority presence was--in the state, was at that campus.
Story_ID: 5758
Speaker 1: In 1974 you also wrote and published your first book.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Right, I had been approached by colleagues with whom I'd worked at New Rochelle High School and at Smith College, and they gave me some leeway as to what I wanted to write about.  The series basically was in the field of education, but I chose to analyze black studies and draw a linkage between black studies and virtually every discipline.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your book, 'Black Studies in Urban Comparative Curriculum'.  Tell me a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's an attempt really to, interrelate ways in which the black aspect, for example, could be brought into the teaching of the social sciences, history, psychology, sociology, economics and so on.  At that time, people were really questioning.  They were using the laughing matter of black English and black math to try to say that this whole thing is a bogus activity with no intellectual honesty.  What I try to point out there is that if you don't include the black aspects of history, you're not really teaching history or psychology, etc., etc.  And I did that with virtually all of the fields, humanities, social sciences, sciences and so on.
Speaker 1: And were you surprised by any of your findings during the research?  Were you surprised at all?
Speaker 2: Very much so.  I was really--I shouldn't have been surprised, but I was troubled at the degree to which you find we have not been teaching the whole story.
Speaker 1: And how receptive were your professional colleagues and your professional peers to integrating this, you know, throughout curriculum?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  The book that I wrote was not respected.  And basically, people questioned the legitimacy of wanting to include this aspect in your, in your course.  Why is this legitimate?  Again, you could get very different courses.  I, I feel that if you don't look at the issue of race and slavery--up until 1865, this is the most tempestuous issue that existed in the United States.  In the late 1700s free blacks petitioned the Congress to live up to the Declaration of, of Independence.  Do you remember "All men are created free and equal in rights" that Jefferson wrote?  It was actually a petition that was sent to congress in 1789, and it was tabled every year until the 1830s.  It came up every year.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your thoughts thirty years later, after writing this book.  Are you satisfied that the black perspective is being integrated in curriculum enough throughout schools in the country?
Speaker 2: There's an improvement.  It's much more--not so much the black curriculum, but now they call it multi-cultural.  Well, anything that gets us off the dime is a step forward.  And I think it's very legitimate to say that there's a need to deal with Asians that come to this country.  I worked with Japanese in California, whose family had been here a hundred years, and they're viewed as foreigners and newcomers.  I met Hispanics, Mexican Americans whose family had lived in the California area for 400 years.  And they are in L.A. [Los Angeles] viewed as visitors.  Well, the United States expanded to them.  They didn't come to the United States.  So I think in going in a multi-cultural direction as long as it's honest and, and, you know, diverse, it's a step forward.  But if you'll notice the degree to which multi-cultural is being attacked today, and people call it bunk.  It's called bogus, all of the same attacks, but if you look at the world today, if we don't prepare people to deal with a much broader cultural base, you're not preparing people to live in this world.
Story_ID: 5759
Speaker 1: In 1977, you moved from Minneapolis to Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where you accepted another presidency at--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Baltimore, The Community College of Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your experiences in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Minneapolis was wonderful, but I kind of longed for a better climate.  My wife [Selonie Head] loved Minneapolis.  The kids loved Minneapolis.  They loved to ski, they liked the environment.  They liked the schools.  They could have settled there for, for life, but I kind of dragged the family on to Baltimore.  And what I liked about the city of Baltimore and still do is the fact that's it's a quintessential urban center.  It's diverse.  It's culturally rich.  It has problems, but it's got age.  It's also got texture, and the community college was a complex place, just moving on to develop a two-campus environment and undergoing a change of leadership.
Speaker 1: And do you think that community colleges in general in the '70s [1970s] were starting to change a little bit?
Speaker 2: Community colleges were creating a whole new range of opportunities for black Americans.  It's important to remember, for example, that Ho--that Howard [University] had a quota on the number of Washingtonians that they would admit.  And most of the historically black colleges, really didn't want any of the local people.  What they wanted to draw on was from the richer, broader black middle class around the country.  The community college is the one that allowed your local black striving middle class, working class to begin thinking about, about college education.  But the unfortunate breakdown is that the historically black colleges looked at the community colleges as competitors rather than as feeders.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the changes you, or did you see any changes in terms--in students in Minneapolis, in students in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Pretty much the same people, just a different color; low income, hardworking, underpaid, under-employed.  You had the older woman coming back, trying to develop a career after either a divorce or years of raising kids.  You had men who'd lost their jobs, you know, with the economic upheavals, community colleges give a great opportunity for retraining, much like the GI Bill.  So I really liked the adult nature of the population and the fact that a given class could run from 1865.
Speaker 1: And were you longing, though for--were you enjoying the presidency level at the community college or were your hoping to move on to a four-year traditional college?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  I liked the community college.  And I liked the competition that it had with the four-year school and developing the associate degree as a, as a legitimate objective.  I've always taken the position that you're better off going to community college and getting an associate degree.  At least then, you've got a piece of paper, than going to an historically black college and dropping out after two years, in which case you're just a college drop-out.  Also, I saw something in the community colleges that very few people see.  We actually had people with bachelor's degrees coming back to get technical studies.  So anywhere from five to ten percent of your class in any given community college was people who already had a bachelors or a master's degree, but they majored in English.  So they were in computer studies or they had majored in, in history, and they wanted to become nurses.  So you actually had that, that element.  So I very much enjoyed the community college, and I didn't feel any particular longing to move on to a four-year school.
Speaker 1: And after you left Baltimore, you went to Pepperdine [University]--?
Speaker 2: El Camino College.
Speaker 1: --in 1983.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like there on the West Coast?
Speaker 2: Well, El Camino College was a different kind of school.  It was 35,000 students when I got there, 200-acre campus, a student body that was so complex that no ethnic group had fifty percent of the population.
Speaker 1: What were some of the ethnic groups there?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was about twelve percent black, about fifteen percent Chinese, ten percent Japanese, twenty-five or thirty percent Hispanic, twenty, twenty-five percent white, a real rainbow.  The faculty coming from racist backgrounds in the '50s [1950s] really struggled with this, but the students kind of learned very much how to negotiate and divide the pie.  The students got there quicker than the faculty, but I really learned how to deal with a mega-institution, a place that had large amounts of money, had taxing authority, had a 200-acre campus that included a football stadium and two gymnasiums to take care of, that had the money to do whatever we wanted.  Our response to Title IX was to build a new gym for women, okay; and a five-member board who were chosen through the electoral process.  So you were chosen by that board, but you also had to look at how you affected their ability to get reelected.  And I also learned then how to begin evaluating people's ideological backgrounds.  And I learned that regardless of my own view, it's important to learn how to work closely and well with people who are reasonable, from another viewpoint.
Story_ID: 5760
Speaker 1: In 1987, you made it back to [Washington] D.C.--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where you took on the helm of the University of the District of Columbia.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: That was a family move.  Selonie's [Selonie Head] mother was still in the east.  Her father was suffering from emphysema.  And we wanted to spend more time with him.  Her aunt had cancer.  Her mother was dealing with both of these people.  One of our daughters was married and back here.  So when I looked at the opportunity of staying in California at a higher rate of pay or coming east and being closer to the family, U of DC was familiar.  I still felt a lot of ideals toward that place, so I accepted a real cut in pay to come back to UDC.
Speaker 1: And what was it like working in the city in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], what was that like working in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: The city was blossoming.  It was growing.  Marion Barry basically had a lot of momentum in the city at that time.  And he, himself, was a pleasant person to work with.  I could always get a phone call through to him and what have you.  The board was highly ideological.  They viewed themselves as the competitors of the president.  So that was something of a problem.  It was a different kind of board than what I'd dealt with.  In California, I had a very professional board.  In UDC, I had nine political bulls.
Speaker 1: And any changes in the students?
Speaker 2: The students were very similar.  Again, the Washington, D.C. population was mirrored in a student body.  One of the areas in which I tried to go though, that the board didn't provide support was that I felt that it was important in 1987 to begin reaching out to the growing Hispanic community.  The board didn't want to do that.  I also had received probings of interests of various third-world embassies.  It's interesting to note that a Foreign Service officer, coming here from China or from an African country can't afford to send his child to American university.  So I tried to offer UDC as a school of choice.  Most of the African embassies were ready to sign--were ready to come aboard.  The Chinese embassy was already sending us students.  The board objected very strongly to that.
Speaker 1: Why?  Did they feel like UDC should be more of a school for the people of the District of Columbia?
Speaker 2: They felt they were a historically black school.  They didn't even want the people of the District of Columbia because that includes the white population.  They wanted to be a black school.  And I question whether a black, when you look at the Republicans in Congress, is really where you want to go.  It seems to me you want to bring aboard ethnic groups will bring you some political influence.  One of the things I learned as a student of American history was progress in this country comes about through coalitions.  And no ethnic group was ever able to progress without coalitions.  And the board, though, didn't see it that way.  I think had UDC been willing to cooperate very closely with the embassies as I had proposed, and with the Chinese embassy as I proposed--incidentally, the Chinese ambassador and I were in Korea at the same time.
Speaker 1: Um--.
Speaker 2: I think UDC would be in a different place right now.
Speaker 1: And where do you think UDC is right now?
Speaker 2: Non-existent.
Speaker 1: Can--do you think that it has the potential to--?
Speaker 2: It's gone.  But at that time Mervyn [M.] Dymally from Congress was willing to support an expansion of the, expansion of the endowment, a doubling.  He was prepared to get the St. Elizabeth [Hospital] property for us if we agreed to put a community college on it, that would be part of the University of DC system.  In short, what I was trying to do in Washington was to develop UDC as a system of schools such as they have in New York City.  In New York City, the [City] University of New York is like tropical foliage.  [Rudolph W.] Giuliani couldn't get rid of it.  [George E.] Pataki can't get rid of it, and you can't close the colleges.  They tried to close Hastos [Community College, City University of New York] thirty years ago; couldn't do it.  I wanted to open a community college, Ana Costa, at St. Elizabeth's that would have drawn students away from Prince George's Community College, where many Washingtonians now go.  And it would have given a good feeder population to come up to university studies at UDC.  The board totally rejected this.  They felt that they wanted to go forward as they were.  And I saw them heading toward a wall.
Story_ID: 5761
Speaker 1: In all your years of teaching and working with students, what do you think has been, you know, the biggest change that you've seen in students?
Speaker 2: Looking from the '50s [1950s] to now, what I find is students have progressively lost two things.  Number one, intellectual self discipline and number two, persistence.  And I see that even in my own grandchildren.  If it's hard, don't bother me with it.  And I find our students compete very poorly against, for example, Iranians, Chinese, who just got here, people from virtually any other culture where you have intellectual discipline.  Our students don't want to tackle the tough jobs.  If you look, for example, at black PhDs, compare the number in your soft fields like education--not that those aren't valuable, but why don't we get some more in chemistry, physics, biology and engineering?
Speaker 1: Why, why don't you?  Why do you think we lag?
Speaker 2: Because our students aren't attacking those disciplines in high school to be able to handle them in college.  That we're not looking at those areas for majors.
Speaker 1: And do you think that the onus should just be on students?  What more can colleges and universities do to make those fields a little bit more attractive?
Speaker 2: Ultimately, the students have to do it.  And it has to come from in here.  And the school can make it available--community colleges and historically black colleges have made these disciplines accessible to people for the last forty years.  Why are any of these schools facing enrollment problems?
Story_ID: 5762
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about what's happening with a lot of HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] in terms of drop in enrollment, lack of funding, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: They've cut their own wrists.  They have turned their backs on community colleges.  From the community college they can get, number one, a black student who fits their profile who has completed all remedial studies and has already achieved something.  It's interesting.  UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] figured this out in California.  They set up a program by which they would channel students to El Camino [College] who would then be guaranteed access to UCLA two years later.  And it's interesting.  UCLA was sending me a lot of black and Mexican American students.  So they were filling their minority quotas, not only with freshmen who might drop out, but with juniors who were coming in fully prepared.  And they were able to increase their enrollment that way and reflect very well on minorities.  I have never been able to communicate that to historically black college leadership.  And, of course, many of these guys are my friends.  I like them.  I've worked at these various schools, but they tolerate me as a community college guy.  They overlook that in me.
Speaker 1: And what do you think, in terms of HBCs, what we're seeing happening to some HBCs that are now, the population there is--the majority population is becoming white.  For example, right here in our own backyard at Bowie State University?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the historically black colleges have always been integrated.  It's interesting.  They were called, see the Community College of Baltimore was called a black school and about a third of our students were white, even though the white students were evening students, the black students were the day students.  But one third of our students were white.  We were called a black school.  Towson State [Towson University] had two percent black school--black students, they were called integrated.  So you do get a double standard there.  I think to a very large degree, the historically black colleges have to do better marketing.  They've got to reach out to black students and begin competing with white, with the white schools for them.
Speaker 1: And what impact do you think integration had on historically black colleges?
Speaker 2: Devastating, because the historically black colleges have become very lazy in knowing that there's this middle class, your Bill Cosby's generation, that will always come to them.  But now Bill Cosby, Cosby's kids can go to Harvard [University], UCLA, a lot of fun places.
Speaker 1: And do you--what responsibility do you think blacks have in terms of insuring that historically black colleges remain viable?
Speaker 2: I think the important thing that the black population can do is to provide political support.  In Ohio, you have Central State University.  And a friend of mine from UDC [University of the District of Columbia], my former general counsel is the president at Central State.  I lobbied very, very hard for the, for the protection of the school and for their continuation as a historically black college.  If the black community doesn't do that, those schools are gonna, either change in their nature, or go out of existence.  And I think it'll be a tragedy cause they're still needed.  There is not full access in this country.
Story_ID: 5763
Speaker 1: As, you know, someone who has a fond appreciation for history, why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: If you don't know where you've been, you don't know where you are.  And I think it is very important that, particularly, minority Americans, black Americans, understand where we started.  And I think doing that, we can put our current situation in perspective.  Today's students are growing up with no sense of that there ever was segregation.  They don't have any concept that this could even have been attempted.  And we're not really that far away from it.  You do still have economic segregation or what have you.  And economics are really very much determined by race.  So we really haven't reach the millennium.  And I think an understanding of history is important if one is to understand how to deal with the future.
Story_ID: 5764
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you feel about the way you've lived your life, and what's important to you?
Speaker 2: I'm not dissatisfied with the way I've lived my life.  In my career, I think I've enjoyed parts of it.  Had I had an opportunity to start over again, I think I'd probably not go into administration and stay in the classroom.  I'm upset that I've only got one book.  I feel I could have produced more because my interest was in writing, but that's, you know, not really a regret.  It's, it's I wish I could have.
Speaker 1: Why would you have preferred to stay in the classroom?
Speaker 2: Well, I think administration has a very ephemeral, temporary kind of an influence, whereas if you write a book, that's gonna be there forever.
Speaker 1: And--.
Speaker 2: And the students you influence are gonna be there forever.
Speaker 1: And if you were to write another book what do you think you would write about?
Speaker 2: Well, it's the old dichotomy in my life.  I could do some things in education or some things in history.
Speaker 1: What would you like to do?
Speaker 2: Some things that really interest me.  Look at the history of the, of the Indian tribe in Florida.
Story_ID: 5765
Speaker 1: For those who are interested in a career in education--.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --what advice or suggestions do you have for them?
Speaker 2: I would urge them first of all to get the maximum credential possible.  We're still a credentials-driven society, and, of course, where some people might operate with less of a credential, we are always going to be required to have the ultimate.  So a student interested in becoming a university faculty member, I would say a PhD is essential.
Speaker 1: And as a--someone whose background is in higher education, what are some of your thoughts about the alarming costs of attaining a college degree?
Speaker 2: The cost has always been there.  What you're really getting is a withdrawal of public support.  And as states withdraw the support of universities, you find that basically, the cost is being passed on to students.  At your great state universities, like Ohio State [University], the state is really only paying ten to fifteen percent of the cost of operating the university.  Now, how can that be a state university when eighty-five percent of the funds have to come from elsewhere, okay?  But you've got all of the onus of state regulations and what have you.  So you're getting a real withdrawal of public support of higher education.  At the same time, you're getting a withdrawal of public support from the student because the grants of the '60s [1960s] have really become the loans of the '90s [1990s].  And you're getting more and more of the onus being put on the student from that point of view.  We, in effect, are disinvesting ourselves in higher education, and we're gonna pay an incredibly tough price for it.  Part of that price, we're seeing right now in the outsourcing of jobs.
Speaker 1: And for, in terms of the cost of higher education, it is becoming out of reach for many minorities, particularly African American students.  What are some of your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: People have to look at a different, different approach.  We're somehow telling people that going to a community college is not the way to go.  But for many people a community college is the most affordable way.  To look at it from another point of view, if you go to a place like Cal [California] State [University] Los Angeles, you're gonna find eighty percent of their students were at one time or another in a community college.  At the community colleges I've been, we very often have students from nice places like Johns Hopkins [University] or the University of Maryland coming to us to take a chemistry course during the summer because it's cheaper and it transfers.  So students have to begin looking, not necessarily at the classical, going on to the four-year school, but perhaps going to community college first, deal with lower costs, work and save some money, and then go on to the four-year school.  But I think higher education is important enough so every family should make it priority, and every individual ought to make it their priority to see that they get on to college because to a very large degree, I think people aren't gonna be able to survive in the future without it because our competition now is global.
Speaker 1: And do you think that, that threat is even bigger for students of color?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  We're gonna be the first eliminated.  For example, my mother [Yvonne Bernier] was a seamstress.  Her job no longer exists.
Story_ID: 5766
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what, what some of your thoughts are on affirmative action?
Speaker 2: Affirmative action has been much maligned, but since our media doesn't real-really feel the need for balance, they've misrepresented it.  I've always interpreted affirmative action as one who operated such programs as being sure that the pool included a range of people.  So as long as they've interviewed a range of people, men and women, black and white and Hispanic and so on, you're then free to choose the best person.  In the past, what was done historically is you kind of wipe out all the minorities in competition, and then you make a choice from three black males--white males.  Okay, but what they've said is affirmative action involves quotas which is not true, and secondarily, selection of unqualified people, which is not true.  I feel those who want to damage affirmative action will choose unqualified people.  So, yeah, I think affirmative action is a very good way to balance the injustices done in the past.
Speaker 1: And in terms of higher education, what were some of your thoughts on the [University of] Michigan [affirmative action lawsuit] decision?
Speaker 2: It was devastating.  I think to pretend that we're a colorblind society is to go back to the '50s [1950s] when we were colorblind, but I was just invisible.
Speaker 1: And, you know, since that decision minority enrollment at Michigan is down, more particularly, African American enrollment--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Michigan is down.  What are your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: Not on the basketball team though.  How exploitative it is.  One of the things I think the black community should do is, let's not have those basketball players going.  Why have the basketball team have a bigger potential to blacks than the student body has?
Speaker 1: And do you think that too often that's how whites perceive the African American student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We sing and dance.  And we do play good with sports, in fact, only some sports.  Baseball has now become a white sport, but we're very good at basketball and track.  I'm glad they leave us that.  And I think we have to begin getting beyond, and we have to begin looking at other ways of getting an education because sports don't always give you an education.  And they certainly wouldn't give you a professional career.  When I was in Washington, D.C. I used to tell kids in elementary school that they'd get a better chance--they've got a better chance of walking out there and hit by lightening than making it to the NBA [National Basketball Association].
Speaker 1: And in terms of the Michigan decision, what are some of your thoughts?  Is it unfair to deny a white student a spot just because--as the argument is, just because they're white?
Speaker 2: They always have.  You knock out white people when you bring aboard a black basketball player.  You knock out white people when you bring in somebody's, somebody's son, right?  George W. Bush was an affirmative action appointment at Yale [University].  He didn't get the best grades, but his daddy [George H.W. Bush] and granddaddy [Prescott Bush] went there.
Speaker 1: And in fact, more students go to school as a legacy--getting into college as a legacy than affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Right, and if you add sports and legacies, you'll find the affirmative action appointments are very minimal.  But again, the media doesn't report that.
Story_ID: 5767
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I think, first of all, we have to look toward expanding educational opportunities.  Everything that I would aspire to is based on broadening the number of people going to college and developing a wider range of expertise.  If you look at the number of teachers we're gonna have as we move further into this century, we don't have nearly enough teachers, for example, even to service our own community.  And that's only teachers, where you have many black people going into the profession.  If you look at the sciences, we're literally unrepresented.  And I would certainly hope to see more and more young people moving in those directions.
Story_ID: 5768
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: Different challenges in different places.  Every school that I was at was a volatile in a different way.  Each one was complex in a different way; each one required different solutions and it required me to change in different ways.
Speaker 1: Which do you think was the most challenging?
Speaker 2: There are two that were the most challenging, El Camino [College] because of the sheer size.  I had never managed anything of that magnitude before.
Speaker 1: And the other?
Speaker 2: As I look back, I think, what?  We had thirty-nine buildings, I mean just, just that.  The other was University of D.C. [University of the District of Columbia] simply because of the complexity of the politics, which are, unfortunately, the driving engine there.
Speaker 1: And when you look at the University of D.C., are you profoundly disappointed that it's not servicing students the way that it should?
Speaker 2: I'm deeply hurt, and I'm deeply offended that I couldn't do more.
Story_ID: 5769
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I tried to bring new people into higher education.
Speaker 1: And what would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: More educated people; maybe the black community and the Hispanic communities beginning to reach that first threshold of expanding the numbers in higher education.  The numbers are moving, but not quickly enough to accommodate growth.  And if we don't expand our growth and if we don't broaden that, we're gonna become South Africa because to a very large degree you're gonna have a large Hispanic and black and Asian majority, which is gonna exceed fifty-one percent of the population by 2040, and you're gonna have all of the power in about five percent of the white male population.  And I don't know if you, we want to be South Africa.  You already see elements of that.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Look at your conventions.  Look at who you see among the delegates, look at who you see in your cabinets.  And I'm not usually moved by a high-highly visible token.
Story_ID: 5770
Speaker 1: Speaking of the black and Hispanic communities, what are some of your thoughts on, just some of the discord between the two?
Speaker 2: I think the black community has missed sight of the fact that Hispanic is not a race, but a culture.  And Hispanics could be as black as any black American.  Most Hispanics are black, Indian and white.  So to a fairly large degree, Hispanics are really able to see things from many different perspectives.  I grew up in a black community.  I am most comfortable in a black community, but I'm also comfortable in a West Indian community or in a Hispanic community.  And I think that the inability to create that coalition, which is the most natural, has been politically devastating.  In New York City, the only time that the black community and Hispanic community cooperated, they made John [V.] Lindsey the mayor, and it's never again happened.  And if you'll notice in the last mayoral primaries, they pitted a black against a Hispanic so that a white ultimately got the Democratic nomination.  And until the black and Hispanic communities realize that in America, if you don't create coalitions, you're going anywhere, we will not advance.
Speaker 1: And in terms of what you said, Hispanics, most Hispanics being, you know, having some black background, white background, etc., do you think that most Hispanics identify with blacks, and could that be part of the problem?
Speaker 2: They don't identify with black Americans, but they identify with blacks.  For example, as a young man, I don't mind being called black, but I would not accept being called a Negro.  In the Latin, in the Hispanic community, there's an old saying in Puerto Rico, "ensename su abuela ", "show me your grandmother," because every family in most Latin communities, includes people of three races, black, white and brown, every family, without fail.
Speaker 1: And as a, a black, Hispanic, which do you identify with more--or are they both the same?  Are they equal?
Speaker 2: I'm a martial man, I identify with just by myself.  It's part of what I learned in high school.
Story_ID: 5771
Speaker 1: Well, you may notice there that in my travels, I went to Detroit, Michigan.  I very much enjoyed going there because I was able to in effect, work with a largely urban, multi-racial black community and run an election.  Wayne County Community College had never had tax support, and the state was phasing out the off-the-top additional subsidiary they were giving the college for thirty years.  So we actually had the challenge of getting the suburbs to accept property taxes to support a community college that they viewed as largely black.  And we actually won in 1992.  We conspired to be the last item on the ballot.  And when Bill Clinton won, we also won.  But I learned from running a political campaign.  John Conyers, the congressman from Detroit, took me by the arm and kind of walked me through and was very good in instructing me on how to run a campaign.  And I marveled at what I learned.
Speaker 2: Is politics something that you would perhaps be interested in pursuing?
Speaker 1: No, I'd not be good at it.  I'm too independent and probably wouldn't play the game and would say all the wrong things.
Story_ID: 5772
Speaker 1: From Detroit, though, I moved on to Ohio again, Newark, Ohio, where I had a unique challenge.  I went to a campus in which there were two schools.  One, the Ohio State University campus, I was the dean, and the Central Ohio Technical College, I was the president.  So I had two colleges, two schools, two faculties, two boards and a curriculum that ran from the associate degree and certificate on to the master's in social work.  So, again, I enjoyed learning more from the complexities and how to juggle many hats and many budgets and what have you.  And that's something I'd never done before.  And as one reached the sunset of the sixties, of your sixties in age, I appreciated being in a learning situation, it kept me alive; kept me stimulated.
Speaker 2: Why did you leave Ohio?
Speaker 1: Just to retire.
Story_ID: 5773
Speaker 1: In 2001, I'd been in education for about forty-four years, from student teaching in a junior high school to the, to school campus.  I had no desire to continue working just to have the income.  I did want to be able to spend some time while I had good health with my grandchildren, most of whom are here.
Speaker 2: And what do you miss most about being on a college campus, in a classroom, what do you miss most about your life as an educator?
Speaker 1: The give and take of ideas, the challenge to the students.  The students, as I indicated, have very little discipline, primarily because they get information the easy way off the Internet, but, for example, at my last year of teaching, I had some arguments with students--not really arguments, but dialogues with students who felt the Second Amendment was, would allow them to have their guns.  So, you know, you get the old gun control, teaching the American Constitution to people who should know it backwards as college freshmen or college sophomores, but had not a clue as to what was included.  But, so I enjoyed that give and take.  I enjoyed undergraduate quite a bit.  I also enjoyed teaching the graduate students, the teachers, the seniors and, of course I taught on slavery.  I enjoyed just dealing with the, with the discipline, without dealing with learning problems or the maturity of your undergraduate student.  It's nice just to be able to talk to people who know something about the field and can contribute something and can challenge you.
