Story_ID: 261920
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Fred Cash, F-R-E-D, Cash, C-A-S-H.
Speaker 1: Now sir, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten, eight, thirty-eight [October 8, 1938]. Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professional entertainer.
Speaker 1: All right, and you are (laughter)?
Speaker 2: With The Impressions.
Speaker 1: All right and have been with them for many, many years?
Speaker 2: Since '59, [1959] yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is seven twenty-eight, o-five [July 28, 2005].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Chattanooga, Tennessee at Up Above's Recording Studio [ph.].
Story_ID: 261921
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they make me ask everyone and they only require a short answer, and the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, yeah collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's one of my favorite foods.
Speaker 1: All right well that's two out of the three Impressions (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is that right! (Clapping hands).
Speaker 1: Okay, right (laughter), okay so they must make some good greens around here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I love it.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well not really, 'cause when I travel I make that my vacation you know, especially if there's some places that I've never been I just--I would get out and kinda go around and check the city out and see what's happening, so I basically make that my vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well believe it or not 'It's Alright,' the song 'It's Alright' that we [The Impressions] recorded, that's where it come from, my favorite phrase.  Hey man, it's all right, it's gonna be all right you know and Curtis [Mayfield] took that and that's where 'It's Alright' came from.
Story_ID: 261922
Speaker 1: Okay well I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Cash] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lola, L-O-L-A, Cunningham, C-U-N-N-I-N-G-H-A-M, Kate Cash.
Speaker 1: Okay now what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in LaGrange, Georgia.  I think that's November 28th.
Speaker 1: Okay, November 28th what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, my God, she was eighty-nine when she passed away, so that would be what?
Speaker 1: When did she pass?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994] okay, okay we'll just put down died in 1994, eighty-nine okay, and what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  I mean how far back can you trace 'em?
Speaker 2: Well only to my mother's mother, my grandmother and she was like 103, -two [102] or three [103] when she passed away and that's been I think 1966 if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she goes--in fact she, well she was according to, well she was 103 in '66 [1966] she basically goes back to--she was born around the time the slaves were emancipated, 1863 right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right so.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about, about, that she tells about those days or?
Speaker 2: You know I was so young when I was around her at that particular time and then I left and I moved to Chicago [Illinois] and never really sat down and just talked to her about these issues you know, 'cause I was so young then and I wouldn't of really known nothing about 'em anyway at that particular point you know and time in my life, but I never got a chance to just sit down with her and talk to her about those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any stories that are passed down in your family?  With a grandmother who lived so long, are there any stories passed down in the family about, about what life was like you know, I don't know--over a hundred years go?
Speaker 2: Well I know it had to be somewhat hard at that particular time 'cause like I say they was--they come outta LaGrange, Georgia, a little town not too far from Atlanta [Georgia], you know and I just can't imagine what it was like back then you know.  I don't know for sure but I can imagine it was hard times as far as working in the field, picking cotton and all that.  I know my mother spoke about it many times as well as my father you know so there was a lot of cotton picking back in those days.  So that's about as I can tell you as far as my grandmother was concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay, any--well is there a story about how they, they got to Chattanooga [Tennessee]?  Did she, did your mother grow up in LaGrange --?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in LaGrange, Georgia but I think after her and my father got married they moved to Chattanooga, Tennessee.  I'm not sure what year that was, but they moved to Chattanooga, Tennessee and had a family.  It was like four boys and one girl and they, they had been in Chattanooga ever since.
Story_ID: 261923
Speaker 1: Do you know much about what, what your mother [Lola Cunningham Cash] and her family did in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?  I mean did they have a chance to go to school, did they have--I know those were the days when schools were segregated.  Did they have a black school and do you know the name of it or?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't but my mother did go to school.  She had a good education, she played piano for a lot of the churches here in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  She was a good musician, you know and oftentimes I would just look at her and listen to her play piano and just wished that I had that kind of talent where I could play some kind of instrument, you know?  But I wasn't blessed with that, so I was blessed with singing.  My sister she, she plays piano you know and I said boy I wished I could play some kind of instrument.
Speaker 1: Now did she, did she talk about how she learned how to play the piano or how, how she got exposed to that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think when she moved to Chattanooga, Tennessee there was a teacher that my mother run into at church and taught her how to play the piano, and that's how she learned.  'Cause even she would read music, she could read music you know, so that's how she learned how to play.
Speaker 1: So she had a chance to go to school in LaGrange [Georgia], and then she learned how to read music and play.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are there many musicians on her side of the family other than your sister and her?
Speaker 2: Well my sister like I say, she played piano.  My son [Fred Cash, Jr.] he plays bass guitar you know with a lot of different groups like Boyz II Men and you name it you know, he's always, always going somewhere out the country playing with a play or playing with some artist, you know.  So none of my kids sing, he's about the only one that's a musician in the family other than myself.
Story_ID: 261924
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James Cash.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 9th, I think that was 1903.
Speaker 1: Okay, was he born in LaGrange [Georgia] too?
Speaker 2: He was born in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, Macon.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was born in Macon, Georgia and that's where he grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your father's ancestors, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Back to my, to my uncle, like I said, I was so young when I left here and left Chattanooga [Tennessee] moving to Chicago [Illinois].  I didn't really get into talk with my father about a lot of stuff until I got grown you know?  And those are some of the subjects that I didn't discuss with him before he passed away you know, but I know that he did have a brother and he had two sisters that lived in Detroit [Michigan] and his brother remained in Macon, Georgia until he passed away and had several kids and they are still in Macon, Georgia at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so did your father talk about growing up in Macon, what, what it was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he did, I think.  Well I don't think, he grew up without a mother you know and I think he was raised, he was raised by his father and he just talked about how the days you know that the chores and stuff that he had to do as a young man coming up without a mother, you know a lot of things that he had to do extra, you know and you know sometimes, I, I wonder you know, when you grow up without a mother how do you become, how do it affect you as far as the woman is concerned you know, and all the time that I've known my father you know before he passed away, I never heard him say, "I love you," you know, but I, I mean I felt it you know.  Like I tell my kids now--hey all my sons, my daughters, "I love you," you know.  I never heard that from my father growing up, you know but I reckon that was the way that he was brought up so, but I, I hold, I hold nothing against him for that.  That's just the way my father was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So his mother died when he was young?
Speaker 2: Very young, yeah, very young and he was raised by his father.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did his father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Farmer, yeah he was a farmer and my father also worked on the farm as far as picking cotton and stuff you know.  That was basically what they did, you know.
Story_ID: 261925
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Lola Cunningham Cash and James Cash] meet?  Did your father move to, I mean did any--either one of 'em move or how did they meet?
Speaker 2: You know that's another situation, I don't really know how my mother and father meet, sad to say.  I don't know how they met.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did your father move from Macon [Georgia] to LaGrange [Georgia] or did she moved from LaGrange to Macon or?
Speaker 2: You know I believe, I'm not sure, that they both met here in Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay so they.
Speaker 2: From, yeah.
Speaker 1: They didn't, they weren't married before they moved here, they were, they, they met after they got here?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right so he was in Macon, Georgia and she was in LaGrange, Georgia and I think they met after they got here to Chattanooga, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And married.
Speaker 1: Now was there a story about what, what drew your father to Chattanooga, or drew your mother here?
Speaker 2: Well I reckon they was looking for something a little bit better you know as far as they lifestyle was concerned you know and Chattanooga might've been just a little better as far as LaGrange and Macon, Georgia was concerned, just like at a young age my brothers, all my brothers they left Chattanooga they moved to Detroit [Michigan] seeking work, you know 'cause there wasn't a whole lot happening here in Chattanooga you know.  So I suppose that was the same reason for my mother and my father leaving where they were to come here you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Searching for something a little bit better.
Speaker 1: Do you get the impression they were tired of the farm life type of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most certainly, most certainly so I know my father said when he came to Chattanooga he got a factory job you know.  So that was in search for a better life.
Speaker 1: Now Chattanooga is a--is known for -it's train, it's train--it's a kind of a train, a major train stop in the South and you know and there's a song 'Chattanooga Choo Choo' and all that (laughter).
Speaker 2: 'Chattanooga Choo Choo,' yeah.
Speaker 1: You know we're even staying in the Holiday Inn with a train on top of it and train cars out in the.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: So I mean it's, you know the, the trains and the TVAs, the Tennessee Valley Authority and all that.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So did those, did the train routes have anything to do with them coming from Macon here to Chattanooga with--was that when the southern roadway came up or, I don't know I'm just asking?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, I think maybe they came by car you know my father drove up.  He had a car and I think that's how he came to Chattanooga, Tennessee but yeah at that particular time the, the train, the Chattanooga Choo Choo all that stuff was kinda really popular at that particular time you know, but he drove up.
Speaker 1: And in the 40s [1940s] there are a lot of jobs associated and then the [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt administration with the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know when they're building you know the dams and so forth.  I don't know, did he work on any of that?
Speaker 2: Naw' well see my father  worked at, I don't know if you ever heard of an International truck and all of those kinda of trucks that was built way back in those days, that was a company.
Speaker 1: Oh, International Harvester?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's the company he use to work for, International Harvest you know and after that company moved to Chicago [Illinois] he started working for another factory here you know, so he worked for that factory until he retired.
Story_ID: 261926
Speaker 1: Can you describe your parent's [Lola Cunningham Cash and James Cash] personalities for us and tell us who do you think that you take after or what do you take after either, or both of them?
Speaker 2: Well I think I take the music part from, from my mother, 'cause like I said she was a musician and I think I take--my father was such a funny man you know.  He could set down and tell you all kind of stories, man; and I think I took that side from him you know, and as he would be telling you a story he'd be laughing just as hard and so I contribute--that's, that's where I got that from, that side of myself from him.
Story_ID: 261927
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters did you have growing up?
Speaker 2: I had--it was four boys, one girl.  Now there's only three of us left.
Speaker 1: And where were you, are you the in the?
Speaker 2: Third kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was number three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So kind of right in the middle there?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Story_ID: 261928
Speaker 1: Can you tell us like what was your, what neighborhood did you live in when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Park City [Chattanooga, Tennessee], grew up in a little community called Park City.  Well there wasn't a whole lot to do, we'd sit down on the corners at night, Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and myself, 'cause, well we loved to play baseball, we played that during the day you know but at night there wasn't a whole lot to do so we.
Speaker 1: Now before I get to you all on the corner singing, before I get there--now Park City now what is--what side of town is Park City on and how is Chattanooga [Tennessee] you know--where do peop--?  I know in most towns in those days, the black side of town, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the white side of town, what was the difference between the two sides of town in terms of how they looked and where did--is Park City on the south side of Chattanooga?
Speaker 2: East.
Speaker 1: East side.
Speaker 2: East side.
Speaker 1: Okay, east side of Chattanooga, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well at that particular time you know there was whites staying down the block from us, you know and we didn't have any problem as far as getting along.  We played together every day you know.  I didn't have no problem with that you know and neither did they.  I don't, I imagine after we got grown you know that's when everything started to separating.
Speaker 1: Now, now did you go to the same schools?
Speaker 2: No, no I went to a little school called Park City Elementary School [ph.].  That was right there in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how was, was the town segregated in terms of the signs and that sort of thing on the fountains and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was segregated.  There was no white going to my school, it was just all black you know but they had the white fountains and the black foundations.  I, I saw a little bit of that you know, but like I said I left when I was about twenty, about nineteen or twenty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Moved to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: But people did get along pretty good you said anyway?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You said in your neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Got along well coming up as a young kid you know.  I never heard any racial slurs like I said we just, hey they stayed right down the block and we was on the other end you know. We just played and had a good time.
Speaker 1: Were there many white people in your neighborhood or just?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah there was quite a few on my street you know. And, like I said, that was no problem.
Story_ID: 261929
Speaker 1: Can you describe for us some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of Park City [Chattanooga, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Of Park City and wherever else you were when you were growing up, the sights and sounds.
Speaker 2: There was a foundry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right in front of my house and man, when they would be burning that iron and stuff you could feel all the ashes and stuff you know.  I don't know why we didn't catch lung cancer or something you know?  Would just be flying in the air, get all over your porch and stuff you know.  So that's something I grew up with as a little boy and quite naturally I'd go over there at night, steal me some iron, take it back the next day.  The guy know that iron came from his shop you know, but hey he'd give me two or three dollars, I'd put it on the scale and go on about my business you know, but that was just little boys at that particular time you know.  Yeah we did that many times.  He'd give us two or three dollars, he never said nothing but he knew that iron came from his shop you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: So they paid for scrap iron and, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yep that was a scrap iron company where they, you know bring metal and stuff and they'd burn it in those great big old tubelows [ph.], man fire be shooting out and like I said the ashes would just fly everywhere, everywhere.
Speaker 1: Did it make it hotter in the summertime having a foundry?
Speaker 2: Very hot, very hot 'cause it's was right across the street from where I lived you know and they ran that for years and years and years, but when I came back after leaving in '59 [1959], that company had died down you know.  They--it was no longer so, but those years of growing up as a little kid, it was very hot, very hot in the summertime, but in the wintertime you know, hey it was kinda good 'cause it kept you warm you know, but you still had to deal with those ashes.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of coal around the place, around that foundry for?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah a lot of coal too that they burn you know, but it was mostly metal, iron that they burned you know.
Speaker 1: Did they melt it down and?
Speaker 2: Yeah making meter tops that go over the meters you know--that's what they made.
Speaker 1: Man hole covers and?
Speaker 2: There you go, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay what other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: That was about it.  That was about it.  I don't remember any other sounds, just that foundry.
Story_ID: 261930
Speaker 1: Now I imagine, since your mother [Lola Cunningham Cash] played for the church, music was a big part of growing up I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh a big part, yeah, I use to have to go to church three times a day you know, and well it was something that I loved because it was music you know and Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and myself as little boys after we'd leave church, we'd form a little old group, called the Southland Jubilees [Southland Jubilee Singers] and we'd go to church, go to his father's church [Triumph, the Church and Kingdom of God in Christ, Chattanooga, Tennessee], his father [George Gooden] was a preacher so we'd go there and make us a dollar and something you know doing a couple of tunes and leave there and walk home to the movies you know, so I kinda enjoyed that you know.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the church your family went to?
Speaker 2: [Greater] Beulah Baptist [Church, Chattanooga, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Beulah Baptist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of the church that Sam's father was a pastor?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of that church but I think his sister is pastoring, pastoring that church at this point.  He'll probably be able to tell you that.
Speaker 1: Okay so Beulah Baptist Church and you formed a group called the?
Speaker 2: Southland Jubilees.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay it was you and you and Sam Gooden and?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who, who else was in it?
Speaker 2: Emmanuel Thomas and one other fellow, I can't think of his name at this point, but we'd just do that to have, to make a little money to the movies you know.  I know we's had to sound bad, had to sound bad, but you know when you in church and you sanging and they applaud for you, you know they ain't gonna say, "Well hey man y'all sound bad" (laughter) like we use to do when we was rehearsing 'cause it up sitting on the corner sanging pop songs you know, people holler out the window, "Hey y'all go home, y'all making too much noise" you know, you can't sang no way you know, but in church you know it's a different kind of feel you know as long as you're up there trying they gonna applaud anyway you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so did you like music on the radio, did you listen to a lot of stuff on the radio?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I loved music on--I listened to The Platters, Hank Ballard and the Midnighters and Ray Charles and all those groups you know and when they came to the [Soldiers and Sailors Memorial] Auditorium [Chattanooga, Tennessee] I was a little boy I'd be right there looking at 'em you know and just enjoying 'em to the utmost and many times you know I looked up on that stage when they was performing and said, hey, boy I would love to do that one day, not knowing that it would happen and it did happen.
Story_ID: 261931
Speaker 1: We were talking about the influences of music in church and in--the musicians that you liked on the radio and that sort of thing.  Let me ask you about, before I get you know to go back to singing, I wanna ask you about grade school.  Now, you went to Park City Elementary School [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did they teach music at Park City at all?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw we just went to the sixth grade there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I had to go to another school which was East Fifth Street [Elementary School, Chattanooga, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went starting from the sixth from the seventh on through.
Speaker 1: So was that like a middle school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: East Fifth Street?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then after a few years you know they started to zone it for the districts, then I had to leave there and go to a school that was closer to me and that was Howard High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Howard High School [The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now all these schools were all black schools right?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did you graduate from Howard (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I didn't graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left here when I was in the eleventh grade, I joined The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well did you like school when you were in elementary school and?
Speaker 2: I loved arithmetic, mathematics that was me, you know anything else, hey I didn't care about it you know, but mathematics that was my thing you know.  English, I kinda liked that a little bit but mostly mathematics, that was me.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, her name was Ms. Pfeifer [ph.] and she was my English teacher and a lot of times during the, the school day I would have to take her car.  She had brought a brand new Oldsmobile, I never will forget it, and I use to have to take it and get it serviced for her at the Oldsmobile dealer you know and quite naturally you know I got to cruise through the neighborhood so the boys can see me you know, and I know boys said.
Speaker 1: This is in high school I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, boy if she had've know that she would've had a fit you know.  I know some time I was a little late getting back.  She would look at me kinda funny but she never would say anything you know, but she was a good lady, Ms. Pfeifer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how would you describe yourself as a, as a kid growing up?  I mean what were you like and how would your friends describe you?
Speaker 2: I think a happy kid you know.  I had several friends, we always ran together and played baseball and just had a good time 'cause it wasn't a whole lot to do you know, and mainly looking at television you know.  Didn't do a whole lot, I didn't go out of my community a whole lot.  I kinda just stayed; I was a homebody you know.  A lot of times my mother [Lola Cunningham Cash] would just say, "Hey [HistoryMaker] Fred [Cash], here go to the movies."  She'd give me money 'cause I stayed at home a whole lot you know but I was happy doing that, and even to this day hey I don't rip run out in the street a whole lot.  If I'm at home I'm happy you know?  And I suppose it followed me on through my life up until right now you know.  I don't care nothing about going to clubs and doing this and doing other things you know but sometime you know my recreation, I like to go to the race cars, to the track see the race cars run you know.  I like boxing, I like all of that kinda stuff.  Well I can see that on television you know, but I have went to several fights, Muhammad Ali and I loved him in the day, you know, and still do today you know, but I didn't do a whole lot growing up, but I was happy with what I was doing.  If I stayed at home I was happy, you know.
Story_ID: 261932
Speaker 1: Have you known Sam Gooden [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] all your life?
Speaker 2: We grew up together, yep.  It was one house between us and we grew up as little boys you know, and if I wasn't at his house he was at my house you know.  If I had something to eat, he had something to eat and vice-versa you know, and we've been together all these years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all started singing together at what age would you say it was?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord it had to be when I was about twelve or thirteen somewhere in that area, 'cause Sam was just a few years older than myself, but his family they sung too you know, I mean his mother [Ruby Satterwhite Gooden] played piano and all the kids.  His sister played piano and they all sang and same thing with my family you know, so I suppose it was just fate that me and him started to singing as well you know.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Lola Cunningham Cash], was she instrumental in teaching you how to sing or getting you interested in music at all?
Speaker 2: Naw, that was just something I picked up on my own you know, from just listening to her play and sing you know and I just kinda took that and ran with it.
Speaker 1: So she never really tried to get you involved in a choir or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I did sing in a choir you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sing in the choir at church [Greater Beulah Baptist Church, Chattanooga, Tennessee] you know, but as far as just sitting down with the piano trying to show me what's happening with that you know, I wasn't interested in that you know, but I think it just came natural as far as me singing, you know.
Speaker 1: Now what inspired you to want to sing, 'cause a lot of kids don't, don't wanna be in the spotlight, don't wanna sing, but you know?
Speaker 2: We didn't have anything else to do, I mean after--we couldn't play baseball at night you know at that particular time 'cause it wasn't no lights and stuff you know on the field like it is today, so we just sat on the corner Sam and myself and several of our buddies and just, just sang, that amused us you know, and everybody split up after eleven or twelve o'clock, they'd go their way and go home.  And that, that was all we had to do.
Speaker 1: So you'd sing like late at night then.  You're out there singing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that why the folks told us, "Hey y'all go home, making too much noise" you know so hey we'd split up and go home you know.  Next night (laughter) be right back there again doing the same thing you know, but that was our enjoyment.  That was our time coming up.
Story_ID: 261933
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [The Howard School, Chattanooga, Tennessee] had you--did you--were you still singing with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) [The] Roosters.
Speaker 1: --Southland [Jubilee Singers]. Oh, you had a group called The Roosters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after that we had formed a little group Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and myself called Four Roosters and a Chick.  So you know back then they had all kind of bird names like [The] Spaniels and all of that you know so we had.
Speaker 1: Oh and The Orioles and?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah so we had to fit in there somewhere.
Speaker 1: The Dixie Hummingbirds.
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: And you got--like, yeah I've heard of these other birds, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, hey we named ourselves the Four Roosters and a Chick.
Speaker 1: Now who was the chick?
Speaker 2: Catherine Thomas, yeah she was the chick.
Speaker 1: All right so.
Speaker 2: Looked like a rooster, but she was the chick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't you write that (laughter), she'd kill me I'm telling you, but she was just a mean girl.  You couldn't get along with her at all you know.  She just one of those kinda mean persons you know.
Speaker 1: She was in a group with four fellas now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you perform at--now you sang, you were singing with this group, you all were singing like popular?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Music?
Speaker 2: We were singing pop music.  We were so young, I had to slip out the window at night when my parents [Lola Cunningham Cash and James Cash] go to bed.  I'd sleep--slip out the window and the guys would pick me up on the corner, and we'd go down to the night club and sing.  I'd come back, slip back in the window and go to sleep.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you when you started slipping out the window to sing?
Speaker 2: I had to be about fourteen, somewhere in that area, about fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they didn't want me to sing, they just--well when the fellas left to go with Sam and the rest of the fellas left Chattanooga [Tennessee] to go to Chicago [Illinois] to pursue a career as far as singing was concerned, my mother would not let me go.  She said no, you're too young, you cannot go, but after, after a few years Curt--[HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler left the group.  He was there only six months and it happened right here in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  He did his last show at the [Soldiers and Sailors Memorial] Auditorium [Chattanooga, Tennessee] here, so after that they came and got me and I left and went back with 'em to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay now.
Speaker 2: That same night.
Speaker 1: Four Roosters and a Chick consisted of you and Sam Gooden --
Speaker 2: Right and Emmanuel Thomas and Arthur Brooks.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now the Brooks Brothers, there's another Brooks brother, right too?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was too young, he wasn't in it at that particular point, Richard Books, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I think the Brooks Brothers went to Chicago with Sam Gooden right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, so I came up '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: Well I didn't come up but that's when--like I said Jerry, they did their last show here at the auditorium here in Chattanooga.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they came and picked me up and I went on back with 'em.
Story_ID: 261934
Speaker 1: Now did you think at the time that you all were performing here in Chattanooga [Tennessee] that you all were really that good?  You know, they're really good?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, we weren't that good at all but that was something that hey, they had other groups here [Chattanooga, Tennessee].  There was two other groups here called, one of 'em was called The Lamplighters, I can't think the other group, but boy they were sharp.  I mean those Hank Ballard songs that was out then, them guys sound just like those groups you know.  Man, we really sounded bad, we really sounded bad now that I really think about it and listened to those other guys you know, but hey we went out there and tried anyway yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so whose idea was it to go to Chicago [Illinois] I the first place, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well it mostly Arthur Brooks, yeah, I mean he had this dream about wanting to be in the entertainment business you know and it was basically him.
Speaker 1: Okay so he had the Chicago idea?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Plus he had family there in Chicago.  We first moved to--when I left here I went to Detroit [Michigan], I stayed there nine months and then went on over to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't go directly to Chicago, but?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Yeah I lived with my sister in Detroit for about nine months and then went on over to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now did you sing in Detroit?
Speaker 2: No, no. At that particular time we were just trying to get it together 'cause [HistoryMaker] Jerry [Butler] was a big star on his own at that point after 'For Your Precious Love.'
Story_ID: 261935
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were on the outskirts of this when they were making their, their big move in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, they.
Speaker 1: Did they write you and tell you what they were doing or did you have to--how did you find out they- they made a record?
Speaker 2: Oh, I heard it, I was in Chattanooga [Tennessee] still.  Man, that record was big 'For Your Precious Love' you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but how did you first find out that they were gonna make a record?  Did you know that they were?
Speaker 2: No they didn't write.
Speaker 1: Did they tell you, did they say we're--
Speaker 2: I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Getting to make a record or?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I--when I heard it on the radio I said man that ain't them guys, they can't sing like that.  Until they came back here, you know.  I never will--I was sitting out on my front porch.  They had a brand new green station wagon and I saw them pull up that hill, I stayed on the hill, I saw 'em coming up the hill, I couldn't believe it.  They pulling out big roll of money.  One of the guys later on told me, say, "Man I had about a hundred dollars in one dollar bills" and had about tens and twenties.  You didn't see all the ones under there you know and man that just blew my mind, just blew my mind.  I said, golly look what I don' missed out on, I said to myself you know, but after that show that's when they came back the next morning and got me and I left and went back with them.
Speaker 1: Okay so you just basically heard their record on the radio and knew it was them, The Impressions.  When did they change their name to The Impressions, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well once they got to Chicago from what I understand they put some names in a hat, somebody pulled out that name, The Impressions, and that's what stuck with the group 'cause they didn't want to- they had such a big record at that particular time, they didn't wanna go out as The Roosters you know so that's why they changed the name.
Speaker 1: Now what happened to the chick [Catherine Thomas], did she--?
Speaker 2: Naw' she stayed in Chattanooga.
Speaker 1: She stayed in Chattanooga?
Speaker 2: Yeah and worked, well she sang with us for a while you know and we finally just came to the conclusion that, hey maybe it just needs to be just the fella, you know.  So she kinda dropped by the wayside and we carried on with just the fellas.
Story_ID: 261936
Speaker 1: When the record 'For Your Precious Love' came out--now this is a big, big hit and from what, from what.
Speaker 2: Big, big record.
Speaker 1: And from what I understand when it was released, they released it under three different labels or something?  It was on three different labels and it was some kinda confusion in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Abner [Records], yeah, yeah, Abner.
Speaker 1: Vee-Jay Records right?
Speaker 2: Vee-Jay Records.
Speaker 1: It's a black record company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just like Motown.
Speaker 1: Say something about that a second 'cause we don't--a lot of people don't know about Vee-Jay.
Speaker 2: Oh, Vee-Jay was one of the biggest companies just like Motown was in the early '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] you know they had The Beatles, they had all the Gospel singers, they had the [Original Five] Blind Boys, they had the Swan Silvertones, you name it, they had all these people on their label you know.  The Dells, The Spaniels, us [The Impressions] and they were a big, big company at that particular time you know and.
Speaker 1: Who was who proprietor, who owned Vee-Jay?
Speaker 2: Well Ewart Abner was the president of the company.  I'm trying to think of the owner--I can't think of his name, I think of his name.  I can see his face.
Speaker 1: I think a woman actually owned it, well a husband [James Bracken] and wife [Vivian Carter], owned it.
Speaker 2: Her and her husband, yeah, 'cause she was disc jockey over in Indiana somewhere, but I can't think of their names.  I can't think of their names.
Speaker 1: Well we've got it on some other information so when I--right now I can't think of her name either right now, but I know that they were big.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they did--they were the company that signed The Beatles for their North American releases.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, before anybody else.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah they was a very, very big company.
Speaker 1: They were right across, I heard they were right across the street from Chess Records in Chicago?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, from what I understand that's where the group first went to.  They was telling me they went over to Chess Records in the wintertime and those people just stood in the window and looked at 'em, wouldn't even open the door to audition 'em you know, so they went across the street over to Vee-Jay Records, and that's how it all began.
Speaker 1: Competition makes the world go round I guess, so.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's very true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the account I read they were like knee deep in snow or something in front.
Speaker 2: That's right and from what I understand they just sat there.  They looked at 'em but they wouldn't open that door, so they went across the street to Vee-Jay and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now who produced their records for Vee-Jay you know?
Speaker 2: What is his name?  Oh, I can't think of his name.  I got it over there, can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: Well I'll just wondered--okay but I think the--from what I read, now tell me what you--if I'm right or wrong, but the--
Speaker 2: Calvin Carter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the producer 'For Your Precious Love,' Calvin Carter.
Story_ID: 261937
Speaker 1: And when they [Vee-Jay Records] produced it ['For Your Precious Love'] they--one of the labels at least had Jerry Butler and the Impressions I think.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And after they made that one tour I think, so they came here, but how many cities had they gone to do you think?
Speaker 2: Well they had went to quite a few cities you know.  I know they had made the rounds to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], the Uptown Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Baltimore [Maryland], the Royal Theater [Baltimore, Maryland] and several other places you know.
Speaker 1: And at this point too, just for clarification, for purposes of--Arthur Brooks and his brother had already left the group [The Impressions] right?
Speaker 2: Naw they was (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: -- (Simultaneous) Were they still in at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they were still there.  After Curtis [Mayfield] left and I came in, I mean after [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler left and I came in, everybody still remained until a few years later, I think they stayed with the group two years after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then.
Speaker 1: So at that point The Impressions consisted of, it was Sam Gooden [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden], Arthur Brooks and his brother?
Speaker 2: Richard Brooks, right.
Speaker 1: And?
Speaker 2: Curtis.
Speaker 1: And Curtis Mayfield and Jerry Butler?
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they're five?
Speaker 2: So after Jerry left then I came back in the picture.
Speaker 1: Okay so they brought--who brought you in and how did they--did Sam call you or?
Speaker 2: Well, Sam and Curtis they--Sam evidently told 'em you know, well we know another fella that sang with us, his name is [HistoryMaker] Fred Cash you know.  So they came back 'cause they was trying to decide there was another fella that they was looking at as well but I didn't know that you know, but they found out that I could sing bass, I could sing tenor, I could sing all the parts, you know so that's how I got in.
Speaker 1: So wait a second now, you sing all the parts?
Speaker 2: I can sing bass, sang tenor, sang baritone, lead, I, I did it all and the other fella just only could sing tenor.
Story_ID: 261938
Speaker 1: 'Gypsy Woman,' say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now are you singing bass on that one?
Speaker 2: No, that's Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] singing bass on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, he's singing bass, all right.
Speaker 2: I, I didn't do any bass on any of the songs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I could do it if, if it was needed to be done you know.
Speaker 1: So if we were trying to discern which one is you when we listened to The Impressions, which, for instance like what, what would we hear?  I mean we know you're in there, but if you sing all three--you can sing all three roles and parts?
Speaker 2: Well I was singing tenor.
Speaker 1: Tenor, okay.
Speaker 2: I was singing top tenor.
Speaker 1: So on most of 'em you sing top tenor?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of first tenor, a lot second tenor with Curtis [Mayfield] and myself back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a particular phrase on a song that we can look for and know it's you instead of?
Speaker 2: I suppose it's that top tenor.  Yep, that--I mean that was, our, our, that was our, our mark you know as far as the high singing was concerned 'cause a lot of people thought we was gay because we sung so high you know, but after a period of time you know that kinda faded out.
Speaker 1: Now, did they really?  They thought you all were--?
Speaker 2: Yeah man, can't no man sing that high you know, but we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us an example of, of, just a little piece of a song with a high tenor?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of a, just a sample of the high tenor.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Keep on pushing," one of the high tones, you know.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: The high notes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's one of my favorites I think, too, 1964.
Story_ID: 261939
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, I remember when we [The Impressions] was over in Cleveland, Ohio one of the disc jockeys, we wanted the other side to come out.  He said listen, "I'll tell you what.  I bet you, I bet each one of you one hundred dollars that 'Keep on Pushing' will be a big hit record."  Aw, naw we, naw man, 'Keep on Pushing' it--naw, naw we want the other side of the record which was a up-tempo record, you know.
Speaker 2: Which one was that one?  What was the other side?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: I can't remember what the other side was, but I remember it was up-tempo you know and that's what we wanted, and we went back through there several months later, 'Pushing' was just so big.  He said, "What did I tell you, I told you this was gonna be a big record," you know?
Speaker 2: You know but it raises an interesting point because as I remember, as a teenager you know when I would be in somebody's basement, barbershop or something you know where kids are cutting each other's hair and singing and listening to the records and trying to sing the various parts, I mean The Impressions is what you would put on and try to learn how to sing from.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean you put The Impressions on and either side of the record would be okay.  I mean you know I'd be trying to learn a song, I know I was--I fooled around with some kids and we were trying to sing, 'Man Oh Man,' you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I be dogged, yeah 'Man Oh Man.'  There was a guy in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had a big clothing store and he worried us to death about that song.  I think he wrote that song along with Curtis [Mayfield] you know?  And every time we'd go in there to shop for clothes, "Fellas, I got this song, y'all, y'all got to hear this song you know."  That's where that song came from, 'Man Oh Man.'
Speaker 2: 'Man Oh Man'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he wrote that song and we put it one of our, one of our albums you know and--
Speaker 2: Is there a story behind that 'cause it if those who are listening to this may not know but the song is about traveling?  "Man, oh man have you ever been," and they talk about all the places this person has been and what he's seen?
Speaker 1: Well, he was a rich, rich man, you know and he did do a lot of traveling you know, plus all the entertainers, everybody in the business bought clothes from that place on South Street in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  Big clothing store, Chubby Checker, I mean a picture of Sammy Davis, Jr., everybody would come in there to buy clothes you know.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of the store?
Speaker 1: Benny Krass [Benjamin Krass], Krass Brothers, that's the name of the store, and the little guy that wrote the song his name was Benny Krass.
Speaker 2: C-R-A-G?
Speaker 1: K-R-A-S-S, yeah Krass Brothers, that was the name of the store and every time we'd come in there, a little bitty guy, man.  He'd--"I, I got this song here, y'all need to listen to it" you know, and then Curtis and he was the.
Speaker 2: Well was he one of the Krass Brothers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah he was one of the owners of the store.
Speaker 2: Now this is a--is he black?
Speaker 1: He's a Jew.
Speaker 2: Jewish guy, that's what I thought he might have been Jewish.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was a Jew and him and Curtis was about the same size and he had so many suits man he wouldn't wear, he'd wear a suit one time and he told Curtis, "Hey man, listen I've only worn this suit one time."  I mean beautiful clothes, so Curtis would buy it, buy his suits, you know, and he used to worry us to death about that song.
Story_ID: 261940
Speaker 1: Now I wanna get back into some of these details but I just wanted, for the sake of chronology just to go back to when you first got involved--when they first called you in '59 [1959] to get involved with a--I mean to be a part of the group [The Impressions].  You said they were looking at another guy but they, they choose you because you were more versatile, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could sing all the parts, yeah, and I suppose that's how I got the job.  I didn't know that they was looking at somebody else, but I learned it, I learned that they were a few years later you know.  I said good Lord, well, I'm lucky you know and was glad to be a part of that 'cause I thought I had missed out on it you know.  'Cause once them guys left and they were just so big, I said whoa.  I just couldn't believe it you know 'cause when they left here and we was all, they couldn't sing like that you know and once I heard that record ['For Your Precious Love'] man, I said naw, that's not them.  They can't sang that good, but man after I heard 'em I went to that [Soldiers and Sailors Memorial] Auditorium [Chattanooga, Tennessee], I heard 'em sing and left and went down to Atlanta [Georgia], they was in Atlanta the next night, and I heard 'em again, you know and took my father's [James Cash] car, 'cause he worked from three to eleven, and I was supposed to have been back and man I didn't make it back and boy I was in big trouble.  I was in big trouble, but I had to go and see them guys sing that song again you know and after knowing that I was gonna be with em' man, I said man this is, this is just great.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is great.
Story_ID: 261941
Speaker 1: You were just saying that you all--after [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler left and they brought you on.
Speaker 2: Right, it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said that the group continued to tour as Jerry Butler and the Impressions?
Speaker 2: --and the Impressions, yeah, 'cause nobody really knew who Jerry was, I mean they hadn't saw him, you know, and when we went down through Alabama, Mississippi we was Jerry Butler and the Impressions.  Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] was the lead singer, he was singing 'For Your Precious Love' and he sounded like Jerry you know so that's how we got away with it you know but after really things started happening '[American] Bandstand' and all that and they saw all these different artists we couldn't do that anymore, we couldn't do that anymore so it made it kinda hard for us at that particular time 'cause we couldn't work.
Speaker 1: Now did, did anybody every point out in the audience, "Hey, that's not Jerry Butler"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they?
Speaker 2: We had played someplace in, in Mississippi and it got around that, naw, naw that's not Jerry Butler and the Impressions you know but we finally made it through that particular show and left town, and came on back to Chicago [Illinois] you know 'cause that could've been treacherous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we got away with it then.
Speaker 1: So you all.
Speaker 2: We stopped doing that and said well, hey we are The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--your home base was in Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: This time because of the record company [Vee-Jay Records] being there?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay so you moved to Chicago, from Detroit [Michigan] you said to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And.
Speaker 1: Now this is about--what year did you move to Chicago, was it '60 [1960] or?
Speaker 2: Probably yeah, about, about, 19--early part of '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I just stayed over in, in Detroit for about nine months.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, well what was it l--can you remember your first show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was at--with [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent in Chicago at one of the--I think it was DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] you know.  He use to have a record hop and stuff and The Dells they would be on the show, a whole lot of the Chicago artists would be on you know, that, that was my first show; but my first big show that I ever played was in Memphis, Tennessee at the [Ellis] Auditorium and I had to wear Jerry's clothes.  I had on his coat, you know his pants, everything you know, and I said, "Boy will you look at this" and when out boy and we shook the house, we shook the house and that was my really big professional show.
Story_ID: 261942
Speaker 1: Were you impressed with Chicago [Illinois]?  I mean you came from Chattanooga [Tennessee] and you, you're in a--had Chattanooga integrated before you left or was it still segregated?
Speaker 2: It was beginning to integrate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was beginning to integrate when I left.
Speaker 1: Did you notice much difference between Chatt- Chicago and Chattanooga in terms of --?
Speaker 2: Yeah one thing in Chicago you know, they, you could do what you needed to do you know, but they would let you know how far you could go you know.  Where they had the signs and stuff there in Chattanooga you know, this is white, this is white, this is black, this is--hey I didn't see a lot of that in Chicago, but if you stepped outta line somebody let you know something you know.
Speaker 1: Okay so wasn't, it wasn't as free--well it wasn't as free as you--did you think it was gonna be a lot freer than it was or?
Speaker 2: I did, I did you know but as time went on you know I saw it freeing up more and more you know, 'cause a lot of the people from the South would move to Chicago you know to try to get a better grip on whatever was happening in they life you know and it got a little bit better.
Story_ID: 261943
Speaker 1: Now with the gospel roots of The Impressions, The Impressions--I think most of the groups had some kinda gospel root, you know, 'cause when you think back in those days Sam Cooke came out of a gospel background.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A lot of The Temptations did, but did you all perform in churches when you first started at all?
Speaker 2: Not really but most of our songs had that overtone to it he 'People Get Ready,' you know.
Speaker 1: 'Amen.'
Speaker 2: Yeah 'Amen,' the 'Keep on Pushing,' that was a gospel song that Curtis [Mayfield] kinda took some of the gospel lyrics out and kind changed it around a little bit you know, but most of our songs man have always had that gospel overtone to it you know.  I suppose that's why things have been so good for, for this groups for so many years because of the foundation that was laid and due to the fact that Curtis was doing such a good, great, great writing at that particular time you know.  That it just laid a solid foundation for what we're still doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in terms of that was there ever a discussion about using gospel music in a secular setting or in, in popular music?  Did you all ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: Naw.
Speaker 1: Whether it was right or wrong and?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just--when Curtis would write those songs like I said a lot of times we'd be on the road, late at night.  I remember him coming to the room talking about 'Choice of Colors' you know.  Two or three o'clock in the morning, you'd hear a little knock on the door, it'd be him 'cause he would never go nowhere, we was on the road or whatever he'd stay in that room writing songs all day all night you know and, "[HistoryMaker] Fred [Cash] come on, listen to this and see what think." And I'd tell him so many times, "Boy, I said you really have a gift as far as writing songs, Curtis."  He said, "Man I think I'm gonna try to go to school you know and learn."  I said, "You don't need to do nothing but do what you're doing, 'cause the good Lord has given you a great gift."
Story_ID: 261944
Speaker 1: I guess it's a good time to ask about your impression of Curtis Mayfield.  Curtis Mayfield, he didn't read music did he?  I mean he--
Speaker 2: No, no that's what he said he wanted to do is go to school and read music and do whatever you know, but like I told him, I said, "Curtis, you have a gift you know, the Good Lord has given you great gift, you don't need to do anything but do what you're doing." And he never did go to school, but he just had that gift where he could write songs man and, and if he'd hear somebody say something that would catch his ear, he could write about it you know and that's what was so amazing about him as far as his writing abilities.  He could just set down and put it on a piece of paper.  Where I've tried to write and I do some writing you know, but it don't come that easy for me.
Speaker 1: So, from what I understand like he you know he played the guitar.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?  So he could, he could pick out a rhythm on the guitar, I mean a song on the guitar?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he would also write the lyrics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he'd write the lyrics and have all the music and stuff down you know and then we'd take it to [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate, and he'd put it on tape then take it to Johnny Pate and then Johnny Pate would transpose it onto a piece of paper into music you know, and that's how we did so many of those songs, you know.
Story_ID: 261945
Speaker 1: Then we had [HistoryMaker] Eddie Thomas who was our manager at the time you know and we just had a great machine working, with Curtis [Mayfield] writing, [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate arranging, Eddie Thomas working for ABC-Paramount [Records], we knew our records was gonna get played because he was the promotion man for ABC-Paramount, so we was cranking 'em out five hits at a time you know, and it was just lucky that hey, we had that kinda machine working for us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the arrangements of Johnny Pate are, were wonderful on those--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --[The] Impressions records, right.
Speaker 1: He did most of our stuff and then we tried to use all the same musicians.  If we had a hit on 'It's Alright,' we'd try to use them same musicians all the way down the line.  Sometime we couldn't get one or two of 'em you know we'd try to wait until those guys was available so they could play on these records.
Speaker 2: Now the first big hit after [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler left was 'It's Alright,' is that true or was it?
Speaker 1: Well we had 'Gypsy Woman.'
Speaker 2: Oh, was that first before 'It's Alright'?
Speaker 1: Yeah we had--the first record that we'd done was 'Sad, Sad Girl and Boy.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was just kinda warm you know as far as getting us out there and then we came back with 'It's Alright' was the big record, that was the big record that really took us on over the hill you know, and after that 'Talking About My Baby' and all the rest of the stuff you know.
Speaker 2: Now did 'It's Alright' come out before 'Gypsy Woman'?
Speaker 1: Naw, 'Gypsy Woman' came out after [sic. before] 'Sad, Sad Girl and Boy.'
Speaker 2: Now is there a story behind 'Gypsy Woman'?  I heard Curtis Mayfield on public radio talking about it at one point, but I'm gonna ask you something about some of that, but was there a story behind 'Gypsy Woman'?
Speaker 1: I can't remember if there was a story behind that or not.  What did he say to the fact, I'm, I'm wondering, it might jog my memory?
Speaker 2: Well on public radio he just simply said that he was trying to write something different and so he called the song 'Gypsy Woman,' he never met a gypsy in his life--to his knowledge he didn't really know anything about gypsies, but he wrote 'Gypsy Woman' based on what he'd seen of gypsies in the movies and TV you know, dancing around the fire and that sort of that thing, and he, he talked about later on in life being on tour in France, in Paris [France] I believe where a lot gypsies showed up at his show (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he thought they were gonna hurt him (laughter).  Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause they looked dangerous but they actually invited him to a party and thanked him for writing the song.  They said it was a tribute to gypsies and.
Speaker 2: I'll be darned
Speaker 1: Have you ever heard that story or where you around when that?
Speaker 2: Naw I never, I never heard of it.  I never heard of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was telling it to Terry Gross on 'Fresh Air' on National Public Radio [NPR].  That was a few years ago after he had the accident.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean he was talking about, he was reflecting on that song and how he actually thought that gypsies was there to do him in (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah well I know he as very young when he wrote that song you know, like 'I'm So Proud,' he was very young when he wrote that as well you know and that was one of--that was another song that we had a fit about, 'cause we didn't want that song to come out.  We still wanted another up-tempo song you know?
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't think that was gonna be a?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A hit?
Speaker 2: No, and the record company [ABC-Paramount Records] said, "Hey this is the song that we gonna put out."  We--I never will forget it, we was staying in Atlanta [Georgia], we had a day off, we was in Atlanta at the Forest Arms Hotel, and when we got the call Curtis came back and said, "Man, they gonna put out 'I'm So Proud'."  We had a fit, I mean we just had a fit.  "Why don't they put the other song out you know 'cause it was an up-tempo," that's what we wanted was up-tempo, not knowing if the company said, "Hey, if this is gon' be a hit, they can make it a hit if they want it," you know.  If they want 'I'm So Proud' to be a hit, they can make it a hit and they did, and betted us again, you know, "Hey I'll bet y'all a hundred dollars a piece that this song will be a hit--"
Story_ID: 261946
Speaker 1: But you know, as a--speaking from a--as a fan on the other side of the radio (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, when you, we'd go down to the record store, I mean the word was spread--in those days we didn't have black radio stations in a lot of places.
Speaker 2: That's right, they.
Speaker 1: The word would spread, there'd be a local record shop on the corner you get to buy a record for fifty cents or a dollar or something.  You bring it home, you, you listen to it and then the word was spread and the word about you--those early [The] Impressions songs were powerful messages, I mean that.
Speaker 2: They were.
Speaker 1: Had an emotional--I mean people, the country was going through the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Were you, and I know the songs like 'Keep on Pushing' in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --was like an anthem for the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] volunteers down in Mississippi and they played that a lot.  (Singing) "Keep on pushing."
Speaker 2: Sure. But see what was happening then we was, I mean just so hot, we worked man, I mean, looked like every day; didn't have no time off and that was our way of contributing you know.  A lot of the peoples was out marching and doing whatever you know, but we did it through our songs, 'Keep on Pushing,' 'We're A Winner,' you know.  "If you had a choice of colors," you know.  All of those songs, 'This is My Country' so that was our way of contributing something back you know, and the people grabbed it.  I mean really grabbed it, all those songs such big hits.
Speaker 1: The song like 'I'm So Proud of You' [sic. 'I'm So Proud'] you know I mean even though it's a love song.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think, it had a larger general meaning you know--?
Speaker 2: It did, it did.
Speaker 1: --of people kind of sort of a re--being a statement you know in the black community about being proud of who you are.
Speaker 2: Who you are.
Speaker 1: And who you're in love with and you know rather than.
Speaker 2: Well see that's why I say at a young age Curtis [Mayfield] had that gift you know as far as writing songs was concerned you know.  Even while he was alive I just never thought that he got his just due as far as recognition was concerned you know, because believe it or not I don't know if a lot of people know, this man was really great as far as sitting down putting this music together.  He was a genius at that you know and I mean he's gotten a lot of recognition since he passed away you know but it would've been so much sweeter if it had of happened while he was alive.
Story_ID: 261947
Speaker 1: Tell us something about Curtis Mayfield's personality, is there a different--you know aspects of his personality that seemed to jump out but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Great guy and a funny guy, I mean would do anything--had a road manager, his name was Eddie Suitor [ph.] and he was--we was, (unclear) we was in California all sitting around the pool.  Eddie Suitor couldn't swim at all and he was all, he would always wear a suit, had a hat on and he was our road manager like I say at the time, and he came past that pool, Curtis pushed him in that pool with his hat and his suit on and I thought I would just die laughing.  We all fell out you know and Suitor was one of them kinda guys man he stuttered, "I-I-I-I'll cut ya, I'll cut ya" you know and man we just thought that was so funny.  He would do things like that, you'd be in the shower he'd go get the waste basket and fill it up with cold water and just, woosh, and just laugh so hard I mean it would just tickle him so bad you know, and look around and wonder who it is--would be Curtis, you know?  And he was just a funny guy, really funny guy.
Speaker 1: Now I've--we've also heard that he was very tight with--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) With his money (laughter), he was that as well you know I mean he's--"Man aw, we can't spend that kinda money you know," he was very tight when it come down to spending his money you know, so I imagine that's what made him Curtis Mayfield, because he was very tight when it come down to--I mean just buy, he'd buy certain things you know, but he was just, never just overspend on anything and you couldn't borrow a whole lot of money from him.  He'd let you have a few dollars (laughter), but that was about it and he wanted that back immediately, you know but all-in-all, he was a great guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did he ever talk about the [Civil Rights] Movement you know?  I know he wrote songs about it but did he--do you think that was really on his mind a lot?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, we was out in California one time and heard A. Rap Brown on the radio.  So we--
Speaker 1: H. Rap?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we drove, we found out where that meeting was and we went there you know and just sat down and kinda listened to see what the message was all about you know, and all these guys used to come to our show.  We'd play at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], if any of 'em was in town. They'd come, you know.  So yeah that was very much on his mind, very much.
Story_ID: 261948
Speaker 1: Who else would come to the shows, I mean, who are some the people that--did [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] ever come to one of your shows?
Speaker 2: You know we was leaving Greenville, South Carolina in the middle part of the '60s [1960s] on our way to Atlanta [Georgia] to receive a plaque from Dr. Martin Luther King when all of our band had a wreck and got killed.  We had played at the [Greenville Memorial] Auditorium in Greenville, South Carolina--even with some of--with Jackie Wilson, he was on that show and some of his musicians wanted to ride back with our band to Atlanta, but all of 'em got killed.  And.
Speaker 1: All of them?
Speaker 2: Every one of them.
Speaker 1: What happened, what happened?
Speaker 2: For some reason there was, they was coming down [I-]85?
Speaker 1: Were they on--in a bus?
Speaker 2: Naw', they was in a--at that particular time we had a station wagon.  They was pulling a trailer and from what I understand the police said it was foggy and they didn't make a turn, they went between two bridges.  You know how the highways are separated on this side by two bridges.  They went right between them two bridges, 210 feet in the air, it pulled the trailer on all the--it jumped all the way across that river to the other side and just fold up and killed every one of 'em you know, and we didn't get a chance to meet Dr. Martin Luther King, 'cause everything was just in such an array at that particular time you know?  'Cause a lot of the people thought it was The Impressions.  When the police found 'em they were--had all our ink pens, and hats and stuff saying Impressions and that's what went out over the radio you know, until our road manager finally called everybody and let 'em know, to let 'em know that it was not The Impressions, it was The Impressions' band you know.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: That had to be what about '66 [1966], ' 65 [1965] somewhere in that area, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, that's really, that's really tragic.
Speaker 2: That was terrible, just terrible.
Speaker 1: You probably lost a lot of, you all probably lost a lot of performances trying to regroup right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we just had to take off a while and just try to get over that you know after going to all the funerals and stuff, we just had to regroup.  Take off some time, put a whole new band together you know and come back out there again, but it was a very hard time for us 'cause these guys had been with us and played on a lot of our records, you know and they was sorely missed, and that's something that took us a long time to get over, you know.
Story_ID: 261949
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite song?
Speaker 2: 'It's Alright.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's what bought my first home, I never will forget it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now there's a story you told at the beginning that that's your favorite phrase is the saying, is it's all right.
Speaker 2: It's all right, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's all right, so how did that become a song now, how did it become a song?
Speaker 2: Well we was in Nashville, Tennessee playing at club called the Brown Derby [ph.] and between shows we didn't have a lot to do and you know how the dressing room just wasn't adequate at that particular time.  So we'd go out in the car you know in the car that we was traveling in.  Curtis [Mayfield] would have his guitar and me, him and Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] would just sit there and sing you know, and I had this saying like I said "Oh, man, it's gonna be all right, it's all right" you know, blah, blah, and Curtis put that song together, 'It's Alright,' that's where it came from you know and I just happened to listen to an interview that he was on and he was speaking about that you know.  I said, boy I'll tell you the truth, he just had that kinda gift where he could just hear somebody talking about something and right away he could put it to a song.
Speaker 1: Well it kind of, when you reflect on that song it sort of bridges a gospel, the gospel scene and the secular scene by and it kinda--the song says, "It's all right to have a good time"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's all right, but, and the beat is like a gospel (singing) "It's all right, have a good time, 'cause it's all right."
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, well you know when we got through recording that song, we was in the studio and Gene Chandler he was in there.  Several other artists you know.  We played that song all day--that was, we didn't do any other song after that.  We'd just sit there and play--and he said, "Man," Gene Chandler said, "If this is not a hit y'all give it to me.  Y'all give it to me." But [HistoryMaker] Johnny Pate, Curtis, Sam and myself and Gene Chandler we sat down and when it got to the clapping, Gene Chandler he was on that clap.  "Everybody clap your hands," he went in the studio with us and we put all that down you know, but we felt like we knew we had us a hit and we needed it at that particular time 'cause ABC-Paramount [Records] was gonna drop us from the label if we hadn't a came up with a hit, but that 'It's Alright' saved us, 'cause when that come out and it hit so big, we kept rolling, we kept rolling.
Speaker 1: That's an up--it's an upbeat song.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the message you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: "When you wake up early in the morning," how's it go?
Speaker 2: "When you wake up early in the morning feeling sad," uh what?
Speaker 1: Like so many of us do.
Speaker 2: "Hum a littler soul" yeah, "make life your goal and surely something gotta come to you and say it's all right" you know, but you know great song and I'm glad it came from me, proud of that.
Speaker 1: Do you have another favorite?
Speaker 2: 'Keep on Pushing.'
Speaker 1: 'Keep on Pushing.'
Speaker 2: Yeah. That's another favorite song of mine you know and I love to perform it as well you know even now.  We can't get away from doing those songs, we have to do 'em you know.
Speaker 1: And I, as I said in '64 [1964] is when 'Keep on Pushing' came out when you had the, the summer- Freedom Summer in Mississippi, the-- [Andrew] Goodwin, [Michael] Schwerner, and [James] Chaney had been killed that summer.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You had SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was down there you know registering people to vote, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party [MFDP] and they went to the [1964 Democratic National] Convention in Atlantic City [New Jersey], I mean that-- you know 'Keep on Pushing' was--a lot of people.
Speaker 2: It was big for that time for that movement.
Speaker 1: It inspired a lot of people.
Speaker 2: It did, it did you know and I was just elated over it, you know.  I think even [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson named PUSH [Operation Breadbasket; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] after 'Keep on Pushing' you know and it was a big song, I mean, big, big for that time.
Speaker 1: Now did Reverend Jackson tell you all that or how did you?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't really say that but I just feel like why, maybe that's where it come from you know, Operation PUSH.  Could not be true you know but I feel like that's where he got it from.
Speaker 1: I think you're right, but you know we don't--we can't verify it here, if any historians were watching this, but I think you're right and if somebody does some research they'll probably come up with--
Speaker 2: I'm gonna ask Reverend Jackson.
Story_ID: 261950
Speaker 1: You said before we started this interview that you would often sing on the records of some of the other people that Curtis [Mayfield] was writing for, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I was telling about the show in 1966 I saw as a teenager they had Fontella Bass and Major Lance and a lot of different you know--Gene Chandler's on the show and you know [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler's on the show and he performed with The Impressions and--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Said but you often sing the background for songs like '[The] Monkey Time' with Major Lance and other songs?
Speaker 2: That's right we sung all of those songs with Major you know.  All the songs that Curtis wrote (humming) we did all of those tunes with him you know until our record company [ABC-Paramount Records] made us stop doing it.  They said now listen y'all, y'all can't out--we hear more of The Impressions than we're hearing of Major Lance you know, so y'all can't do that anymore you know.  We used to do a lot of stuff with Jerry, a lot of stuff with Gene Chandler you know but yeah, our, our record company put a halt to that, so we couldn't do it anymore.
Story_ID: 261951
Speaker 1: Well what we were discussing kinda in the break, we wanted to go back maybe to the beginnings of your involvement with The Impressions to when [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler left and--the kinda hard times The Impressions fell on, and you said that for a while you know the--well The Impressions then consisted of the Brooks Brothers [Arthur Brooks and Richard Brooks] and--
Speaker 2: Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and--
Speaker 1: Sam and you--
Speaker 2: --myself and Curtis [Mayfield], yeah.
Speaker 1: And Curtis Mayfield and for a while you all were impersonating Jerry Butler (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, through--well hey.
Speaker 1: Curtis had to, had to you know travel with Jerry Butler.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In order to--'cause he was still writing songs for Jerry Butler right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well.
Speaker 1: And he had to do some traveling with him to make enough money for you all to--'cause you fell on hard times.
Speaker 2: Very hard times, very hard times.
Speaker 1: Now what was the--tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: In between that period Sam and I we got little jobs at one of our friend's restaurant you know so we could kinda survive 'cause.
Speaker 1: So what were you doing in the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What were you doing in the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Washing dishes, yeah that's, that was my job just--
Speaker 1: Who would have ever guessed that?  I mean that.
Speaker 2: Well, hey we--our friend he was a white fellow and he said "Well hey, my"--his father was Greek, well he was Greek as well and he said "Man, my father's got a restaurant.  I know y'all need something to do, you know so you can have some kind of monies to live on."  So he got us a job in his father's restaurant, and busting [sic. bussing] dishes that's what we was doing you know to try to feed ourselves, 'cause Curtis he had to go on the road with Jerry so he could make a living for his self, you know.  So he was still playing guitar for Jerry and writing songs you know, and once he made enough money he came back and got Sam and myself.  We went in the studio and recorded 'Gypsy Woman.'  We took that to New York [New York], I think we recorded it in New York and gave it to Maxine Brown which was another artist.  Her husband was a producer, and he took it to ABC-Paramount [Records], and ABC-Paramount liked it and after that the rest was kinda history because it started the ball to rolling you know.
Speaker 1: So your first records as The Impressions without Jerry Butler were produced by?
Speaker 2: 'Sad, Sad Boy and Girl,' that was the first one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But the one that really started to making noise was 'Gypsy Woman.'
Speaker 1: And that was on ABC Paramount?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not on, not on Vee-Jay [Records]?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Then after that 'It's Alright' and after that it was, it was uphill, but those was very hard times in between, because when the record came out it was Jerry Butler and the Impressions.  So Jerry kinda rode on that because he had that name you know and we had to do something to survive and that's what we did.
Speaker 1: So how long a period of time was it between?
Speaker 2: I imagine it had to be about two or three years.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: In between that period.
Speaker 1: Okay so did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was a downer.
Speaker 1: You all were washing dishes for two or three years?
Speaker 2: Oh, naw, naw, we--I reckon we worked there for about, about six or seven months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was just--the area that we was working in man was just so rough and we went to work like about four o'clock in the morning and it was just--I mean really a rough area that this restaurant--the area that it was in, in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Where, where was it in Chicago?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I know going down Wentworth [Avenue], it was somewhere over in that area, and I just can't remember.
Speaker 1: Was it in Greektown [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it in Greektown?
Speaker 2: It probably was, probably was 'cause it was Greek restaurant you know, but man it was a rough part of the town that it was in, so we stayed there and we did that for a while you know and we lived in [HistoryMaker] Eddie Thomas' home.  He had a home and he said, "Well hey man"--after we left Detroit [Michigan] he said "Well I gotta house here."  Didn't have no furniture in it, we was sleeping on the floor, you know and that's how we made it.  That's how we made it you know and after Curtis came back and he had made a little money we went into the studio and started rolling again.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now that's a period of time we didn't hear about, the, down, that's--so that was the worst-- I guess that had to be the worst period you know.
Speaker 2: The worst time, yep, for The Impressions you know, but once we got it back together then hey.  The Good Lord was in the mix and hey, and it went from there.
Story_ID: 261952
Speaker 1: So you think your biggest time was in the mid-'60s [1960s] when all those, all, most of The Impressions' hits were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah on up through the late part of the '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause people still like--I mean you--once you get a--it seems that once you get a body of work of enough songs that are hits, then you don't really have to make anymore (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: I mean (laughter) it seems like, you know I hate to say this but that's what it seems like, you don't really have to make 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said we laid a good foundation as far as a lot of these songs are concerned you know?  A lot of these people will never forget these song the 'Keep on Pushing,' 'People Get Ready' and 'Choice of Colors,' 'We're A Winner' you know because it meant something to them you know and they've also expressed the meaning to their kids you know.  We see young and younger people coming to our shows you know and wanting to know about what happened with this song?  How did this come about?  You know, so that's what keep us out here working still and at our age, you know.  So I'm thankful for that and for the good writing that Curtis [Mayfield] had done over the years.  It just left a good solid foundation for The Impressions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--just for the sake of clarity here, you all had a contract with ABC-Paramount [Records] as The Impressions.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But when you sang background for Major Lance and them that was for OKeh Records?
Speaker 2: OKeh Records.
Speaker 1: And the--that was for the--you know for another label?
Speaker 2: For another label.
Speaker 1: So that's why they--there was conflict, and they said hey we're--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --hearing more of The Impressions on Major Lance's record than.
Speaker 2: That's right and they didn't particularly care for that you know.
Speaker 1: (Humming) Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's why told us, listen, y'all can't do that no more.  Yeah 'cause we hearing more of y'all on the record than we hearing of the artist you know.  So that put a halt to that.
Speaker 1: But Curtis could still write for whoever he wanted to write to right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he wrote for a whole lotta folks and that was no problem, long as we didn't sing on those records.
Story_ID: 261953
Speaker 1: Now there came a time though when Curtis Mayfield you know struck out on his own?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well I guess in the early '70s [1970s] I guess or--when was it?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]?
Speaker 2: That was his--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, so what happened?  What was it (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, Curtis wanted to stay in--the company was kinda big and Curtom Records was really growing and it was big at the time you know.  He said, "Well what I'm gon' probably do is just stay in and run the record company," you know.  So Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and I we said well, you know we'll just carry on and just put somebody else in Curtis' spot and keep going you know.  So we was in Washington, D.C. playing at The Howard Theatre.  Leroy Hutson was going to--what is the college there?  Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and he and Donny Hathaway use to come over and catch our show all the time at the Howard Theatre, and he was just so interested in singing, so interested in singing.  That's what his major was in, was music.  So we--when Curtis got ready to leave, we put--called on Leroy and Leroy joined the group and he stayed with the group for about three years and after that we decided to make it a four-man group.  So after Leroy left we bought in Ralph Johnson and Reggie Torian, and our first big record with those guys was 'Finally Got Myself Together [(I'm a Changed Man)].'
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah that's what bought us.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: Back as a group you know?
Speaker 1: So that was the four of you on that one right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep so we had about five hits with that, with that line up in the group you know you know.
Speaker 1: Now, now who wrote that one?
Speaker 2: Ed Townsend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The guy that sang 'For Your Love'; he wrote that and several other songs for us, 'Sooner or Later' which was another hit for The Impressions that he produced.  'Same Thing It Took'; that was produced by [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson's [half] brother [Chuck Jackson] and Ed Townsend.  What was his name?  And Marvin Yancey, like I said we had about five hits with that line up in the group.
Speaker 1: Okay yeah, and that was--the five hits.  I remember those yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, same thing took 'You are My Sunshine,' 'Finally Got Myself Together,' something else.  I can't think of what the other one was--'Sooner or Later' yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah now that was another--so, so you got another kinda golden age going on here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: That kept us running on up through the '70s [1970s] and the early '80s [1980s] you know.
Speaker 1: And meanwhile Curtis Mayfield is--he's a big solo.  He comes out with 'Superfly' and all the rest of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he decided to go back in the studio you know.  When this music is in your blood you know, said, "We'll I'm gonna come off and just run the company and retire."  This song came about, 'Superfly' you know and all '[(Don't Worry) If There's A] Hell Below [We're All Going to Go]."  That was the tune and he went into the studio man and when we heard this song I said, "Whoa, this is gonna be a monster," you know.  That put him back out on the road again you know because once he recorded 'Hell Below' the public demanded for him to come back out on the road you know so he went back out.
Story_ID: 261954
Speaker 1: Now there's a phenomena [sic. phenomenon] here that you might be able to shed some light on, I don't know if you can, but I recall in those days that Curtis Mayfield had to be, and this isn't scientific, it's just my impression of it, had to be the most popular artist with black Vietnam [War] vets--
Speaker 2: Oh, most certainly.
Speaker 1: --ever, and I.
Speaker 2: Most.
Speaker 1: Just from observation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well man, we ran--well we played a lot of those [U.S.] military bases overseas over in Germany and Switzerland and Denmark, you know and hey man all of the service guys could tell you something about one of our records that related to them, that kept 'em going through those-- though that period you know and it was some heck of a stories that we heard.  How those particular tunes kept 'em going under such bad situations you know?
Speaker 1: Can you remember a story, I know it's been a long time but can you remember?
Speaker 2: It has been a long time but I remember this one guy was just saying you know, his buddy had gotten killed and this song 'Keep On Pushing' came out and that's what kind of pulled him through that period of time you know.  He said, "Man I just played this song over and over and over again.  That was my national anthem, that's what took me through that period," you know?  And I've heard several of 'em, many stories you know about some of the songs that have carried 'em through you know so it was a big thing for a lot of the servicemens.
Speaker 1: Yeah it just seems like, it seems when you hear the name The Impressions behind a record you expect it to be something that's gonna inspire you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or push you, that's (unclear) if you had a, if you all came out with a song that denigrated black women or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or gloried a pimp or something it would be like--people would say well this isn't The Impressions.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: They would probably be upset.
Speaker 2: And wouldn't nobody buy it, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause hey that's just, that wasn't our style you know?  Our style was about hey, let's get ahead, let's do something, you know.  Then let's make it all right with this one, let's make it all right for that one, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah you couldn't even have done.
Speaker 2: --to motivate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you couldn't even of done 'Cloud Nine.'
Speaker 2: Oh, naw.
Speaker 1: The Impressions couldn't of done 'Cloud Nine.'  They would've.
Speaker 2: Well Curtis come to us with '[The] Monkey Time.'  We said, "No we, we can't sang 'Monkey Time'" you know (laughter).  He said, "Well I'll take it and give it to Major Lance" you know.  So we knew what kind of songs we needed to be singing, you know and that's what we stuck to.
Speaker 1: That's interesting because I think the public sometimes wondered if the group is conscious of it's image and, you know?
Speaker 2: Sure we were, you know.  That's why when--I mean before he'd give any song away he'd bring it to Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and myself to just listen to see if we wanted to do it, you know?  And that just wasn't our image to do those type of songs, you know?
Story_ID: 261955
Speaker 1: You'd think a lot of groups make a mistake by changing their, I mean you know--for instance like you said '[The] Monkey Time.'  After 'Keep on Pushing' and all that--when you do like 'Monkey Time,' I mean it just seem like it's too frivolous to, you know for--
Speaker 2: It is, it is and I think a lot of people.
Speaker 1: --too light.
Speaker 2: A lot of artists make a mistake by doing that.  You got to know where your niche is in this music business you know, and if you get outta that it, it won't happen for you, because people already perceived you as one way but then you do something else you know.  It just don't work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it--even with a successful artist, and I'm thinking about like James Brown. He has always been a big success, but for some reason 'Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud' don't go with 'Hot Pants' you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter), that's right.
Speaker 1: It just doesn't, you know?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right you know and that's what I'm saying about knowing where your niche is you know.  Just certain things that you can't do you know and you have to realize that and know your boundaries.
Story_ID: 261956
Speaker 1: One thing I notice about The Impressions is that, as I said in 1966 when I saw the show with The Impressions and Major Lance and that whole tour, we saw The Impressions on stage and then [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler joined The Impressions and you all sang together and it seems over the years there's always been a reunion and it's not, never been a, it's never--it's always been like a family kind of aspect around The Impressions.  Now you can correct me if I'm wrong, and if everybody hates each other tell me.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But it seems like The Impressions can always get back together and sing and--
Speaker 2: Well who--
Speaker 1: --it seems like it's never a problem?
Speaker 2: It's never been a problem you know as far as Jerry Butler and the Impressions you know.  We've always--even now we work together you know.  So back then we'd come together and do something, then everybody split up and go they ways and do what they need to do.  Back in '84 [1984] we went out on a tour for Budweiser for about thirty-five days you know and right after Curtis [Mayfield]--right before Curtis got hurt we was getting ready to set up another Budweiser tour you know, but it didn't materialize because Curtis had that accident, but yeah we were always been friendly toward each other you know and I'd like--I talk to Jerry Butler's manager just about every other day you know, and we're just good friends.
Speaker 1: How have you been able to do it though with you know it's so much, it's many recriminations in the music business and you, you--the story of Motown and everybody's mad and people are you know, they leave--everybody's bitter and--
Speaker 2: Well I think when you be true to each other you know you gonna always have that thing as far as being truthful with each other.  That's what it's all about you know; I don't have to lie to Jerry, Jerry don't have to lie to me.  We can just be friends and mean that you know and if you are good friends, hey it'll stand up and it have stood the test of time all of these years and hey we talk and still talk you know and we like each other, 'cause Jerry's a gentleman and great guy and I like him a lot.
Story_ID: 261957
Speaker 1: What happened--just tell us for the--I guess anybody can read about it if they want to, but what happened to Curtis Mayfield?  This is I think in--was it 1990, I think it was?
Speaker 2: I think it was 1990, yeah.  Well he was in doing a show, this show we do every year or just about every other year in Brooklyn, New York [New York] for [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] raising money you know for the kids or whatever, and Curtis was on stage.  I think he went on, was taking Harold Melvin & the Blue Notes' spot because he wanted to go and catch a flight, you know.  And all of a sudden this storm just come up from nowhere you know and all this big lighting rig--it blew over the speakers and this big lighting rig fell on Curtis' neck, and that's what paralyzed him from the neck down, you know, just a freak accident, you know.  Who's to say that it wouldn't happen if he hadn't went on in his spot -- Harold Melvin and Blue Notes?
Speaker 1: Was he performing when that happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was just ready to hook up into his guitar and getting ready to play you know, and as he was bending over hooking into his amp, that's when it all happened.  So just--
Speaker 1: So he was paralyzed from the?
Speaker 2: From the neck down, yeah from his neck down and I don't know, but he still man, he laid on his back, he cut a couple of albums you know and he was still in the business and still going strong, and I don't know how he, I don't know how he did it but hey man, he laid on his back and recorded a whole album and did well with it, really well.
Speaker 1: So Curtis Mayfield passed in '90, 19--1999 I believe.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], yep.  His wife [Altheida Mayfield] had called from Atlanta [Georgia] that night when he passed away.  She said--well she called me early--yeah she called me that night.  Said, "I don't think Curtis is gonna make it through the night," you know and she called back the next day and said he had passed away, you know, but his manager said that he had talked to Curtis and he just got tired, said he was ready to go you know, and he went on in, went on in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We lost a great writer and a producer and a great friend.
Story_ID: 261958
Speaker 1: Since that time The Impressions have been inducted into the--is it the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame yet?
Speaker 2: Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, the Vocal Hall Group Hall of Fame, the Rhythm & Blues [Music] Hall of Fame, Beach Music Hall of Fame and now here we are with, what is this, The HistoryMakers hall of fame.  So it's been good for us, it's been really good for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you've had like--we just interviewed yesterday [HistoryMaker] Willie Kitchens who's one of the newest members of The Impressions right?  He's the newest, I guess the newest member?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: From here in Chattanooga [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now when did, when did you and Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] move back to Chattanooga?
Speaker 2: I moved back in 1976 and I--my mother [Lola Cunningham Cash] and father [James Cash] got sick and so we come back to try and help take care of them you know and in the process I fell back in love with Chattanooga and I've been here ever since and love it.
Speaker 1: So you were glad to leave way back when but?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was because man it was so cold in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean it was just--ooh that (unclear) man every winter was just kill me.  I'm a kind of a warm-natured fellow you know, and I don't know how I stayed in Chicago all them many years you know, but once I got back here and saw what the weather was about I said, "Oh man, I should've been back fifteen years ago," but I got here and got settled in and bought me a home and raised a family and hey I'm happy here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now when did Sam move back?  Did he move back around the same time or?
Speaker 2: I think he moved back in 1977, I think he moved down to Atlanta [Georgia] first, he and Curtis [Mayfield] and he stayed down there for about a year and then he moved back to Chattanooga.
Speaker 1: Okay now and now you all perform--it's three of you now right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there was four, and the other new member passed away.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vandy Hampton, yeah he passed away several months ago.  Just one of those things man, he, he got sick and his sister called me the same way Altheida [Mayfield], Curtis' wife called me and said he was in the hospital and in intensive care in Michigan and they didn't think he was gonna make it through the night.  You know it was just so sudden you know and the next day about four o'clock he had passed away, so lost a couple of great guys there.
Story_ID: 261959
Speaker 1: How many times do you all perform a year on average?
Speaker 2: Probably about six months out of the year, just about that you know.
Speaker 1: So you're on the road about six months out of the year?
Speaker 2: About six months out of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay is it mostly here in the United States or?
Speaker 2: Well overseas, 2000 we was over in London [England], Africa.
Speaker 1: Well whereabouts in Africa?
Speaker 2: All over Africa. I'm trying to think what countries were we in?
Speaker 1: Nigeria or you think?
Speaker 2: Naw'.
Speaker 1: No? Oh.
Speaker 2: Aw I can't think of it right now off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: South Africa or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, South Africa, was it Durham?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Durban?
Speaker 2: Durban, South Africa.
Speaker 1: Durban, South Africa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we went on tour with Eric Clapton over in London for about thirty days we stayed over there.
Speaker 1: Now how did that collaboration take place?  That's an interesting collaboration?
Speaker 2: Well when we--in California, we was at the, at the church.  We had service for Curtis [Mayfield] and Eric Clapton performed, Stevie Wonder performed.  Who else, Lauryn Hill, all these people performed and we performed with Eric Clapton, 'I['ve] Been Trying' and after that service was over we was standing out in the parking lot.  Eric Clapton say, "Hey man I, I, would really love to record a song with you all."  I said "Oh yeah?"   So we took, we swapped numbers and about a month later he called me, you know.  Said, "I'm gonna be recording in New York [New York] and I'd love for y'all to come out and do a couple of tunes with me."  So we went to New York to the recording studio, thought we was gonna do just one or two songs--wind up doing the whole album but one song you know.  It came out, it did well, it did well, 'Reptile' that was the name of that album.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we toured over in Birmingham, England and in England with him for about three weeks, then we came back to the [United] States and did some dates here as well with him.  Great guy to work with, great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, great guitar player yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, man he's phenomenal you know and just loved him.  He treated us so nice and I can't say enough good things about him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you do--about six months out of a year you tour?
Speaker 2: About six months out of the year which is about enough you know.  After all these years on the road, man, being out on the road so much you know, those six months sound like, like that's about right for us.
Speaker 1: Are you working on any new material?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we got a new Christmas album.  I think we missed the deadline for this Christmas, but next Christmas in '06 [2006] we got a new CD that's coming out and, believe it or not, this is the first Christmas CD that The Impressions have ever had.
Story_ID: 261960
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you--yeah you know you were just reflecting during the break about the trip to Africa and some of the things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --you saw in Africa?
Speaker 2: Well you know we went over there with a (unclear), a lot of the church peoples from Atlanta [Georgia] and just seeing how the people lived over there at that particular time.  We went through a lot of the mud huts and saw a lot of the dances, you know they came out and greeted us with a, a lot of the young ladies doing the African dance and it was just really incredible you know.  It's a place that I've always wanted to visit you know and it was for helping the people over in Africa.  That was for our reason of going over there you know?  So we stayed over there I think for about eight days, just doing shows.  We did several shows for the people you know raising monies to help out you know, and I remember we played Rome, Italy and some Africans came up to us in the airport and said asked us, "Have you ever been to the Motherland?"  We said, "No." "Well you all so close you need to go to the Motherland" and I've always wanted to go to Africa and when the chance came where we could go, I was just elated and enjoyed it you know.  'Cause I had a whole different perspective of Africa you know.  Africa, man looked just Miami, Florida you know.  I mean it is really beautiful and I've always had--was under the impression you know the jungle and all the animals running here and there you know.  Wholly different kind of set up you know, and it was just beautiful beaches you know and I just enjoyed it, enjoyed it, enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 261961
Speaker 1: When you were coming up here in Chattanooga [Tennessee] you went to black schools, did they teach black history in the schools when you were coming along or did they--did you have any of that kind of?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Instruction?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was wondering in a place like Chattanooga with its significance in terms of the Civil War and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Tennessee being a state where they, even the whites were split on slavery and you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: How did, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well you know a lot of that right, we right close to it right here in Roswell, Georgia.  You can go down to the battlefield there and just look around and--
Speaker 1: The [Battle of] Chickamauga, Chickahominy [Battle of Gaines's Mill], all those different battles.
Speaker 2: --Chickamauga, all of that you know, yeah and see where the soldiers did all the fighting and stuff you know.  It's a big area here for that you know.  I remember when I as a little boy, all the soldiers would come into Chattanooga.  There was a little cafe, H & I Cafe [ph.] down the street from my home you know, where I grew up at and they would just be in there I mean just every weekend there would just a lot of soldiers in there and I didn't really understand it at that particular time because I was so little, you know, but as I look at it now you know it was a big base here down in Rossville [Georgia], big base. And I ride through there now and just look, you and it's amazing.  It's just amazing, you know all the monuments and stuff are there and I just ride through there 'cause it's so peaceful you know and it's maybe about ten or fifteen acres--ten or fifteen miles through there that you can just ride and stop and look at the old cabins and stuff you know, and.
Speaker 1: So they made a historic district out of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah goo gobs and monuments and stuff and it's interesting to see.
Story_ID: 261962
Speaker 1: Now we were talking before we took the break about the Christmas album.  It's being produced by [HistoryMaker] Willie Kitchens here from Chattanooga [Tennessee] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he's doing a great job and Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and myself you know we just letting him just do what he needs to do with this project because he's good at what he do you know.  He cut all the music and picked most of the Christmas songs you know and we all working on the vocals together and, and like I said he's doing the music.  He's already done it you know, so we've done ten songs so far we've five more to do and we'll have this project finished, and I am really proud of it because all the years The Impressions have been out here we've never had a Christmas album and I don't know why that is, but we will have one next year, so and I'm proud of it.
Story_ID: 261963
Speaker 1: [When] you look back at everything--of all the years with The Impressions, what do you see as your major contribution to the group?
Speaker 2: Well I think my own contribution to this group is after Curtis [Mayfield] really left and went on his own there had to be an anchorman to keep everything together and that was my job you know, as far as being the business man, as far as taking care of everything, making sure that everything was right in certain areas you know, and when something would happen, we needed to do certain things to keep the group going, I was there to try to make that happen and I think that was my contribution.
Story_ID: 261964
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That we'll come together and try to work with each other, you know?  That's something that we look like we have a problem with you know I mean as far as working together, making things happen you know, and that could be if we don't be jealous of each other. We could easily do that and be so much further ahead if we just all put it all in one basket and let's work together to make things happen for a better world and for our young people.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think The Impressions have sort of shown by example how, that you can work together and?
Speaker 2: Certainly, I think so, I think so and when we go out to the different schools and things and speak to the kids and stuff, that's one of the things that we talk about you know.  Here's, hey let's come together and do what we need to do to help each other to do it, and I'm just hoping it's rubbing off on some of the young kids.
Story_ID: 261965
Speaker 1: Now when you look back over all the things you've done to this point, is there anything that you would--any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, no, I mean the way the ride went, that's just the way I would ride it again you know, 'cause I'm not ashamed of nothing that we have done at this point you know.  It's all been good, some of it have been very, very hard you know but that's a part of it you know.  This business is hard you know so I wouldn't change anything, not at all.
Story_ID: 261966
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look over everything that you've done to this point, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well I think through our songs you know, there will be legacy some kinda way as well as this history making [sic. The HistoryMakers] situation you know for our kids and whoever wanna know about The Impressions fifteen or twenty years from now you know.  There'll be some documentation where they can look in and say, well hey, this is what they done, and that makes me feel good you know because it'll be written down somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the people will know what we have done over the years.
Story_ID: 261967
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Lola Cunningham Cash] and father [James Cash] think of your success in the music business, did they ever dream that?
Speaker 2: No, my father told me, "Hey boy, you need to get a job," he didn't think this was a job you know?  And when we used to send--we had hard times I'd sent home for money my mother would send me five dollars, man I thought that was five hundred dollars you know and my dad he just never thought, my dad was a Christian man you know and you know he never saw me perform, never, never.  He saw me on the television, but my mother would come to our shows you know, but my father was into that church situation and he never would go to a club or to an auditorium to see us perform you know, but he was proud after we really made it you know and I started sending a few dollars home, aw hey, (laughter), "That's my son" now, you know, but you know he just never thought this thing would materialize into nothing, 'cause when I use to sending home for money, "Y'all, [HistoryMaker] Fred [Cash] you need to come home, ain't nothing gonna happen with that mess" you know, but my mother had faith, she really had faith and thought that we could make it and we was blessed to make it.
Story_ID: 261968
Speaker 1: What about your family now, tell us about your family?  Do you have any children and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, I have six children, six kids.  I got four boys, two girls, most of my kids are Greenville, South Carolina from my first marriage.  I got a son, Fred [Cash] Jr. he lives in New York [New York] and he plays bass guitar with a little bit of everybody you know and I got another son, he's in Greenville, South Carolina.  He has his own construction company, and he's doing well and then I have a daughter in Greenville, South Carolina and another son and I have a nineteen year old daughter here in Chattanooga [Tennessee].  She's going to college and my other daughter she's in Atlanta [Georgia], so I'm proud of all of 'em.  They don't call daddy worrying daddy for nothing, but if they call and they really need, I know they need it you know, but all of 'em are doing well on their own and I'm proud of all of 'em.
Speaker 1: Are you currently married?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I'm married, my wife is Cynthia Stanley-Cash and she's and administrator at UTC [The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee], university here and she's been there several years and my backbone.  So, yeah I'm very much married.
Story_ID: 261969
Speaker 1: Is there anything that I haven't asked you about that you think you wanna put on the record before I ask you our last question?
Speaker 2: Hm, I can't think of anything else at this point.  I can't think of nothing else.
Speaker 1: Well our last question is similar to legacy but it's a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna let whoever determine that you know.  I can't speak for myself how I would like to be remembered.  I'm gonna let the people determine how I should be remembered.
Story_ID: 261970
Speaker 1: In the front of this photo is Sam Gooden [HistoryMaker Samuel Gooden] and in the middle is Curtis Mayfield and of course on the end is myself [HistoryMaker] Fred Cash.  That photo should've been taken in probably 1964 or '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay, in the middle is Curtis Mayfield, to the left is Sam Gooden and to the right is myself, Fred Cash, probably the same year '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please, okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay, all the way on the left end is Curtis Mayfield at the microphone, and in the middle is Sam Gooden and to the right of Sam is myself Fred Cash.  I don't know what song we was recording at that particular time but we are in a recording studio in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: 'Keep On Pushing.'
Speaker 1: Right, (laughter) with that car you really had to keep on pushing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I had one that you couldn't start like that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well I was in Curtis' Jaguar and that was definitely, definitely in 1964.  That's Curtis at the wheel, that's me in the middle and that's Sam in the back.  We're pushing the Jaguar.  The name of the song was 'Keep On Pushing,' 1964.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is kinda tricky, he's got a book here and I'm trying to.
Speaker 2: Where're we at, the bottom?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay far left that was Nate Evans, in the middle--next to Nate going to the right is Sam Gooden, to Sam's left that would be Vandy Hampton and to Vandy's left that's me, Fred Cash.  That looked like we was working in some night club some place that I can't remember.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Never use that name no more, yep.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How about this one?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my beautiful wife, that's Cynthia Stanley-Cash and myself Fred Cash in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: Let me see the book again. (Unclear) sideways 'cause they scanned those on the side.
Speaker 2: Okay, I need to name all those people again?
Speaker 1: If you can yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was the 1984 Budweiser tour for The Impressions to my far left is Curtis Mayfield, right beside Curtis Mayfield is Nate Evans, right beside Nate Evans is Vandy Hampton, beside Vandy Hampton is Sam Gooden and next to Sam Gooden is myself Fred Cash.
Speaker 1: Who's that in the middle (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Who's that in the middle?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, yeah I didn't see him down there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so those comprise all The Impressions that were?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Around at that time performing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: There you go, that's right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next?
Speaker 2: That's The Impressions of today, in the middle is myself Fred Cash, to the left of me is--no well it's to the right of me is [HistoryMaker] Willie Kitchens and to the left of me is Sam Gooden.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold steady please.  Discussion.  Okay next.
Speaker 2: Did I say they last names or did I just say Willie?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think you did.
Speaker 2: I believe I just said they first name to the right of me was Willie, to the left of me was Sam, shouldn't I have said they full name?
Speaker 1: Well yeah, I think we got 'em, (unclear) we'll know 'em.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That part we'll know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We've got the same picture in red, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, good yesterday from Willie.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay good.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Far left, Nate Evans, Curtis Mayfield is next, Sam Gooden is next, Fred Cash, right below Fred is Jerry Butler and on the end is Vandy "Smokey" Hampton.
Story_ID: 261971
Speaker 1: That's my daughter, Delisa Cash, she lives in Greenville, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think this is the next smallest. (Unclear).  Does this work or should I take 'em out?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which photo?
Speaker 1: That middle shot, that's my mother and father.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: It's fine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father, James Cash and Lola [Cunningham] Cash.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Is there another one on here you wanna get?
Speaker 1: That's my oldest son, that's when he was a baby, that's Fred Cash, Jr., lives in New York now.
Speaker 2: He's a bass player now right?
Speaker 1: Yeah he's a bass player.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next, didn't we do that on already.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, naw' that's different one, naw' that's a different daughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay. Same background, same photography, all right go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is my daughter Britnee Elizabeth Cash.  She lives in Chattanooga [Tennessee] attend Chattanooga State [Community] College.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay next, actually wait let me grab one more of that one, sorry.  Okay, good next.
Speaker 2: What can I say about this fellow?  That's when [HistoryMaker] Fred Cash was a little baby, standing out in my front yard in Chattanooga, Tennessee, sweet little sucker (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My--this is my other daughter, this is Dana [ph.], she lives in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 2: Now let me get my other son here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my son Danny Cash [ph.], he lives in Greenville, that's his daughter, my granddaughter, Victoria [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you lower that?
Speaker 2: Lower it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Lower it, it looks like it's not all the way down so it's.
Speaker 2: Well it's got a, it's in a book and the book is (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you flip it upside down?
Speaker 2: I guess I could (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 2: I need to say that again?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No you don't.  Discussion.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's my son and daughter, that's Anthony Cash on the left, my daughter, Delisa on the right, and of course me in the middle.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I think that's it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're right.
Speaker 2: My brother Julius Cash with my wife Cynthia [Stanley-]Cash.  That was in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Where in Detroit do they live?
Speaker 2: Out in, what is that field?
Speaker 1: Southfield [Michigan]?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Southfield, yeah.
