Story_ID: 111894
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: The name is Blanton Canady.  That's B-L-A-N-T-O-N, C-A-N-A-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on November 25, 1948 in a little town called West Point, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm now currently self-employed.  I'm a McDonald's licensee and I've been so for the last twenty-three years.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 6th of January, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, oh, where are we at the present time?  We always ask that question too, that's for historical reasons.  Where are we now?
Speaker 2: We're in Chicago [Illinois] at The HistoryMakers office building which is my first time ever being here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm glad to be here.
Story_ID: 111895
Speaker 1: All right, sorry about that, but, okay, but before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's not McDonald's fried chicken?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well actually we do have a, a crispy chicken sandwich that is fried so I have a chance to eat that from time to time.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown, that's my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas time is my favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've got a couple of those.  Love Jamaica.  Love Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question in this series is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, "Three sides to every story. Your side, my side and the truth."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111896
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you about your family history.  We'll start with your mother's side and then I'll ask you about your father's side but can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name was Grace Warrick Canady.  The spelling of the middle name is W-A-R-R-I-C-K, and Grace, G-R-A-C-E, Canady, C-A-N-A-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Columbiana, Alabama in 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not very far.  Like many black African American families, most of the history of our family comes from just handed down through, through grandmother and mom and dad telling us the stories.  What I do know about my mother's side of the family is that they lived on a farm in Columbiana, Alabama.  My grandfather was a Methodist preacher.  He was of mixed blood, could have passed for, for white.  My grandmother was of half African American, half Indian descent and my mother had a large family totaling, I'm going to say approximately at least five brothers and six or seven sisters.
Speaker 1: That is a big family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But for those days, that's pretty much, you know, a lot of rural families had big families--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --like that.  Are there any stories passed down in your family about your grandfather's mixed heritage or about slavery or--
Speaker 2: Well, the, there is one story that was handed down about my uncle whom I was named for.  His name was Blanton and at an early age, in his twenties, he, he left home.  He was very, of very light-complexion and the belief within the family is that he, he left home to pass and went somewhere up North.  I can recall my mother and her sisters for years and years and years, going through the telephone directories calling Warrick's within, 'cause they had heard he was in the Chicago [Illinois] area.  They had heard that he might be in the Detroit, Michigan area and for years and years they tried to track him down and to no avail, they were not ever able to do so.  So, that's one that I often remember them talking about, it was my Uncle Blanton.
Speaker 1: Okay, they, was there a story about your grandfather's background?
Speaker 2: Not much that I know of other than that he was a very religious person.  He was a pastor, a minister, as I indicated.  Both my grandparents had passed away before I was born and, in fact, it was my, my grandmother's sister that was our surrogate grandma and, in fact, she stayed with us for years and kind of looked over myself and my two brothers.  And so to me, she was my grandmother.  I never knew my grandmother on neither side of the family so that was pretty much part of that upbringing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are there any stories about the Indian side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not that we were told and it's interesting that, that you've asked that and I probably should spend some time with my first cousin who's a bit older than I but she, there's not many of us left to talk about all of this but we, no, we haven't had a lot of dialogue about my grandmom or my granddad.
Story_ID: 111897
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother talk about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, quite a bit.  She, my mother was a very feisty lady and even as a young girl she talked a lot about how the walks to school and how she had to, every day, the white kids in the community would kind of block her way on this little road or this little path that she'd always have to go to school.  And one day she just decided she wasn't going to go around and got in a big fight and I guess she won it (laughter) but she talks about that all the time and I think that was part of her way of just building in to us a bit of pride about who we were and how we should conduct ourselves and not be afraid and not be intimidated by pretty much anything.  So, she would tell that story all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did she have a chance to go to school for a higher education in Georgia or--
Speaker 2: My mother was highly educated, especially for that time.  She was, she went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and, in fact, graduated from Talladega and became a school teacher.  So, that was something she was always very, very proud of and she insisted, with all of us, that we would go to college and we would stay in school and was always a very strong message in our household.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was she the first in her family to go to college?  Or, did her father have a chance to, or her mother?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure, I'm sure her parents did not and it seems to me that it may have been just she and her sister who she was very close to that may have had some college education.
Story_ID: 111898
Speaker 1: Okay, so, is there, do you know how your mother [Grace Warrick Canady] wound up in Chicago [Illinois]?  Or, no, I'm sorry, in West Point [Georgia]?  I'm sorry, West Point.
Speaker 2: Well, it was my dad that brought her to West Point.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: As the story goes, I guess he, my dad was, he was one of those individuals that he traveled the, quite a bit around the countryside, if you will, and he would go to different little towns and somehow he met my mom and they struck up a little bit of a long distance relationship.  Columbiana [Alabama] is not that far from West Point, it's probably about forty-five, fifty miles but he courted her for some time, as I understand is, my mother tells the story that she did, she thought he was a little bit too aggressive at first and didn't particularly like him but he was relentless and he got her to marry and he brought her back to West Point.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So do you know when they got married?
Speaker 2: Um, I would say, gosh, boy, I'd have to, I'd have to, I know I have the documents for that but I don't recall it, just offhand, what the dates were for their marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] or--
Speaker 2: It had to be in the, well I can kind of backdate it.  I know they had my oldest brother late.  She was in her thirties when he was born and he was born in 1945.  So she, they had gotten married probably, at least, at least ten years prior to that.  So they were married in the mid to early '30s [1930s], I would guestimate.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe about 1935 or so?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 111899
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: The father's name is William Canady, Jr., that's W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Canady, C-A-N-A-D-Y, and Junior.
Speaker 1: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born, he was born in 1913 in October of 1913 in West Point, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: I know a little bit more about them because of the connection in West Point.  My grandfather and my great grandfather were all, I know that my grandfather was a Mason.  I never, ever could figure out what the Masons did but my dad was a Mason and they would talk about the secret meetings and the stories about that.  Not very much they would tell us as kids but my great grandfather and my grandfather were, my grandfather was a deacon at the church and my great grandfather was very much involved in the church as well.  So, most of our lineage and most of our relatives on my father's side stayed around and about West Point, Georgia so there's still quite a few that still reside there today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 111900
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down about, about the Nineteenth Century or, or, the slavery or reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Well, there's some, there's some great stories about my dad 'cause he was one of those who was almost a bit of a first in a lot of areas.  He would tell us a little bit about his prize fighting days.  He was an amateur prize fighter for awhile and that career abruptly ended when he, when someone accosted my mother, a white person accosted my mother while they were shopping one day in West Point and he beat him up pretty bad (laughter) so his prize fighting days was over, were over pretty much after that but he became the first black police officer in West Point, Georgia and that was always a big thing in the South at that time and, you know, we would have these little funny stories and as kids I remember, I can even remember to this day, the number on his patrol car was 402 and we would always accost him that way when we'd see him, here comes 402.  But, yeah, he, he really established a little bit of a legacy for black police officers to follow and he did that job for probably five or seven years so that sort of propelled us within the black community, at least, into a, a little bit of a prestigious situation because my dad was a police officer and my mom was a school teacher and, in the rural parts of Georgia where we lived, that was, that was a pretty big accomplishment at the time.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  So did, did he have a chance to go to school too?  Did he go to--
Speaker 2: No, my dad, I think he dropped out of high school.  He, he was a real workaholic.  I mean my dad would always have two, three, even up to the days that he became very elderly, he was a bit of a hustler, he always had two, three jobs going at a time.  So, he would just do things to make money and he started out working at a peppermill.  That's what West Point is renowned for, the towel company, the, and my grandfather and my great grandfather and my dad and all his brothers, I mean, they all went to work at the peppermill factory and there's an untold story but there was something going on between some of my older relations and the owner of that business because we were always given jobs and we had pretty good jobs at the mill.  That story never came out but a lot of stories never come out in those days in the South, so--
Speaker 1: Do you have a--
Speaker 2: --there was some rumor about our name.  It's a very odd name, Canady, is an Irish name and so there's been rumors about what our true lineage might have been on my father's side, whether or not there was some crossing in an earlier day, you know, so we're not real sure exactly where it came from but a lot of speculation about it.
Story_ID: 111901
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so you grew up at West Point [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Actually, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I left West Point at the age of nine and my mother was really bent on us having a better, myself and my two brothers, having a better opportunity than what the South could offer and, again, she was so intensely committed to the fact that she wanted us to get a better education, a better opportunity, that she really pressed.  My dad had no desire to, to relocate and she pressed him year, after year, after year, and what sort of prompted it was that his two older brothers, actually three of his brothers, left West Point at an earlier age.  Two of them came to Chicago [Illinois] and one went out to California and so the two that came, that went to Chicago, would often visit every summer and, of course, that just added fuel to the fire with my mom wanting us to relocate to Chicago and so eventually at the age of nine, at my age of nine, we did.
Story_ID: 111902
Speaker 1: Okay, let me back up a little bit though to, we always ask this question, do you have a, well, how many brothers and sisters do you have, first of all?
Speaker 2: I have a, I have two brothers and I have a half-sister from a dad, my dad's earlier marriage.
Speaker 1: And, and where do you fit in in the lineup?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 111903
Speaker 1: Do you think you take after your father more or your mother?  What do you think?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  I probably have my mother's sense for economics.  She was always one to really save a dollar and she was very well-read.  I think I probably take after the academic side from her.  My dad was just a gift for gab and so I would say I probably take more from my mother than my dad.  My middle brother, now, he was much more like my dad 'cause he had that gift for gab.
Story_ID: 111904
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Um, I have a few.  I can remember kindergarten and, oh, one of the funniest stories, I, three times, not just once but three times, and this was one of these old, older kindergartens with, they pretty much had different ages that went to the kindergarten and we would play and the boys would get pretty rough in playing and not one time but three times fell on the same bench, requiring stitches above my eye, three different times, over the course of a year and that's a, I don't know if that's a fond memory but it's one that I, I certainly can recall and my mother was just always so upset with me for, 'cause I just had a, I guess a hard head.  I wouldn't learn very easily not to stop playing those games with those older kids.
Story_ID: 111905
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were some of the, now you grew up, I mean, your younger years were spent in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I can recall, you know, in those days, you know, Georgia, where I lived, was very raw and, you know, you didn't have a lot of paved streets.  It was, I remember the red mud and, you know, there were times that we would play and we would be in our bare feet playing and so that's the biggest thing I remember is the red mud 'cause it would always get in between your toes and was always very hard, it'd cake up and always very hard to clean but other sights and sounds.  You know, I think as a, a young child, it's, everything just appeared to be bigger than life to me, you know, and I can recall going back to my home on a family reunion and I was just totally aghast at how small the place was that we lived but as a little boy, it was, it was huge.  I was always into, my mom always thought I'd either be a doctor or something to do with animals because I'd always, had these little games going on with, it's kind of funny to say now but, bugs and spiders and (laughter) I would experiment with them all the time but those are some of the things I remember most about my childhood.  Bees, got stung a number of times 'cause I'd try to catch them and play with them and that sort of stuff so, I, I was the youngest and I had only a cousin that was my age who was about a mile or two away so many times I would entertain myself around the house and I found those little games with the things you'd find in the yard, you know.
Story_ID: 111906
Speaker 1: Okay, now where did you go to school now?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Well, coming to Chicago [Illinois], the, the grade school, the elementary school I went to was Robert S. Abbott Elementary School which is at 35th and Wells and I went there from basically fourth grade up through, you know, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well how did you like school?  Did--
Speaker 2: I was always a good student, very shy.  I used to be, when I was in elementary school, I was a very shy kid and didn't make friends right away.  Coming from the South, you can just imagine what that was like in the first year or so.
Speaker 1: Now what was it like?  What was it like coming from West Point, Georgia to Chicago or where'd you come, to the South Side, right, or?
Speaker 2: South Side, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: South Side of Chicago.  Well, what was that like?  I mean, was it dramatic?
Speaker 2: It was very dramatic.  I mean, coming from a small town like that and coming to a big city.  You know, our classroom sizes were probably two, three times as large, just the competitive nature of it.  It was, it was very different than what we had experienced in the South.  Just the buildings and streets and we lived right down the street from White Sox Park so that was exciting as I was growing up.  So, yeah, it was very different to come up but our mother, my mother and my father kept a pretty tight leash on us, you know.  We went to school, we came home, we played in front of the house and that was it.  So it was not a lot of flexibility in terms of getting out and about so I was say to a large degree, because of that, it was a little bit sheltered.  If it wasn't a structured activity, either at church or either at school, we didn't get too many opportunities to get involved in stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well how would you describe yourself as a little kid?  What were you like?
Speaker 2: I think as I, I was, again, very shy, very shy.  I, I was pretty disciplined, though.  My mother kind of built that into us.  In terms of homework, I would always have to do my homework before we played and I would take to that.  I mean, it wasn't something that I did reluctantly and I was always ahead in my class work so I think I was a pretty studious kid.  I loved to play as much, as many, most kids did, baseball, football.  We didn't have organized sports in our neighborhood but we just had the pick-up games and, you know, I did that quite a bit on the playground or wherever we could find a, on the street, between the cars, playing football.  So, you know, very active, I would say I was.  A pretty good student.  I'd have to say probably a very good student.  I graduated valedictorian of my class and--
Speaker 1: This is in high school?  In grade school?
Speaker 2: This was in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a big thing, you know.  Chicago Defender covered it, you know, and so my parents were very proud of that.
Speaker 1: Hum, okay, all right.  Now, did you have any favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Mrs. Brown, the librarian, was, was just a great person.  She was there forever.  I think everybody has a teacher like that.  It's just kind of, whenever you went back to visit the school, she was, she was still the librarian but she was a person that you could always go to if you, if you had a problem in a class and you needed some special help, she would always really look into that and take care of it for you.  I was always, I had a strong propensity to math and, boy, I can't remember that teacher's name, but he kind of got me started in, in really liking mathematics--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that was probably through the years, one of my stronger subjects.
Story_ID: 111589
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you started grade school in Georgia, right, though?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school in Georgia?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I was nine when I left but I can tell you this, it was a segregated school and it was near the, there was a elementary and high school where the whites went and there was an elementary school, never got to the, well the high school, they built a new high school, and one of my best friends, his dad was the principal of that high school and that was primarily for black students at the time and that's my best recollection.  I can recall, you know, being involved in plays in the fourth grade and, and just being very competitive.  This, this friend of mine, we were always very competitive in who was going to end up being, getting the best grades and being the best student and he's still, he's still there in the South today.
Story_ID: 111590
Speaker 1: But back in Chicago [Illinois], now you were valedictorian of your grade school class?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  What was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Mathematics.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Always math and I don't know if it's a fond memory but the worst memory I had is that I had stage fright in my speech, forgot it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is your valedictorian speech?
Speaker 2: Yes, totally forgot the speech.  I was totally petrified.  First time I'd ever been in front of a large audience like that and it just scared me to death then and you're talking about the worst feeling you could have as a kid but it's interesting.  I think things like that in your life sort of built character because now I have absolutely no problem in front of people talking and, large groups of people, small groups of people, whatever. So I guess you, you go through the test of failure sometimes and that's how it builds your ability to do stuff like that.
Story_ID: 111591
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Tilden [High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Tilden was technical when I was there.  It was Tilden Technical High School [Chicago, Illinois] and it was really a good, a very good high school, very good school to, that prepared, I think, just about everyone that was there for the next step, which was college.  It's probably, you know, Tilden and Lane [Technical High School] were the only two technical high schools.  If you know anything about Chicago, in the Chicago, in the city of Chicago and, and academically as well as, you know, they were very good schools and I was, it was a sad day to see my class was the last technical class to graduate as a, as Tilden Tech.  They changed it to a general high school after that and it was an all-boys school, as well.  So--
Speaker 1: When you, when you attended--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --it was all boys?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was all boys and my class was the last all-boys class.  They started to make it co-ed right around my junior year, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now were you involved in high school activities and student government, or that sort of thing?  Did you continue that kind of leadership from grade school?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I was--student council.  I think I was treasurer of student council.  I was on the debate club, National Honors Society, math club, anything that was, I wanted to play basketball but I was too small, just couldn't, couldn't pull it off.  I tried out for it a couple of times--
Speaker 1: What do you mean, did you--
Speaker 2: --just always was--
Speaker 1: --you were too small 'cause you're a--
Speaker 2: Literally, too small.  I mean, I was--
Speaker 1: You're about six feet tall now, right?
Speaker 2: No, not then.  I didn't start to grow, I didn't start to grow until actually I graduated from high school.  It was really, I was really very conscious, self-conscious about my height.  I was real skinny.  I was a skinny, short kid and I was, you know, I really had some problems, you know, in just in terms of that, just in terms of my own psyche but yeah I was, you know, very much involved in high school and anything that was academically inclined.  Chess club, I was a member of, as well.
Speaker 1: Did you still like math better than anything else?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, it was still my, my subject, the subject that I liked the best and it was one of the few schools at the time that really took, that allowed students to take advance math courses.  You know, I was, I think that we were able to go all the way up to calculus at the time.  Now that's nothing.  You know, my son, when he was going through high school, I mean, they were, they were taking all kinds of advanced math then but at the time that was a big deal, you know, to be able to take calculus in high school.
Story_ID: 111592
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any teachers in high school that really stand out?
Speaker 2: Ms. Dunn [ph.] was one that--she was our science teacher, our chemistry teacher, and she was unbelievably hard but was probably one of the best teachers that we had at the school.  She, she was tough, she was tough and chemistry one and two you had to go both chemistry one and two through her and that was at the time, too, that those were required courses so you didn't get around.  You had physics, you had chemistry, you had math and I think that's a real shortfall in schools today.  I don't think they teach those disciplines, or require those disciplines, in high school any more, you know.  It seems like it's more of a general education now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111593
Speaker 1: So, when you were in high school, did you participate in Junior Achievement or any of those kind of programs?
Speaker 2: Um, we didn't really have Junior Achievement, we had a, what we had was the National Honors Society and all the students that were part of the National Honors Society, we were all grouped together in the same classes and so these were supposedly the more advanced classes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that the school offered.  And so that's how that worked.
Speaker 1: Do you mind that, do you know what I'm talking about, Junior Achievement--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --is a, this business program--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no we didn't, we didn't really have, have that at the time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I'm sure some of us would have taken advantage of it.  I do remember one program we had though that was offered through IIT [Illinois Institute Technology] that I took advantage of.  It was a computer software class and that was just really something special back at that time 'cause computers were really just on the brink of becoming something that was being used, you know, unilaterally across the board with a lot of people so to have the opportunity to actually have a computer class and we spent the summer going, like, learning this computer language at IIT.  That was, that was a big thing.
Speaker 1: COBOL [Common Business Oriented Language], or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's exactly what it was.  I was trying to remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: COBOL with the cards, punch cards--
Speaker 2: Yup.
Speaker 1: --and all that.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what it was.
Speaker 1: And these were computers are big units that looked like appliances now--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --or Xerox machines--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, COBOL was the language that we learned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You're exactly right.
Speaker 1: And that's pretty much the standard when you talked about a computer and a--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in a college or school--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you're talking about one of those big mainframe--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --computers.
Story_ID: 111594
Speaker 1: So, so did you have any business, any sense that you wanted to be involved in business when you were in high school?  I'm just trying to find out if you, you were inclined towards that at all.
Speaker 2: No, actually, actually I was gravitating more towards, I wanted to be an architect and at Tilden [High School] I took a number of drafting courses.  That's another teacher I was very impressed by, Mr. Fifer.  He was the drafting teacher and I just loved the idea of, of trying to, you know, really wanting to design and create buildings and, and that was my dream, to become an architect and so it was a little bit on the technical side but it was really the precision of drawings and I was really excited about architecture.  So, no, in the very beginning it was not a business vision that I had.  It really didn't happen until I got in college that I decided to change.  I actually went to college in the school of architecture and after my first semester it, I, it really dawned upon me that most of the guys in, and most of the people in my class were also very great artists.  I was not a good artist.  I was pretty good at drafting and so I, I figured out pretty quickly that you had to have a bit of a creative side as well as a technical side to be successful in this field and so as a result, I, I really struggled with art in my first semester and I decided from there that that probably wasn't the career I needed to pursue and I just kind of went to business really by default.  It wasn't something that I had planned to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to the business school by default and what I mean by that is that I was going over the curriculums and I didn't wannna--I wanted to graduate on time and as, I went to the University of Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign] and a lot of the schools there are very independent of each other and they don't accept credits from the different schools and the business school pretty much accepted all but one of my credits and that was by default, that's how I ended up in the business school (laughter).  That's how I ended up there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you were in high--how did you choose a college, based on an architecture program?
Speaker 2: Well, part of that but, you know, we, we had a lot of counseling going on too and I applied to a number of schools.  The, you know, I took the SATs, the ACTs, all of that stuff and it really came down to where we got offers 'cause I, I knew I was not in a position to go to a school without a scholarship and when it came down to it, the University of Illinois offered me the best package, being a state school and it was a combination of work scholarship and grants and that was, that was pretty much why I decided to go there.
Speaker 1: So that's 1966?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 111595
Speaker 1: Okay, University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], 1966.  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Now you're talking culture shock.  That was culture shock.  Coming from, and even a mixed school like Tilden [High School], but going to University of Illinois where we were about one percent African American population in the university out of about 32,000 students, it was, it was really tough, a tough adjustment because, you know, you were ending up being probably the only person in your dorm that was African American and it just had a lot of different challenges in terms of that.  I think, for the first time in my life, I felt not well prepared to compete.  I'd always been at the top of my class in grade school.  I was in the top twenty in high school and so I came to the University of Illinois and all of a sudden, you know, I can remember one visit I had with the counselor the first week of school and it really angered me but he said to me, "don't expect to make more than C's", and I said, okay, and you know for a while there he was right (laughter). But I'm a firm believer that, you know, it's how you apply yourself and I learned very early in college that there were a lot of kids a lot brighter than I was, there were a lot of kids that just had a lot of natural ability but you can make up for that if you discipline yourself and you, you work at it and that was a, that was a key early learning for me, that it didn't matter that the guy down the hall could learn the subject matter in an hour if it took me three or four, what mattered was the end result and that's the discipline that I, that I took through, through college and I did well.
Story_ID: 111596
Speaker 1: Now, now, when you were in school, black studies was starting up in schools--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and did you have a black studies department or a black cultural center or a black student union at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, now, now you're talking, yeah.  Those were, those were very exciting times.  Well, let me tell you about the black studies program, that was probably the most, one of the most influential things for me in terms of my own learning about my own heritage and, and really becoming proud of that heritage and it was the African American, African American studies program and it was headed by [HM] Val Gray Ward at the University of Illinois and she was such a tremendous influence on all of us and I was on the staff.  That was one of the, the opportunities I got through my work studies, I was able to work very closely with Val as part of her staff on the, in the studies program and so that was just such a great experience because she brought such a wealth of, of knowledge to the black experience, whether it be dance, whether it be poetry, the speakers that were brought down to the U of I [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], the plays that she acted in, the plays, she did Harriet Tubman, I'll never forget that, did a, just a standing ovation performance of Harriet Tubman one year and she was just, she was a dynamic lady. So, that was the black studies program.
Story_ID: 111597
Speaker 1: At the same time, if you, it's not, our university was affected as many others with the whole activist movement and so we had a black student union at U of I [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign] and was headed by some really, really bright individuals, I mean, really bright individuals and one of the greatest things, achievements that I think that we did as the black students union at the U of I is a project that we, that was coined or named Project 500 and Project 500 was probably the largest, and first of its kind where we actually went out and recruited 500 black students--
Speaker 2: Now did--
Speaker 1: --from the Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --from all of the major metropolitan areas around the country and it was not based just solely on ACT, SAT scores, but it was based on their work ethic and the referrals you got from the ministers and the teachers.  So you could take an average student and, and get some strong references from the teachers, the parents, the ministers and we got them accepted to the U of I.
Speaker 2: So this is like what's today known as Upward Bound in a lot of schools, I guess, similar to that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and this was one of the first that, and the most proud thing that I can say about Project 500 is about 95 percent of the kids graduated and are doing very well today and just proves something that I've always firmly believe that, you know, tests are not any way a measure of ones success in life and so many times I think, particularly black students can be really felt to not be in the same class of the average white student because of the testing and it really goes back to what I talked about earlier is, you know, what's inside of you.  If you really want to work hard at it and do what it takes, doesn't preclude you from being successful.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this sounds, I mean, it sounds, we interviewed C. T. Vivian in March and he, he started, I think, the first like Upward Bound-type program in the country--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --and that may have been up in the Chicago area here--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --I don't know, I can't remember now but that's something that--
Speaker 1: What was neat about it was we became recruiters and they empowered us to, to basically do the whole enrollment.  I mean, we would do the interviews, we would go out and get the applications, we get the references, we would send those down to admission, we would do the follow-up with the students, we talked to the parents, we did the whole, the whole shooting match and it was very rewarding to see that program.  Now it had a major, major hitch, and no one expected us to be successful.  We had to literally, in order to get the administration, the university administration to agree to this program, it was a black student union, we went on strike, actually at the school, and had a sit-in and that was what precipitated the Chancellor to allowing this program.  So it wasn't something that just happened because there was a, an intellectual discussion that ended in their saying, "Yeah, we'll do this."  It was a big struggle over a couple of years for us to get the administration to agree but they didn't expect us to be this successful and so when we, when the 500 plus students came to the campus, they didn't have rooms for them. They did not have lodging for them and they ended up, over half of them, having to camp out at the, at the union, the big union hall.  Well, things got a little nasty and it was all over the papers, Chicago [Illinois] papers, everywhere else, but it turned into a bit of a riot.  Police were called in from just about every county and all the students, including ourselves, got arrested 'cause we were there as their chaperones.  Finally the charges got dropped but that was not a great introduction for those kids to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], at all.  That was a very tough introduction and it was--we felt so badly 'cause we had their hopes up so high about what, you know, this college experience could mean to them.
Story_ID: 111598
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what else in college?  You, now did you, now did you start to grow in college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I started to grow.  You know, after the first year, I did the dormitory life and started to make a few friends and pledged fraternity, Kappa Alpha--Kappa Alpha Psi, and didn't complete my pledgeship.  There were seven of us that walked away from that very close to the end.
Speaker 1: Now what, what happened?  Was there something wrong with it or did you have a critique of it at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I want to bad-mouth them on the tape.
Speaker 1: Well, no, it's history now.  I mean, there are some things--
Speaker 2: All right, well I'll tell you, in those days, yeah, it is history and it is something that needs to be told, I guess, but, and I want to tell it fairly and effectively 'cause I was really into the program and into the fraternity and this was the last week of Hell Week that our line, our particular line walked off and in those days, the hazing was almost criminal and in our case it was criminal.
Speaker 1: What kinds of hazing were you all subjected to in this?
Speaker 2: You have the traditional beatings, you know, which--
Speaker 1: With a paddle, right--
Speaker 2: With a paddle--
Speaker 1: --on the behind.
Speaker 2: --which was, which was pretty traditional and that was mild.  There were, and this is why I think a lot of the fraternities or, you know, there's rare that people get as far as we did because what tends to happen, and the reason you don't hear this is they're sworn to secrecy and so when you get to like the last two or three nights of Hell Week, it escalates every day, the type of things that, that happen to you and only the frat brothers would know about some of these particular hazings that you go through.  So if I say to a Kappa something about brer rabbit, they would know what that is but, you know, it wouldn't mean anything to you and this was what forced us away.  This was a night, in a basement, in the Kappa House where they undressed us, they poured flour over us and they lit it.
Speaker 1: They lit it.  Does flour light?  Actually, I mean I don't even know, is it combust--I guess it is.  It's combustible and so--
Speaker 2: It's very combustible and the method of putting out the, and we were physically burning.  The method of putting it out was a water hose--
Speaker 1: Hmmm.
Speaker 2: --and that just, all seven of us, of us walked off the line that night and I don't know if it, I can't, it happened and I wouldn't say that it was a first time or the last.  I mean, there, but you know, Hell Week is an escalating kind of thing and we were like right, the night before the last night, that's how close we were.  So, but you know, I have, I have no bitter feelings or I'm, a lot of my friends are Kappa's and we ended up, through the course of my college career, we partied and had, you know, it was just one of those episodes in my life that I'll never forget.  Fortunately, I don't think those kinds of things go on today.  I think a lot of that has been, you know, the Kappa's at the U of I, they lost their house at one point in time, almost lost their charter.
Story_ID: 111599
Speaker 1: That is a, it raises some, here that I heard, I mean, we're about the same age when I was in school in Ohio--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --the Omega Psi Phi, the black fraternities was the craziest I guess you'd say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or the ones that did the craziest things.  The Kappa's seemed to be the peacemakers of the, of the three big ones, you know, but I heard when I came to Illinois, people talk about how, how kind of crazy the Kappa's were--
Speaker 2: Oh, they, they were nuts.
Speaker 1: --at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign].
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were.
Speaker 1: So I guess this is all true, then.
Speaker 2: It, it depends on where you are.  Like, for instance, the Omega's in the South, in Atlanta, wild, wild and crazy.  Same with the Kappa's.  They would take us down on these so-called fieldtrips as pledges and just so that people could, you know, embarrass us and intimidate us and beat us and all that stuff and you wonder, how in the world, you know, do you get your mind and then, into such a place that you, you can do that.  You're intelligent people and, but it is brainwash and it is indoctrination.  It starts out very small and before you know it, your, your ego is involved and your macho ego is involved and you're proving something and then they play on the idea of, of your comrades, you're letting them down if you, you know, so that starts to work on you as well, that you're a group, you know, and you have to protect each other.  It builds a pretty strong bond and no question about that but, and I just think you have some people there that just went over the edge with some of the things that they were doing and I'm not, I'm sure it doesn't happen or didn't happen in every particular chapter but, and for years they tried to get us to come back on line.  We were probably one of the more popular groups of pledges that, on the campus, that, that they had and it was a big scandal when we walked because everybody, and we wouldn't even tell the story for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111600
Speaker 1: So is there anything--Now you had a rich college life it sounds?  You had a lot of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was, I tell you it was probably, you ask me if I grew up, I grew up in so many different ways in college, you know, just the whole bit of the, just really learning more about my African American heritage was, was huge in that era as you, as a lot of people know, that was a very vibrant era for black pride.
Speaker 1: Now who, who did Val bring to the campus, I mean, Val Ward [Val Gray Ward] is a great cultural figure in the Chicago area and all over the country but who did she, who did she bring?
Speaker 2: There was, there was the author, he died not too long ago.
Speaker 1: Alex Haley or--
Speaker 2: Alex Haley was there.  Also, boy, I can't remember, but--
Speaker 1: Did Gwendolyn Brooks come down?
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Brooks was there, absolutely.  We had, what's the woman's name from California with the--Angela Davis was there.
Speaker 1: Was it James Baldwin you were thinking about?
Speaker 2: James Baldwin--
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: --was there, thank you.  So, yeah, we, we had a, that was, that was very rich and then, you know, I think just the academic experience of, of really learning how to compete in pretty much a, an all-white situation.  I mean, we were one, less than one percent of the, of the population at the U of I [University Illinois at Urbana-Champaign] and so just learning how to compete in that environment was invaluable because that was, real world.  I mean, that's typically as you come out of school and you enter into society and particularly into business, you're probably going to be the only one in the, for years, I was the only one in the company or in the division that I was in and I learned how to become very comfortable in that because of that experience at U of I.  I learned how to compete, you know, with the best that were around and hold my own and be able to take pride in that.  So it was a huge growing up exercise and to be able to come out as an honor student when this counselor said to me I wouldn't do any better than C's was very dramatic for me to know that there were ways that you could, could, if you have determination and you're willing to stick to things, I tell people this all the time is, people who fail are usually the ones that won't hang around long enough to just grind it out and that was just a very important lesson at the U of I, I first started to learn that.  So it was the academic experience, it was the African American experience in terms of the culture that I, that I learned.  It was becoming a man, you know, literally at that school.  Being able to take care of my own bills, being able to, to fend for myself and, you know, rent apartments and have roommates and, you know, it was just a life experience that I, I had a full experience at the U of I and particularly coming out of a, a background, a family that was pretty closely-knit, you know.  My mom [Grace Warrick Canady] and dad [William Canady, Jr.] didn't, I don't think we had sheltered lives but, you know, really coming up we were, we were pretty much in check and balance in a lot of things.  So, that was a, that was a real eye-opening experience for me.
Story_ID: 111601
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were on the verge of graduation, what were your prospects for, for a job?  Did you, were you going to graduate school or were you, did you want to start your career right away?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I knew that in order for me to go to graduate school, I had to start my career because, once again, my, my folks were not in a position to send me to graduate school and pay the bill.  I mean, they contributed what they could for my college but primarily my college education was financed through summer jobs that I held plus the grants that I received and for the first couple of years, work study programs that I was involved in.  So, that was always, I had that knowledge that if I went to graduate school, I needed to get with a company that would afford me to do that.  So it was never even a second thought about that.  So it was about starting my career and I was offered a position, I can remember this like yesterday.  I was, here I was this '60s [1960s] student, I mean, I was totally in the look.  I had the big afro and, you know, even had started to grow a beard and, you know, and I get called up for this interview with Illinois Bell and, and, you know, I had the common sense to know what I had to do and I had to cut my afro and, you know, I did all this in the hotel, you know, and I cut the afro and cut the beard and shaved, shaved myself that, that night and went in for the interview and got the job and started, started my career that way and after my first and second, I think after my first year working at Illinois Bell, I enrolled in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go?  At the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] or you went to--
Speaker 2: No, I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And was accepted in their M.B.A. program.  And here's a, I think a good story I want to tell about, both about college and graduate school for the younger listeners to this.  You know, it goes back to this issue of determination and just not giving up on things when you first hear the first line of, of why you can't do something but I, I remember, you know in college, again, that counselor telling me about that, that C grade average and then I remember coming out of college and people telling me that there's no way, no chance that I'd get into the University of Chicago, top one percent of students around the country and, you know, I never was, I was always probably in the middle as far as test scores.  I was never this, this brainy kid that excelled high in tests.  Never had great test scores to go by.  I did okay but never really great scores so no one would ever select me on the test score and so when I sent my application in, I, I found out who the Dean was.  I made an appointment, I went to see him and I sat down with him face-to-face and talked to him and based on that interview, I was admitted to the school.  And it just says to me a lot of times, you just don't, just go the normal route and sometimes you have to go the extra mile, the extra piece sometimes to sell yourself and to let people know there's more to you than, than what it is and I've always felt very confident that if I could get in front of people that, you know, most of the time that, you know, if, if there's a, for every rule, there's an exception.  For every rule, there's an exception and that particular Dean of Students, he was so impressed with me in that meeting that, you know, I got accepted to the University of Chicago, one of the most prestigious schools in the country.  So, that's what started my graduate work.
Story_ID: 111602
Speaker 1: Okay, well how'd you like the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?  Was it a--
Speaker 2: Tough, tough, toughest period that I ever went through because I was working full-time and going to night school at the U of C [University of Chicago].  I had transitioned jobs.  I started at the University of Chicago with Illinois Bell and I transitioned jobs and went to work with Xerox Corporation and I, that job with Xerox entailed a lot of travel.  I was the Midwest Manager of Telecommunications for Xerox and that really came out of my Illinois Bell background in telecommunications.  I was a consultant and had some claims to fame at Illinois Bell.  One of the things I always like to tell people, the Sears Tower, I put the telecommunications, the first telecommunication system in Sears Tower.  I was the head telecommunications consultant for that project and had to train each floor, each, each group on the use of the system and also coordinate the installation.  So--
Speaker 1: This is, now they, they broadcast as a Channel 44 broadcast out of Sears Tower?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: I think--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure any more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I've been away from it but in any case, I went from Bell telephone to Xerox and they hired me as the Midwest Region Telecommunications Manager.  So I was in transition in these two jobs and really taking a full load at the University of Chicago.  That was tough.  That was tough.  I was literally studying on airplanes for classes and for that three-year period, I had no social life, Saturdays, totally spent in the library with, you know, some of the groups.  It was a tough school, tough school.  Finance courses, statistical courses, tough school.  It was almost a living hell trying to accomplish that.  It was the toughest three years that I had ever experienced but I'm so proud of the fact that I did it and I did it in a way that, you know, I was able to utilize the work experience and the job was good enough to, to pay for that education, so, it was a good thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't married at this time or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I was single.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was single at that time and I really haven't, you know, after I got out of school, I started having the time of my life (laughter), you know, because as a single guy and I made this accomplishment, it took me three years to get that M.B.A.  It's a two and a half year program, it was at the time.
Speaker 1: So this is 1973, I guess when you came out?
Speaker 2: Of '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: I didn't start right away.  I think I started in '72 [1972].  I worked a couple of years at Illinois Bell before I started the program and finished the program in three years.  So, and that was without going summers 'cause I was also in the [U.S.] National Guard.  So I had to spend my summers with the National Guard.  That's a whole another experience to talk about--
Story_ID: 111603
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But, did you stay here in the [United] States?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did, fortunately--
Speaker 2: That's right, and those are the days that you stayed in the States?
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days you stayed in the States but it's, it's kind of a little bit of humor for me when I, I mean if there's a humorous side.  There isn't much humor in this War, none at all actually, but if there's a humorous side for me is thinking back at what it would have been like.  The [U.S.] National Guard is not a well-trained group of people for the real war stuff.  You know, these are really weekend, we used to call ourselves weekend warriors.  You know, these are the guys that just come to the meetings.  They don't take the stuff that seriously and I can just imagine being thrust into a theatre like Iraq what shock that has to be because you're not taking the training as seriously as the regular troops do.  You know, you're just kind of just walking through it. I can't imagine that the National Guard has changed that much and so if there is, I just wonder and worry sometimes about some of those kids that are over there and just got thrust into this thing.  It really, haven't really, didn't take this thing as seriously as, as they did when they joined up 'cause literally it was just a matter of showing up at meetings, you know, getting some instructions.  National Guard is a different kind of thing.
Story_ID: 111604
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but you had a full plate of, by three years.
Speaker 2: For that three years, that was a full plate.  I think I probably pushed myself to the limit on that and very fortunate to, you know, I didn't, I didn't graduate with honors but I graduated and I was happy to graduate from that school and I said I would never, ever go back to school again after that experience.  I was done with school but I really didn't have any ambition to do anything further, educationally, anyway.  I thought the M.B.A. was sufficient for what I wanted to do.  So, you know, it worked out well but that was a tough, that was a tough period.
Story_ID: 111605
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you stay at Xerox [The Xerox Corporation] for a while?
Speaker 2: I stayed at Xerox, I stayed at the, I was on a three-year rotation.  I stayed at Illinois Bell for three years and it wasn't on purpose, it just kind of turns out that way.  I stayed at Xerox for three years and completed my M.B.A. at Xerox and then I went to work for a company called American Hospital Supply Corporation and I was recruited by them.  I was really not, I was very happy with Xerox.  Xerox to me was one of the more progressive companies for African Americans around in the '70s [1970s].  They, they were one of the first companies that had a, a black network.
Speaker 1: So you were there when [HM] Bob Blackwell was there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and impressive.  I mean, probably, some of the more dynamic African American people I'd ever come across.  I mean, very smart, bright people and it was, I was, you know, happy to be there and felt that I had a good career opportunity in front of me.  So, I wasn't seeking employment when, when I left.  I was actually sought out and recruited and one of the things that I, I, even today I try to hold on to is, always should keep your options available and listen to what people have to say.  I always say people in any negotiation that you go to, no shouldn't be in your vocabulary.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you left Xerox, you were like, you didn't have another job to go to immediately?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was recruited.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were recruited, oh recruited by--
Speaker 2: I was recruited by American [Hospital Supply Corporation].  There was an actual, an actual headhunter.
Speaker 1: Oh, the hospital supplier.
Speaker 2: The hospital supplier.  They were, they were looking for a person to do what I did.  I was a telecommunications manager for the Midwest for Xerox but they wanted it for the whole country.  They were just starting up their telecommunications department and they wanted an experienced person to head it up and so I was recruited for the, for the job and I was still single, not a lot of big choices to make, they offered me a great salary, I liked the people.  You know, I started to learn something at that stage.  It wasn't always about the dollars.  I was starting to make quality of life decisions.  It was more important, or just as important to me, the character and the chemistry of the people I'm working with as it was the job and the dollars and that's a key lesson, I think, once you get to a point, I think that, you know, if you're fortunate enough to get to that point, to make those kind of choices, is, it's the right way to go because that lasts a lot longer than the dollars will.  I mean, if you've got people that you're not gonna have the right chemistry with, you're not gonna really, they're not gonna really be your advocate, the person to support you, you're going to have problems in corporate America.  It's a good lesson early on and I learned it at Illinois Bell, I learned it as far back as Illinois Bell because there were a group of people around me who were really not interested in my success as much.
Speaker 1: To euphemize it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, euphemize it.  So I was really constrained as a result of that and I didn't feel supported.  I didn't feel, you know, that I had an advocate and even when I went to Xerox, one of the first things I looked for, is this person gonna be an advocate?  Do they really want me as a person, my character, my person, to be a part of their team, a part of their success and if I had a good feeling about that, it usually worked out. In both cases, in Xerox, as well as American [Hospital Supply Company], I had that and that was tremendous for me because you had people that really helped you to reach your dreams.
Story_ID: 111606
Speaker 1: At the time I was at American [Hospital Supply Corporation], I was in telecommunications handling it for the country, as I mentioned, and I really started to, I had my M.B.A. [from the University of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] now and I really started to think about, you know, what I really wanted to do and the first thing that I decided, I always, I started to have these ideas in my mind about going into business for myself but I had no clue, no idea what I might do but I knew that I wasn't ready to do it, whatever it was, and I needed to utilize this corporate experience as much as I could to garner the skills and the experience that I might need some day if I were to be in business for myself and I started that with Xerox [the Xerox Corporation].  I really started to understand what are the skills and, you know, you need financial skills, you need people skills, those are probably the primary two, and so I really wanted to balance my work experience in corporate America to attain that and in the telecommunications arena, I was pretty much a one-man show, you know.  I led the department, I was the department.  I reported to a VP [vice president] and, you know, he pretty much gave me free rein as long as the result showed.  So, I didn't have a lot of people experience, you know, I had some financial responsibility.  I think I had about a $3 million budget that I was responsible for in both places but I knew I needed that people side to round myself out from a career perspective.  So I started to have those conversations with my immediate boss about, you know, a shift.  In fact, when I first, one of the conditions that I made in coming to American Hospital was the point that I said I'd do it for two years.  I'd do this job for two years but I want the opportunity.  So I negotiated that coming in otherwise it didn't make sense for me to shift just to do telecommunications again.  I could stay where I am and, and probably have a pretty successful career and they agreed.  They thought that I had the mindset and the skills to do that so they agreed that, and I was interested in financial services, financial management, and so, and I had an advocate to help me do that.  So, and it took me three years, not two, but in three years they made that opportunity happen and I became a financial services manager for one of their largest distribution centers in the country, right there in Waukegan [Illinois].  They're now defunct, by the way.  Baxter Laboratory bought them and they're no longer our entity but at the time American and Baxter and a couple of others were the big players in the hospital supply business.  So, that's, that's kind of how that worked.
Speaker 2: Do you remember Chuck Easter, by any chance?
Speaker 1: Chuck Easter.
Speaker 2: I think he worked for one of those hospital supply company.  He's--
Speaker 1: I don't think I do.
Speaker 2: He's black, he's, he's passed away now but he was--
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he used to supply pharmaceutical pins and cups and other things to--
Speaker 1: Big business.
Speaker 2: --ETA. (unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At least you had these--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --promotional items that you always bring over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, big business.  It's a big business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So you always kept a garage full of these--
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: --these items to give people, you know, at these business meetings and (unclear).
Story_ID: 111607
Speaker 1: And with the, with American Hospital [Supply Corporation] I, and one of the things that I've always tried to do is, rather than make great departures from my experience, I try to build on my experience.  I think that's a formula for success.  I've seen a lot of, now there's some entrepreneurs that have been able to do this miraculously where they'll do one thing totally different from the thing that they did before, not my formula.  My formula is to build on the experience and some of the capabilities that you, that you've learned over time.  I just think that's a more conservative way to, more conservative road to success and one of the things that I, that I did even formed from telecommunications to the financial management side, naturally I have the educational piece on finance 'cause that was my major in grad school and I wanted to get some practical involvement in that so that's a building block process and from a telecommunications side, I, I innovated some things within that department in terms of they never had utilized telephone cells and I innovated that for American Hospital in my department because I had customer service and I trained and developed a couple of key people within their, their Midwest area to do telephone sales and it was fairly successful there for a while.  So, it's just a, a, I think a way of just understanding how you can use the strengths.  You know, one of the things the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] taught very strictly is maximize your strengths, minimize your weaknesses.  That was one thing I remember from the University of Chicago is maximize your strengths, minimize your weaknesses and that's, that's a very good formula to follow because if you, if you just utilize the things that you do well and try to minimize the things you don't, I think you can be fairly successful.
Story_ID: 111608
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you with American Hospital Supply?
Speaker 2: I broke the mold.  I was there for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And very interesting story there.  I was having a very successful career at American, really enjoying, had four departments reporting to me so there I was getting the people experience, and boy did I get it, you know, 'cause 90 percent of those people were women and it was a learning, it was a growing up experience for me because I had department heads, all female, and literally I remember one day pulling me into the office and just calling me every name under the sun, you know, I mean, they just, 'cause I didn't know anything and they were right.  You know, here I was this, you know, this person coming out of, with this concept, you know, and that was a good lesson for me, though, but we worked it out.  We sat, we talked it through, they had some real strong feelings about what I was doing wrong, what I needed to do differently.  I listened to them and it was a great learning experience for me to be able to take that criticism as their boss and still find something positive out of it.  You know, I could have gone the direction of, you know, discipline or, or trying to get back at them or whatever but, you know, I needed these people to be successful and they were the ones that'd been there ten, fifteen, twenty years, you know, and they were right. I was there with new ideas that probably weren't going to work.
Speaker 1: What was the, what was the major thing that you were doing wrong, do you think?
Speaker 2: I think just being theoretical. I think being very highly theoretical about, you know, and really not sitting down and talking through ideas with the people who do the work and getting them to buy in to it before you try to act on it.  You know, that was one of the key lessons.  You know, thinking you got the idea, thinking you got the solution, thinking you got the way to get it accomplished quickly 'cause, you know, maybe your goal is to get it done fast and maybe the real goal should be getting it done right.  So, it was a critical learning for me.  These were very strong females.  They were very strong females and they helped me do that.
Story_ID: 112033
Speaker 1: All right, so, so you've had to, you had to regroup sort of after this meeting with these disgruntled ladies and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and they, they were just very candid with me about my shortcomings and it was helpful.  It was hard to take but it was helpful 'cause you never want to believe those things about yourself.  You think you're the nicest person and the easiest person to get along with but the biggest thing I can say about that experience is they became my greatest allies after that talk and really taking it in earnest and really starting to do the thing, try to do the things that they were asking me to do but at the same time holding them accountable for what they needed to do and we, we had a very good professional relationship in the end and so it was, it was more helpful to me than to them at that, at that particular time 'cause I learned some valuable lessons in terms of how to deal with people.
Story_ID: 112034
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so, now you were there for four years from, that's '76 [1976] to '80 [1980], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: So what happened in 1980?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess a little bit of coincidence, I guess a little bit of the man upstairs, a lot of the man upstairs.  I believe it was a bit of the divine destiny involved here but I was on a flight to California on a business meeting and ran into a guy that I grew up with, a childhood friend, a very good friend of mine, I hadn't seen him in several years, and we ended up sitting together on the, on the plane and he was working for McDonald's.  He was an auditor and he was going out to audit some stores and we just got to talking about what we each were doing and I started to say to him, you know, I'd really been, I had been thinking of going in the business for myself but I couldn't figure out what I'd be good at, couldn't figure out what I could do.  I can imagine that most people kind of reach their crossroad and how do you decide, you know, what business to go in and what you'd be good at doing and I certainly was one of those.  I had no clue as to what I should do or how to do it and so that's why I said, it had to be divine intervention because on that flight he suggested that I contact McDonald's, that they were interested at the time in new franchisees, particularly a, minority franchisees, and I should give it a shot.  He gave me a name and I got back and I called and got an application, filled it out and sent it in.  About three months, two months later, they called me in for an interview and so I was very excited about the prospects of this.  I did a little research on McDonald's, you know, knew that they were the number one fast food company in the world and had a really great reputation as it related to management and that was basically what I needed to know, I mean, about it and I never worked in a restaurant business before.  So I went into the interview and really was able to utilize my own thinking, I guess, to really sell myself to the, the person that was in charge of franchising and what it turned out that they were most interested in was my, the ability to manage, you know, financially, which I had a strong background in and the ability to manage people, which I had garnered a strong background in.  So I was able to sell those two components of my career experience and he liked it but he said to me at the end of the interview that they would need to get back to me, so on and so forth, and so I got a rejection letter.  I thought the interview went pretty well and the rejection letter was like most rejection letters are, they don't tell you why they reject you.  I guess there are legal ramifications to that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 112035
Speaker 1: And I was totally shocked and a little taken aback, you know, 'cause I thought things went well but once again, not just going with the flow, not just taking the first no as the answer, having that little bit of extra determination to say--and most people would not do this, I picked up the phone and called the guy and I said, you know, I got the letter and I really appreciate your having worked with me and sat down and talking to me but, you know, what, what was the problem?  I thought the interview went well.  He said, well, frankly, and I'm not supposed to tell you this, he says but you don't have enough money and I said, okay, well, how much money does it require?  It never came up in the interview and he told me and I said, oh, okay.  I said, well, I'll tell you what, would you be willing to sit back down with me in six months 'cause I'll have the money in six months and he kind of chuckled and we laughed and we said good-bye to one another but it was a great learning experience there because, first of all, they never told me what the money requirement was, never talked about it in the interview.  I wondered why, to myself, why would they even call me in 'cause my, my total financial resume was there for them to read and see so if it didn't meet the criteria, I'm not sure why you're interviewing me in the first place.  So, it was, it was a little odd, I thought, but in any case, I made a point six months later, I was back in his office with a briefcase and I had the money requirement.  I put it together.  I knew exactly how I was going to do it.  I had some real estate that I owned.  I sold it.  I was able to pull that off and I had the financial requirement that they needed and I was accepted in the program as a result of that.  So I stayed in the, I'm still working at American [Hospital Supply Corporation], okay, and I'm working McDonald's part-time, twenty hours a week, in the evenings, on weekends and doing my full-time job during the day and I did that for about two years and McDonald's is a kind of a unique experience because they never, they accept you at different stages, you know, and at any point they can reject you, at any stage.  There's no pay involved.  You're volunteering your time and you're, you're basically going on your own confidence that you can, can do what they're asking you to do and finish and complete it to their standard and there's no guarantee of what you, what, if you'll get a restaurant and there's no guarantee where you'll get a restaurant and I think that's part of the test of your mettle, I really do, to see if you've got what it takes to take that kind of business risk and I did and I was having a very successful career at American and the funny story about it is that the day that I was offered my first restaurant was the same day, talk about divine intervention, was the same day that American offered me a position, a promotion, and they were going to send me to Washington, D.C., become a branch manager for them, same day that I was offering my resignation.  The guy called me into the office to give me the good news that I had just been promoted and I said, well, I got some bad news for you, I'm leaving.  They were in total shock.  They couldn't believe that, that this was happening.  They had several interviews with me to see if they could get me to stay, you know--
Speaker 2: You were pretty--
Speaker 1: --compensation packages, the whole bit, but I was, I was convinced that I was going to do this.  A lot of people didn't agree with me.  My parents didn't, you know, why would you leave a good job?  Those kinds of, you know to take this.  What is this McDonald's thing (unclear)--
Story_ID: 112036
Speaker 1: There comes a time in almost every interview with a business person where their parents say, "Why did you leave a good job?"  They always say that.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, 'cause I had a good job.  I mean, I had a good job, it was a good paying job and it was safe, it was secure, you know, so on and so forth but for me it had, I knew I'd never be president of American Hospital Supply Corporation.  I knew I had this glass ceiling and I could be relatively successful but I always envisioned myself in, in you know, running my own business and so I, it wasn't, it wasn't even a, you know they say when you know something's right for you, you don't even, it's not even something you question.  It feels so natural and right for you to do right.  It didn't even cross my mind that this was at any way at risk, I was putting myself at risk.  It just felt like such a natural progression.  For me I felt prepared for the venture.  I felt that I had paid my dues.  Ten years in corporate America, you know, had the educational background.  I thought probably I was coming into this more prepared than a lot of people and not to say that I was arrogant about it, I knew I was going to probably have a lot to learn, which I did, but I felt that I had prepared myself pretty well for the venture.
Story_ID: 112037
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started, did you start with one franchise?
Speaker 2: One franchise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Opened it in January of '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: And where, where were you located?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five, twenty-five [2525] Martin Luther King Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was my baby for almost seven, eight, nine years.  I, I was really a single store operator and not because, I was offered a lot of opportunities, I turned them, I probably, I had a reputation in those days of turning more deals down than most people were offered 'cause I always had my own criteria, my own screens for--McDonald's is just like any other business, you can make a bad decision.  Most people look at McDonald's and think they're just instant successes.  That's, that's not true.
Speaker 1: Hmmm, so then, so it was, well then, what does it take to manage a McDonald's?  I mean, what does it really, I mean it takes like probably the same thing that it does to manage most places but, but McDonald's is, has a reputation in the black community--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --as being a place where people gather and even in the toughest part of the community, people feel sort of safe at a McDonald's for some reason and--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --it has that kind of, I think it has to do with the management, I guess, from the top all the way to, to the bottom.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it takes really a lot.  I mean, I think it starts with the people.  You really have to have a very hands-on involvement with training and development and care and, you know, a lot of people, when I got in the business, moved more rapidly than I did in terms of number of stores.  I'm kind of, I'm glad that it happened for me the way it did because I was really able to hone the skills and ran that first restaurant almost like a family restaurant and got to know the people, you know.  Really was able to put the quality into the people and the people brought quality to us and by far, you know, I look back at those days, those, that was my best run restaurant ever, you know, no question about it.
Story_ID: 112038
Speaker 1: Now, was it difficult to find good employees and you always hear that young people today are looking for jobs have trouble meeting the standards, even at a McDonald's, you know?
Speaker 2: Very difficult.  Our greatest challenge is getting the quality and the quantity of people we need, not so much at the crew level but certainly at the management level.  It's a real challenge.  It was a challenge when I started this business twenty-three years ago, it's a challenge today.  I'm still faced with the same challenges that I, that I had twenty-three years ago in terms of management.
Speaker 1: So how many people are involved in the management of a store?
Speaker 2: Well, think of it this way.  You're running twenty-one shifts a week so you're, you're at a, at a minimum of five managers, shift-run managers.  That's pretty much the rule of thumb and if you're smart you've got, you know, additional ones so that, you know, when people leave and it's not even if, it's when, you have that, that bench to grow to 'cause our business is about, you know, there aren't too many people who make a career out of McDonald's for a lot of different reasons.  I think our management becomes much more stable than other parts of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but, does McDonald's itself provide like, I mean, is there a system such, I mean, it is, I'm not just saying there is a perception in most black communities that McDonald's is like a haven, you know, where kids all want to go there and you see old people--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --there in the morning drinking coffee, reading their paper, talking and meeting and something like that, you don't see that everywhere, you know, you don't see that everywhere.  It's not, it's not easy to develop that.  Did, do--
Speaker 2: I think we put a lot of money into our facilities.  They're comfortable.  If you really look at our communities in our neighborhoods, it's probably the best facility in the area, you know, in terms of its cleanliness, in terms of its decor.  You know, our average restaurant today, you know, costs about a million dollars to, from point one to ten, to construct it and to equip it.  So that's not a small investment and that's not a small business.  It's a small business but it's not of the ma and pa type that you find in our communities.  So it's usually the beacon in the community in terms of comfort, in terms of cleanliness and you could get a good value.  So, I think that especially works in our community because there are so few places like that to go, you know.  If you're not at the lounge or, you know, I mean most of these places are transient.  There are not too many places you could just sit down and, and the days of the real, the restaurants that used to be so popular, you know, years ago, a lot of them have gone by the wayside.
Speaker 1: This is true.  Well they're not considered like family places even if they're still--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --open.
Speaker 2: And we're one of the few places that offers breakfast and that's another piece of it, even with our competitors.
Speaker 1: There are twenty-one shifts you say a week?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: That's a, you're open a lot.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Story_ID: 112039
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, now the, the national advertising--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --of McDonald's, I know that helps so it makes one of these McDonald's, I mean, can, can you really mess up a McDonald's?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess that's what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you really mess up the management of a McDonald's?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, you can, you can definitely mess up the management, and it's easy.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you have any stories--
Speaker 2: It's easy to--
Speaker 1: --about people--
Speaker 2: --to mess it up.  It's easy to be unprofitable, it's, it's a misnomer to think that it's--and I talk to people who want to go into this business about, this is hands-on, almost, if you don't have great systems, it's, it's every day, you know, management. It's a hands-on management situation.  You cannot--first of all, there, the training never ends in a McDonald's.  You're training people from the day they start to the day they leave the place.  There is always training and development going on.  When you couple that with some of the turnover you have and some of the challenges you have with a lot of the youth, a lot of the youth come to our workplace with very little home training.  They don't even know the fundamentals of dress, of, of being polite, of getting along with the team, teamwork, this is usually their first encounter of any of these kinds of, and you're teaching them literally--
Speaker 1: Are you, are you the primary teacher in this process or do you have, how do you--
Speaker 2: Well you have, you, you have hierarchy of, of things going on.  It's too big of a job for one person to do.  You have to train managers to train crew, to train crew.  So it's, it's a hierarchy and, and that's why the training is so constant.  You never get away from it because the people are always changing at one level or another.
Story_ID: 112040
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're hands-on activities primarily with the managers, other managers?
Speaker 2: Primarily with the managers and at this stage, after twenty-three years, I've got the luxury today of having, you know, a person that really drives the operations for my company that typically, if you don't have that person, that's you.  You know, you have to be that person.  So I'm able to focus more on the profitability side of it and some other areas and he drives the operations, he drives the people side.  So we have a really good relationship in that way and I've been very fortunate to have this guy for about ten years now and he's, he's good at what he does.  So, but it's, it's, when you're dealing with about 250 people, think of it this way, and all the things that can go wrong, think about it that way, you know, calling off of work, personal issues, just not getting the work done--
Speaker 1: There are a lot of personal issues--
Speaker 2: There's a lot of personal issues.
Speaker 1: --in the black community too that some of them are just baffling, I mean, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --but they're a part of the atmosphere--
Speaker 2: They're part, they're part of the atmosphere, you know--
Speaker 1: A poor community.
Speaker 2: Can't get babysitters, baby's sick, couldn't drop them off that day, you know, can't work this shift because of this and so you're dealing with a, a lot of issues with young people and it's not just black youth, and I gotta tell you, one of the, the real disheartening things that I see happening is that I think our youth are getting pushed away even from this entry level jobs today because their culture is saying to them that it's beneath them and, you know, they're not looking at this as a stepping stone to something else 'cause I tell people this all the time, you know, the people who, the skills that you learn at McDonald's, and I've had the advantage, I've had the advantage of being, you know, well-educated, I've had the, the corporate involvement and now, you know, I've had the involvement of, of learning a system from ground up in McDonald's, you know, and having to do the same things I'm asking those crew people to do.  I had to clean the washrooms, I had to mop the floors, all during that two years of training.  I had to do every one of those jobs, so I know what it takes but the skills that you learn in this business are transferrable, you know, the real skills that you can garner and learn if you take that building block method that we talked about before and when you become a manager of a McDonald's, you're riding on a $1.8 million business and you're doing the sales, you're doing the marketing, you're doing the people, you're doing the equipment, you're, those skills are truly transferrable.  If you can do that well, you can do a lot of stuff well in anybody's company, in anybody's business, and I try to communicate that with our people to not even think about this as being something beneath because the skills that you can garner and grow to are the same skills you're gonna find and, and people are happy to hire our people when they leave, you know, the other companies like Walgreens or, or the Kmart's or the, they're very happy, anybody in the retail business is very happy to hire our people because they know they're going to be well-trained.
Story_ID: 112041
Speaker 1: Okay, but it is possible to mess up a McDonald's if you don't know, if you don't adhere to certain practices despite the call for Happy Meals on--for the, I mean the kids like in a black community leave, I mean they leave the house looking for a Happy Meal there--
Speaker 2: Here's the point--
Speaker 1: --they know they're going to--
Speaker 2: --everything we sell has not a wide margin on it, it has a very narrow margin.  What we do best is we sell a lot of it, okay.  So, if, if you're wasting too much, if people are, if you've got what we call business partners, okay, and--
Speaker 1: Unofficial business partners.
Speaker 2: Unofficial business partners.  If you're just not doing things based on the procedures that make it efficient, you're going to lose money and just as you, just as our system works for making money, it's a, it's a penny business.  Well, it's a penny business the other way.  You can lose it as fast as you're supposed to make it if you've got the wrong things in place and literally, you can be in trouble in thirty days, you know, of bad management, bad operations, so on and so forth.  I mean, you may be getting the sales to your point.  Everybody wants to go to McDonald's but if there's, what are you taking to the bank at the end of the day, that's what counts.
Speaker 1: And this is, so this is a finely-tuned operation?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Finely-tuned.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and because of the competitive set today, the margins are even slimmer, you know.  We're, when we were the, the only guy in town, you know, when I first came in the business, you know, it was, it was pretty straightforward.  It was, it was kind of difficult to mess it up.  You know, today, I spend more time managing the profitability of the restaurant as I do the operations of the restaurant.  You really have to pay attention to the details.
Story_ID: 112042
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of acquisition of other McDonald's, I mean--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --so if you've got one, that's pretty good, you're doing fine there, that's a, but how did you, and you're not the only black McDonald operator here that owns more than one, there's quite a few now--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --that own more than one McDonald's and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have about twenty operators now in Chicago, over 300, over 500 nationwide, by the way.  We have a national organization that I hope we have a chance to talk about a little bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe we should talk about that 'cause that's, it's something that's, it's a kind of a positive thing that--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, it's certainly worthy of discussion.  I mean, the black McDonald's operators.  I mean, how did you all get together?
Speaker 2: It started with a couple of guys here in Chicago.  Our first owner-operator here in Chicago was a guy by the name of Herman Petty.  He's the first African American operator in the country and he started on the South Side of Chicago at 67th and Vincennes and was right after the King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] riots [1968].  It's what catapulted him into McDonald's.  He was a barber by trade and he has a story himself.  I would recommend very highly that you guys put him on the list.  He has, he has quite a story to tell.
Story_ID: 111619
Speaker 1: Okay, you were telling us about Herman Petty and the first McDonald's franchise.
Speaker 2: The first African American McDonald's owner-operator and he started in 1967, right after the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] riots [1968] here in Chicago and he was catapulted into his career and shortly after that, he and, I think, one or two other operators, two that came after him, around '68 [1968], '69 [1969], and a business consultant for McDonald's by the name of Roland Jones, they were having problems running their restaurants and they had no one to turn to.  They didn't have a group of people other than the company and the company really didn't have a lot of experience of running restaurants in the inner city and so they formed this group, basically it was three of them plus the, the company representative called the Black McDonald's Owners Association [sic, National Black McDonald's Operators Association] and it was a self-help group and they had meetings every week and just talked about shared ideas, shared experiences, collectively tried to help each other solve problems and that's how it all began.  And today, we're over 500 strong, we're all a billion dollars in sales, nationally, and it's, it's such a proud thing to be a part of because of what we've accomplished not only for ourselves and our families but in the communities that we serve.  There's so many programs that we have, both on a national, local basis that, that offer our help to the communities and it's probably one of the untold stories really that's out there in terms of, a lot of it we don't seek publicity for and rightly so but each and every one of us is involved in some way in our own communities.  So, it's, it's a great story to tell.
Story_ID: 111620
Speaker 1: One of the, the huge things that I feel very proud of in my McDonald's experience is that I was part of a, of a movement, if you will, that really identified with McDonald's Corporation, the opportunity to be more fair and equitable in terms of the restaurants that we, as African Americans owned and operated, and we reached an agreement about seven years ago that in five years we would achieve what we termed parity and we were looking at one point in time, we were at the bottom, the African American operators were at the bottom of every success measure that McDonald's had, whether it be sales, customer accounts, whether it be profitability, a number of stores, as well as a number of operators as a percentage of our, our population.  So we struck a deal.  There were twenty-one of us that went to Oak Brook [Illinois] and it was under Reggie Welch leadership and we negotiated what we call in turn, parity.  It was a five-year plan to take us from the bottom, to even. And I'm very proud to say that we were successful in doing that.  Right now the African American restaurants lead the country in sales comparable to our white counterparts in profitability and as a number of stores and number of owner-operators, we represent about eighteen percent, very close to the SMSA [Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area], the census of what we represent in the population which was our goal and I had a very direct role to play in that which I'm very proud of.  I was elected president of one of our divisions for National Black McDonald's and it was a Great Lakes Division which covered about eight states and I was in charge of the parity of movement, if you will, for that division and we were one of the first to achieve it.  So, that's something that we really look as a legacy to hand down to the new operators coming in and as we, as we move forward in this process, you know our real determination now is not to lose the gains that we've achieved, that can happen very easily, and to maintain what we've accomplished and still have diligence towards the profitability.  So when you asked the question, you know earlier about is there a way to mess it up, well, some of that is not of our own doing.  You can have an extremely old facility that's broke down and hard to run in a tough area and you can have some very significant problems.  One of the things I'm not proud to say, you know, we probably had as a percentage of our operators, a higher number of bankruptcies with African American operators than any other segment before parity.  So in every success measure you want to take, we were at the bottom before we got involved in this particular development and it was, it was very--and I think McDonald's looks at it as a win-win today because they're garnering more sales through our efforts than before and so it's a positive thing for everyone concerned.
Story_ID: 111621
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you're involved in quite a few, now you own five now, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Five and where are they now?
Speaker 2: I have the Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] restaurant down, downtown.  I have a restaurant in McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] and then I have three in the Western Suburbs, one in Hillside [Illinois], one in River Forest [Illinois] and one on Harlem and Armitage.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the most, I guess the most lucrative one is the, is the Navy Pier restaurant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Navy Pier is our highest volume restaurant, has been.  I've owned that restaurant now for ten years and, yeah, we're very proud of the organization we have down there.
Speaker 1: So like two of yours are, are in high, high-traffic public places that, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always, in my recruiting efforts when I recruit, interview new managers, one of the things I always talk about very proudly is that we think, I look at our organization as being a little bit on the cutting edge because we have traditional sites but we have some very unique sites as well.  In the case of Navy Pier, you know, just in terms of numbers of people, you know, this time of the year, January and February, you're, we're probably staffing the place with fifty or fifty-five people.  By the summer, we're up to 120.  That's how busy we get and, at Navy Pier, and McCormick Place, it's, to my knowledge, even today still, the only McDonald's in a convention center in the world.  So, we feel very proud to have been successful in some very unique, you know, locations that we have.  We think that venues, some very unique venues that we have, we think we, we've done a pretty good job in those.
Speaker 1: Well I know in a city like Chicago, it's tough to, to get into a prime venue like McCormick Place or Navy Pier.  I mean, so you've had to really be pretty sharp politically to get, get in those places, I guess.
Speaker 2: It's never about politics (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I would like to think that they awarded the stores to the best person to do the best job (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in Chicago, we're fortunate enough, I mean, Cirilo McSween has like the McDonald's on State Street--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --as sort of a landmark and he's got one in the Field Museum [Field Museum of Natural History], I believe too, which is--
Speaker 2: He doesn't have the one at the Field Museum but he's, he's primary now at the airport--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so he has several at the airport now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by the way, you know, we have a local organization.  Each major city in the U.S. has a chapter of a national organization, so Chicago being the oldest because of Herman [Petty]'s involvement, we have a local Black McDonald's Owners Association and Cirilo [McSween] is the president--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of our local organization.
Story_ID: 111622
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you pick the themes for your restaurants 'cause I know the one in Navy Pier is the Future McDonald's, right, I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we definitely have a say-so into that.  When you get into the high visibility sites like a Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois], there tend to be a lot of hands in it.  The Pier authorities themselves had a hand in it.  They, they really wanted final approval on the concept.  They want it to be one-of-a-kind concept when we first went in there.  So, you know, it was probably consensus driven, myself, McDonald's and the Pier authority agreeing to a concept that we were going to do and going ahead with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any other, are all your restaurants, do, do they all have a theme or a--
Speaker 2: You know, not all of them.  I think the theme, the theming of restaurants really started about five years ago, for the most part.  Now in the case of the special venues, they always tended to have a bit of a theme, like Navy Pier, but now you're starting to see that a lot in traditional restaurants having themes, many of the ones that were built on the South Side of Chicago within the last five years were themed restaurants and have done very well with that.  You have the Hollywood McDonald's on 55th Street.  You have the Pullman [Porters].  I think there's an operator that did one off the theme of Pullman trains.
Speaker 1: Pullman, Pull--porters and all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pullman porters and Pullman trains.  So, there's, there was, there is a movement afoot to--
Speaker 1: Jazz McDonald's.
Speaker 2: Jazz McDonald's, Blues McDonald's, so there is a movement afoot to do theme, more themed restaurants.  The customers seem to like it.  I think we're becoming much more customer focused in even how we build our restaurants now.
Story_ID: 111623
Speaker 1: Okay, now you're a volunteer for a number of organizations.  I met you years ago in relationship to Kuumba Theatre [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where you can join your old mentor, Valerie Ward [HM Val Gray Ward], I guess.
Speaker 2: That's right, she called and I answered.  There's no way you could turn Val down from that and that was an enjoyable experience and I think even one of the teachings that she had with us is always trying to give something back to the community and that was a good fit in the McDonald's scheme too, I think, 'cause they, they really pride themselves and the company really prides itself and the operators as well on giving back to the community.  Currently, I've kind of cut down some of my involvement with outside entities but I am still a member of the Midwest Association Sickle Cell [sic, Sickle Cell Disease Association of Illinois] and I still am a board member there.  The Near South Planning Board is a neighborhood planning group that I'm involved with.  I sit on a board of one of, one of the banks, Northern Trust Bank, the South Side branch.  I sit on that board.  So I've tried to round myself out to do both civic community and business-related kind of activity as I have just gotten older in the business I guess.  I'm very active though in, in McDonald's, and McDonald's has some very unique structures that, you know, I think, worthy of, of talking about, you know.  I think probably one of the few things that separates our company from a lot of others is that most, most of what we do is operator-driven and even at the local level, we have an advertising co-op as an example.  So you talked about the national marketing aspect which is run by a group of operators and a group of company people in collaboration with one another.  On the local level, we have a board of directors that's elected every two years that runs a $24 million budget for a local advertising in public relations.  We have a group of operators that involve themselves in the whole purchasing effort, here locally.  We have a committee that simply deals strictly with how we can improve our people relations, internally.  What are the kinds of things we can do for our crew and our managers as incentives, as training, as development, these are all operator-driven entities and, of course, we have the charity, the Ronald [McDonald] House Charities which currently is under restructuring but is being manned by owner-operators and people from the community.  So, I think that that's the magic in what we do is that the people who are closest to the customer are also the ones that are making up a lot of the decisions and McDonald's has been very smart about that in terms of allowing that kind of collaboration to happen pretty much at every level.
Story_ID: 111624
Speaker 1: You know, I had the great fortune of serving, we talked about first, so I'll give you my first.  I was a first black president for the McDonald's Association of Chicagoland in Northwest Indiana and that was in 1990 and so that was a real hallmark for us because historically before then, we could hardly get a board member elected and out of fifteen board members, we could hardly get one elected and as, as we worked through processes and worked with the other operators and the McDonald's Corporation, what surfaced out of that was my election to the board of directors in one capacity and then two years later I, as a vice president, two years later I elevated to president.
Speaker 2: When were you elected president?
Speaker 1: In 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: From '90 [1990] to '92 [1992].
Story_ID: 111625
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are your, your future plans at McDonald's?  Do you have any, any, do you intend on acquiring additional--
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Always in the hunt.  I think when you stop being hungry in this business, it's time to retire but I--
Speaker 1: Or the people stop being hungry, that's--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  That's true, that's, that's very true.  I think that, you know, I'll do that from a qualitative point of view.  You know, there are certain, you know, situations that I, I prefer being in than others and will try to steer that as much as possible but it's still a very competitive business.  You still have to run good, sound operations in your stores.  That's the first criteria that you have to have that they look at and, you know, good things will happen if you, if you do the right things.
Story_ID: 111626
Speaker 1: Is it--do most black McDonald owners and operators feel especially challenged to run the stores in the community even though we talked about they're the cleanest, I mean, they're clean, they're good places to, for the most part--
Speaker 2: They're tougher, they're absolutely--
Speaker 1: Are they tough to operate?
Speaker 2: --they're tougher to operate, there's no question about that.  We've, you can look at it in terms of the expense of operating and you can look at it in terms of the, the training and development of the people.  I mean, it's, it's just a, it's a harder, tougher road that you have to, and you can look at it also in terms of the customer base and customers are tough in those areas.  You got the gang elements, you got the drug elements, you got the same things that plague our communities overall, centered around those McDonald's.  So, it doesn't change just because you put the golden arches up, you know, and some of that, you know, you, you have to protect against coming into that restaurant and coming up against your people that have to go back to those same problems every day.  So, that, that's what makes it tougher and makes it different and I operated one of those stores for fourteen years so I know it first-hand and it's a, it's a big difference in operating in the suburbs and operating in the city.  I've had the opportunity to see that.  You know, it's, it's night and day, the differences that you operate.  Fortunately, I think the operators are rewarded because those are the stores that tend to have higher volumes.  So if you can deal with the challenges, effectively, you can still make a good living off of it.
Story_ID: 111627
Speaker 1: Have you, utilized senior citizens in your McDonald's?  I know, you, I've seen this on the highway--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the roadside McDonald's on, off the interstate and that sort of thing, but have, I haven't seen that much in the inner city but--
Speaker 2: Yeah we do and I, I guess, you know, we haven't been as active as we could be and should be but I think there's a place for seniors in our business.  I think we, we have a real opportunity for people who want to work short hours, you know, maybe just work lunchtime, you know, eleven to two, three or four hours a day.  There's a great opportunity for that and maybe they just want some pocket change or something on the side or just to be active and feel vibrant and doing something and I know that we'd all love to figure it out, you know, how do you recruit people that are seniors.  I know I've tried it from time to time and had some success with it but, yeah, it's an opportunity for us but they don't necessarily come to us knocking on the door applying for jobs either so we really have to seek them out.
Story_ID: 111628
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you how you felt about that, the critique of McDonald's food, I mean.  Everybody knows it's tasty--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --and everybody likes it but, I mean, in terms of taste, but there's been a critique of its content and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, I think we've, the criticism has, has lessened.  I think we've gotten a lot better.  I think we heard the customer.  I think from, and we're not there, we're not where we need to be but I think we're paying attention to fatty oils in our products, we're not, we're cooking them now with vegetable oils, our whole salad program is in a, is a testament to a more healthy diet.  You know, offering milk and apple dippers with our Happy Meals is, is a target to our, to the kids, or to the moms really, that there's a, you can take a healthier alternative to a Happy Meal.  So, yeah, we're, we're listening to that and, you know, but at the end of the day, I'm not gonna fool anyone with this, McDonald's is burgers and fries. And people come to us for that.  Now how we can make that a, a better balance in the experience, I think, is important but I don't know if we'll ever want to or will lose that identity of, of being McDonald's, that's who we are.
Story_ID: 111629
Speaker 1: I just want to say one thing, they have the veggie burger in New York, now.  I don't know, this is--(laughter), but we always ask this question, so what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Education and obesity.  I also sit on the children's committee for the University of Chicago [in Chicago, Illinois] and learned something I didn't know that the number one killer in that community, surrounding the U of C for kids is asthma and so I think, you know, there, there are a lot of things that plague our community.  I would say number one, that I feel is the one that can uplift us most, though, is education.  I think if we can get the right thing going there, people can find ways to lift themselves but, you know, the drug problems are huge as, as we all can attest to and there's no easy solutions to that.
Story_ID: 111630
Speaker 1: Do you have any, any success stories of people who, you know, started at your stores--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and were able to.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, that's the thing I'm, I'm most proud of and, you know, you'll, you'll, being in this business twenty-three years, you start to date yourself, you know, but you'll just run across a kid, or not a kid, an adult now, and they'll, and someone just calls your name and say, you know, I was coming out of Navy Pier the other day at the garage and the garage manager, and I didn't recognize this woman.  She says, "Mr. Canady, I used to work for you.  You gave me my first job."  Now, those are the things that you feel are successes in life, that people have gone or persons that went on and went to college.  One young lady I know that comes back every year and just to say hello, 'cause she worked the drive-through, you know, all through high school and was a first job and she's gone on to get her Master's degree and, and those are the things you don't see in the newspaper or on the news but there are a lot of young people that we touch in ways that we don't even know we touch them until years later and we find that they've gone and used that experience to better themselves and that's, that's good stuff.  I don't care what kind of business you're in and because of the longevity of a McDonald's, you know, I don't think we're going to be going bankrupt to it pretty soon but, you know, there's a tendency to these people.  You know there was a commercial that we did once of all these professionals that started at McDonald's.  That's quite a story to tell, airplane pilots, you know, CEOs of companies and, you know, I mean, not to say that that's the way it goes in everybody's life but, you know, you've got to start somewhere and I think when you can start in a place that teaches you the fundamentals of basics to be successful in your life, that's, that's not a bad thing.
Story_ID: 111631
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on all the things you've done this far, thus far, and you're still fairly young by our standards of interviewing, I mean, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Hmmm, not really, not really 'cause I, I really think that every experience that I had was for a reason, even the bad ones and they haven't all been great and good and I think that's what builds the person, are the experiences that you have.  So I don't really spend a lot of time thinking about what I could have done differently or what I should have done differently.  I try to spend my time thinking about what, what's new on the horizon, what, what really is the next step for Blanton Canady and, and his, his family.  So it's more of that than looking back.  I don't think I'd change too much about my life experience.  One thing we didn't touch on that I would feel remiss before we get to the end of this interview, I really want to talk a little bit about the family involvement that I had and the success of my business.  I would be remiss in not mentioning that in this interview because it was such an integral part of everything that I accomplished.
Story_ID: 111632
Speaker 1: Okay, you were telling us about your family involvement with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's such an important aspect of my life that I don't want this interview to end without really talking about it some.  When I first started in '81 [1981], my first restaurant, I actually asked my brother, one of my brothers, to join me in the endeavor and become one of my key managers and he was working for Peoples Gas at the time.  His name is Mitchell Canady and he agreed and came aboard and we, literally, opened the first store together and he was there with me day and night assisting in getting that store up and running and went through the bad days and the good days.  What's so remarkable about that, because, I think, a lot of people look at family relationships in business and most of the time it doesn't work.  I'm one of the first to say that.  In my case, I was pretty lucky because I not only had one brother involved, I had two brothers involved.  I had nephews involved.  My ex-wife was involved at one point in time as well as sister-in-laws, and so I had a family affair going for a period of time but I think what was significant about my two brothers, Ron and Mitchell Canady, is that they literally left careers of their own and joined me in this endeavor because we had this vision, the three of us, of developing some kind of legacy for our particular family and I know my oldest brother, Ron, used to always say to me as a kid that he thought that I was going to be the one to, to take this legacy forward for the Canady clan, if you will, and I guess I took that pretty seriously because as I got in the business I really started to, not just add people for adding them sake, but I really found ways where people fit into the business and would help make it successful and it worked.  It really worked for a, a long time and in fact, we grew to our highest point when my brothers were involved.  At one point, we grew up to seven restaurants and a lot of that success was due to them.  One of my brothers became a general manager of one of the stores and one became supervisor for all the stores.  So they were playing very key roles in the organization and more than that, they were mentors 'cause they were older to a lot of the younger managers.  So they were people that were very good with people and, you know, when people felt uncomfortable talking to me about things, they would go to them.  So there was a lot of intrinsic value in that.
Story_ID: 111633
Speaker 1: Well the tragedy of all of this, and there was a tragedy, is that five years ago, I lost both of them in the course of forty-five days.  I, I lost my middle brother on Christmas Day four years ago, five years ago, in a car accident and then forty-five days later, I lost my oldest brother, who was suffering from colon cancer.  So that was a time, we talk about all of these challenges in business, school, you name it, none of it comes close to going through something like that and surviving it and being able to talk about it and it's such an important part of my story that I would be remiss because I would not be who I am, I would not be this, the few successes I've had had it not been for them and all the rest that supported that. So that was a, a pretty challenging time because not only did it, did it tear up things on a personal level, not only did it really become a tremendous challenge personally, but also in the business because they played such key roles.  So, it was a total restructure, rebuilding process that I had to go through on top of the personal issues I was, I was dealing with.  So, I, again, I would have been remiss not talking about that part because I, I think a lot of who I am is because of, we talked about my mom and dad [Grace Canady and William Canady, Jr.], but she instilled that in us and those guys they would, they would fall on swords, and we would do that for each other.  I mean, we just had that kind of commitment to one another, it went beyond.  My brother used to tell me this all the time, when I would be on his case and say, you know, and we'd get into, like brothers do, we had our fights and our arguments, and you can imagine that in a business, you know, with a brother and you're going like this (clicking), and I'm the youngest, okay, and I'm dealing with older brothers, so this is, this is tough stuff.  I don't necessarily recommend it to everybody.  It wasn't all, all gravy.  It wasn't just a gravy train all the way through.  We had times when, I know with my middle brother, we were, we were so at odds, I, I, one day I fired him (laughter).  I said you're fired (laughter), but you know we got through that stuff and, and he said to me, my oldest brother said, you know this is not about the business, this is not about the paycheck, this is not about, this is about our family and trying to build something for it but I learned a very crucial lesson in all of that that some of the best laid plans are not yours to decide.  You know, all of that was gone in forty-five days.  All of those dreams, all of those aspirations, all of those visions of this, this legacy to build, was gone in forty-five days and essentially, you know, I was the one left standing.  So that was, that was a tremendous--and you just come to realize that no one controls this, this life of ours but the man upstairs and he's the only one that has, knows what your destiny truly is going to be and you couldn't have told me ten years ago, or fifteen years ago that, you know, we wouldn't have propelled this thing to become something for our heirs but that's not the way it was supposed to be.
Story_ID: 111634
Speaker 1: Now do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have a son and I have a stepson from my first marriage and my stepson is a very successful guy.  He, he is married with two kids of his own doing very well.  Works for the Federal Reserve Bank.  His name is Andre.  My son, by blood, is, he carries my name.  He's the second Blanton Canady, the Second.  He's a senior at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta Georgia].  I'm just so proud of him.  He's made the dean's list this semester.  He's, he's one of these kids, though, that he, he thinks he's ready to run the world already, you know.  He's already talking about coming out and running dad's business and, well we've had some long talks about that and I persuaded him to get a couple of years under his belt.  I want him to work in the, the real world for a couple of years, makes, make his own accomplishments, do some things on his own, go to grad school.  You know, I was, I felt that was a good experience for me and I think it'll be a good one for him.  You know, get his skills together, you know, the same belief I had about myself, you know, prepare yourself best for whatever it is you're going to do, whether it's McDonald's or anything else and then, you know, he can, he can take on the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your parents get a chance to see you, you become successful with this?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that was, that was one of the great parts about, they saw a lot of that success.  My dad, I remember, I have a, one of the pictures that I will share with the archives, is a picture of my mom and dad at Harold, and Harold Washington, in my restaurant at 25th and King [sic, Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] and that was such a joy for them, you know.  This was like his first year of office and it was Bud Billiken Day and they would, we used to have the breakfast at my restaurant for Bud Billiken's Day and the mayor came by and took a picture with my mom and dad and that was a, you know, so yeah, they had a, a chance to share a lot of that success.  I'm very, you know, I'm very proud of that, very pleased with that, that they didn't, they did get a chance to see us all together too, accomplishing these things.
Story_ID: 111635
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back on, on your career so far, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know what I hope it is and that's going to be an easier one for me, I really hope that it turns out to be--I turn out to be someone that's remembered in helping the operators achieve their dreams and goals.  I hope that that is one of the things that happens that I'm remembered in that way and I would say that if I can be remembered in helping the people that worked for me, if they have a few good things to say about that involvement and maybe that I helped them along the way, that, I know it probably sounds pretty corny but, you know, I've had, you know, reasonable financial success.  I don't really have, other than my ego, any big goals to, you know, double my income or anything like that.  You know, first of all, it takes a bit of fire, I'm fifty-six years old now and not about to slow down but McDonald's becomes a young man's game, it really does, and, you know, but my, I haven't stopped and you may hear some more from me before it's over.
Story_ID: 111636
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I thought I just answered that.  I guess I would like to be remembered as somebody that had integrity about what they did, someone that was honest, that tried to do his best at the things that, that I did in life, maybe not always successful but tried to do my best and I think that, I hope that something comes out of that in terms of the way I treated my family and hopefully there's an element of respect for that part of it that I tried to do the best for my family, both immediate as well as extended.  So that, that would be good if I'm remembered for that.
