Story_ID: 315221
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Ed Anderson.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, and that's, X, as in X-ray E-R-N-O-N-A Clayton. Just start out or are you gonna ask it again?
Speaker 1: Ma'am could you give us your full name, and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Xernona, X-E-R-N-O-N-A. That's X as in X-ray. My maiden name was Brewster, B-R-E-W-S-T-E-R.  My professional name is Clayton, C-L-A-Y-T-O-N.  I have another name, Brady, which is my married name, B-R-A-D-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there a story behind the name Xernona?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a Greek derivation.  I had a twin sister [Xenobia Brewster] who recently passed away, and our parents [Lillie Elliott Brewster and James Brewster] had a Greek friend, a neighbor, and she told my mother that she hoped that she would name the expected child--they thought it was going to be one--Xenobia, which is a Greek goddess; and that's an authentic goddess, with a Greek name.  And then, of course, in the years we were born, twins, which there weren't many because multiple births were not as common as they are today.  And so, it was a rarity to have twins.  But they used to be named, rhymed names, like, you know, Lou and Sue.  And nothing rhymed with the name Xenobia, so they made up the matching name which Xernona; Greek derivation beginning with an X, as you know, in Greek, the X has the pronunciation of Z.  And then the last part was part of a family name.  So mine is definitely original, and I'm delighted with it because it is unusual, and I love it.
Speaker 1: And Xenobia is a--
Speaker 2: Greek goddess.
Speaker 1: There's a--Zenobia was also a black queen--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Asia Minor?
Speaker 2: Spelled with a Z.
Speaker 1: Yeah, with a Z.  But the Z and the X are--could be interchangeable.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they sound alike but Greeks use the sound of Z but use X.  (Unclear) and all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 30th.  I was born in 1930, I'm proud to say I'm 31, ha-ha-ha.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: M, as in Mary, U-S-K-O-G-E-E, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Third largest city in the state.  The whole state is small.  And I remember when I was born and we learned civic lessons, the population when I was about sixth grade in school was about forty thousand.  I went back to my hometown couple of years ago, in 2000, I asked what the population was, they said forty thousand.  So I guess it's never changed.  As one dies, another is born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I've just recently changed.  I was a television execution at Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] until three months ago when I became the president and CEO of my own company, which is the Trumpet Awards Foundation, Incorporated [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is June 22nd [2005], my thirty-first wedding anniversary today.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And one day after the verdict handed down in Mississippi the man [Edgar Ray Killen] reported to have killed, I guess they now call it manslaughter, for the deaths of three men I knew very well; Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], Chaney [James Chaney]--
Speaker 1: Goodman [Andrew Goodman].
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so this is kind of an interesting period in my life right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And where we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia, and we're here at the CNN Center [Atlanta, Georgia], where I've been employed for twenty-seven years until three months ago.
Story_ID: 315222
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask that only require a short answer, and the first one is, ma'am, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Grapes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't do vacations.  But my favorite spot--I have two; Las Vegas, Nevada and the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Now, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  If you can't change the people around you, change the people around you.
Story_ID: 315223
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillie, L-I-L-L-I-E.  Her maiden name was Elliott, E-L-L-I-O-T-T.  She married my father, James Brewster [James Brewster], B-R-E-W-S-T-E-R.  My mother was born in Mount Pleasant, Texas, and of Indian [Native American] and African American heritage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you know the year she was born?
Speaker 2: I'd have to guess because she died in seventy--I've got to figure it up.  She die in '74 [1974], and she was seventy-two; so it was in 1902?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Okay.  Now, do you know--what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  You said they're Indian and African American?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Nothing much except I did meet my grandmother, who's my mother's mother three times, visited her.  She was half-Indian herself, and very dark in complexion with long, black, silky, silky hair, that she combed in her lap all day long.  She just kept her hair in her lap.  Strange woman by observation; didn't talk much, stared a lot, looked around a lot, very sharp features.  And my mother matched those, Indian, obviously, Indian features; high cheekbones, long nose, small lips, eyes that were piercing but clear, and flawless complexion.  At the time we met her, she had had to be in her fifties or sixties, I imagine.  And my mother, who died at seventy--and at that time, you know, seventies were considered kind of old--my mother never had a wrinkle in her face ever.  My mother didn't have any teeth missing.  Very strong constitution; ate garlic every day as her mother did, as her family did; they ate garlic every day.  My mother probably had two colds in the whole years we ever knew her.  She had three brothers.  The first time we saw one of my uncles, we thought he'd been the one who was on the coin.  He looked just like the Indian on the coin.  He had--all was missing was the headdress; long nose, sharp features, high cheekbones.  And although my mother--grandmother was very dark, she married an African American man who was brown-skinned.  So my mother was not dark, she was a beautiful, kind of a copper--or I'd guess you'd say a kind of light-brown skin with reddish undertone in her complexion; so were her brothers--two of her brothers.  One, third brother, was very, very dark like our grandmother.  And it was interesting; my father was very fair skinned.  So the first time we saw our grandmother, we were a little afraid of her because she was so dark and she sat in the dark, and seemed mysterious.  And the first time we went to visit her in Texas, my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I were afraid of her.  And I think it's because nobody in our family was dark as she was, and it was the first time we saw a family member that dark.  And we kept saying to our mother, "Gee, she's so dark.  And she sits in the dark."  And I guess that was probably also the beginning of what we probably called that early stage racism, that if she was really black, she probably--something was wrong with her.  And we were probably conditioned by our environment; that's what I think about in my mature years, you know, why did we not like her.  It wasn't it's because she was quiet, I think, because she was so dark.  But she was really beautiful when we got a chance to analyze her later, and she was kind to us, but it took her a while to warm up to us as we recognized it, it took her a long time to warm up to anybody.  But also was our mother like that.  She was not a gregarious person like my father.  It took her a long time to warm up to people.  But once she formed a likeness for you, I mean, you never got away from her.  She just kind of embraced you so strongly that when she liked people she really liked them, and took on some of my mother's--I mean her mother's traits.  My father was born in Louisiana; very, very fair.
Story_ID: 315224
Speaker 1: Before we get to your father [James Brewster], can I ask you a couple of questions about your mother's [Lillie Elliott Brewster] side? (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know what Indian [Native American] group they were related to?
Speaker 2: Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Cherokee.  Okay.  It's so many Indian groups in Oklahoma--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and having been forced to migrate to Oklahoma from the East.  So they were Cherokee.  All right.  And are there any stories from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: No.  Our family was very close-mouthed.  As a matter of fact, I guess we all owe Alex Haley such a debt, because I think many of us didn't think in terms of getting family history until, you know, he brought the importance to the fore.  But my family particularly was, you know, they were very proud.  My mother just didn't talk much, and then we went to visit our grandmother and she talk much.  And we didn't ask questions about heritage, so, I don't know very much about them.  I kind of wish now I really did, but there's nobody left.  It was a small family and so we don't have any relatives left to tell us things.  And I kind of wish I knew more about my family.
Speaker 1: Did any of them ever on a reservation or--
Speaker 2: No.  We heard that my grandmother, her side of the family, well, really lived the life of what we know now as the storybook versions of Indian life, but I can't tell you much about it.  I really don't--they were just stories we heard.  They didn't have authenticity, so I don't know much about it.
Speaker 1: Well, it's the stories, I mean they don't have to be authenticated for you to tell them, you know, to us.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: But it's really not a lot of--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --stuff passed down?  Okay.  Now, well, okay.  Now did your mother talk about growing, what it was like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  Even when--now, you've prompted my thinking.  As I look back, when we went to visit, they didn't talk much either, my mother and her mother.  And her brothers, they would sit around but there wasn't a lot of talking.  So I guess they didn't--they just weren't talkers.  So, no.  I don't know much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother grew up in Mount Pleasant [Texas] or was she just born there or did she grow up there, too?
Speaker 2: She was born there and grew up there, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have a chance to go to school and everything else?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She went to twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the name of the school she went to?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 315225
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  James Moore was his middle name, M-O-O-R-E, Brewster, B-R-E-W-S-T-E-R.  And he was born in Shreveport, Louisiana--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to a family of five--in a family of five.  There were five children in his family.  And as far as early history of his, I don't have much of that either.  I plan--I have a brother [James Brewster] and he went out on a kind of a search to get--find out more about my dad's family because I think one or two of some family members are around someplace, and he said we need to sit down sometimes and kind of fill in the void there.  And I'm embarrassed sometimes now because everybody seems to know of a rich background of the families, and I know of so little about mine.  But I really--what I do know is that my mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster] and father, whatever brought them together to produce children, I being one of those products, can just say that they must have had good grounding wherever they came from, whatever lives they led because they were so anchored in parenting.  They provided us the wisdom, the knowledge and nurturing and guidance that would be the envy of any family, rich or poor, and we certainly were not rich.  We would be closer to the category of poor, although we never knew that because we were enriched by our home environment.  I grew up in the happiest home that anybody could ever have.  So my mother and father were a good balance.  My mother was the day-to-day disciplinarian who did the physical violence.  She could never join Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] nonviolent movement because she believed in violence, and I say that with a, a joke.
Story_ID: 315226
Speaker 1: Now, did, did she [Clayton's mother, Lillie Elliott Brewster] know her father?  I mean, was there--you didn't mention her father at all.
Speaker 2: No.  And her father was Indian [Native American] and she--well, no.  I'm sorry.  Her grandfather was Indian.  Her father was half Indian and half African American.  But she obviously knew him because she said she had a great fondness for him, but he had passed on by the time we were born.  But she had a relationship with him because she talked about him, how much she loved him.  But we don't know anything about him really.
Speaker 1: Now, did either side ever discuss slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 315227
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact--you'll probably get to that later--but, it's interesting how in my immediate family, in my father [James Brewster] and mother's [Lillie Elliott Brewster] house, they never discussed race either.  It's interesting.  When I think about now how I am so involved in race relations all my mature years, my father gave me things that have equipped me to deal with racism and the life I later ran into, but he talked basically about, you know, the quality of the human being.  And, I think, I just have to just guesstimate on this that maybe because his life was a mixture of white America, or white Oklahoma, and Indian [Native American] in Oklahoma and black, that maybe he didn't want to, you know, delve into it.  For instance, he was well respected in the community, so the judges and the lawyers and other ministers in the community would always--came to him for advice, recommendations, opinions.  So white--the mayor even came in and out of our house as if he were a friend.  We thought of him as a friend.  Indians came in and out of our house because my father handled Indian affairs for the state [through the Bureau of Indian Affairs], so we saw them all the time, and a couple of them we knew personally as friends.  And then, of course, we, being an African American family, we had black friends and neighbors and so forth.  So we had a mixture of people, and that's kind of odd when you think of living in a segregated community.  But my father always talked about taking care of yourself, being proud of yourself, treat everybody right; love your enemies, which, you know, was very difficult to do later on.  But that's what he preached all the time about; how you just judge people and treat people the way you wish to be treated, and judge them based on you wish to be judged, and use that, you know, the biblical thing about, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you."  And he never talked about race.  He talked about when you go out, and he would talk about the world in general in the larger sense, would have its limitations, and I guess he was referring then to the fact that we were black; that we're going to have some problems.  But he talked in terms of the individual stamina.  He said when people choose not to like you based on whatever it is; whether you're short, and he used all that; whether you're short, which we are.  We're a short family--well, my brother's [James Brewster] tall--but my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I have never been more than 4'11".  I'm still 4'11".  So I'm considered to be short in my scheme of things.  He said whether you're short, whether you're dark, whether you have the texture of hair, or whether you--and he used all those things like, whatever it is that people will choose not to like you, make that their problem, not yours; be sure you're whole and wholesome and right and proud; and don't let anything else become your problem.  Work on those things.  And those really have been the charges under which I have, you know, moved forward with my life.  Now that's difficult sometimes because you really don't like when people dislike you because you're black.  I've learned though that's what segregation and discrimination have done to our society, so I now know it.  As an adult, I know that people used those units of measure which are very insane I call them, but it's not a problem for me in terms of my inner self.  It's a problem for me in a society where he said, and it's so true, that you might run into problems in America and where you live that, perhaps will restrict your mobility, but don't ever let anything restrict your ability.  So do as much as you can for yourself to make yourself proud of what you are doing.  Always be proud of where you are and what you are doing; and always make excellence your landmark; and always--I mean, he talked so strongly to this very day, very cognizant of his teachings.  And that helped me when I did meet racism hereon.  I knew then that that person had a problem because I didn't do anything to make this an issue.  It has to do with color.
Story_ID: 315228
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us about your father's [James Brewster] background?  I mean, how did--did he talk about growing up in Shreveport [Louisiana], and what experiences did he have that prepared him to be a leader in Muskogee [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he ended up being a minister, and I don't know if whether it was his reading of the Bible--I don't really know what happened.  I do remember his family owned some land, lots of land.
Speaker 1: In Louisiana?
Speaker 2: In Louisiana.  Timber, had a lot of timber.  As a matter of fact, to this day, there's still land owned by the family.  And he said--I heard him talk about the many times that it seemed like the white man tried to take their land.  And I used to hear him over the telephone and when he would get with his sisters and brothers, they would talk about somebody tried to take their land.  And he would go down to Louisiana and to see how the land is still intact.  So he always talked about how the white man always takes the black man's land.  Didn't understand it all at the time, but I remember that being a great discussion between him and his sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: But I don't know much more.  I don't know much more.
Speaker 1: Now, did he have a chance to finish school himself, or--
Speaker 2: No.  He went to the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he became a Baptist minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Why did you pick Baptist?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Because it's true.  I know you pulled Baptist out of the hat, but--
Speaker 1: No, no.  I read about it.  I read it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.  Yeah, he is, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Since he was a Baptist minister, is there a--did he talk about how he, you know--
Speaker 2: Ended up becoming a minister?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, because a lot of times people feel they're called--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or there's some experience that occurs that brings them to the ministry or somebody mentors them or something.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 315229
Speaker 1: Was he [Clayton's father, James Brewster] a minister in Louisiana before he came to Muskogee [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: No.  No, 'cause--no, 'cause he used to run on the railroad.  He was a Pullman porter at one point in his life.  And--and that, you know, I do remember that that's where he met my mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster].  My mother had moved to Oklahoma to live with a relative, and he--he was on the line called the Katy, MKT [Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad].  What was that line?  Missouri, Kansas, Texas, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's in a blues song.
Speaker 2: Yes.  MKT, yes.
Speaker 1: They talk about it.  He called it the Katy and left me a mule to ride ['She Got the Katy and Left Me a Mule to Ride'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And one of his stopovers was Muskogee, and--layovers--whatever you call it--and so, he met--I remember him saying he met my mother on one of his layovers.  So he was not a minister when she met him even.  So I think he became a minister after.  And I think I heard him talk about it when she said--I think she said something about when he was called, she wasn't sure she wanted a minister for a husband.  But--
Speaker 1: So he was a Pullman porter before he was called--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --to the ministry?
Speaker 2: He was a Pullman porter.
Speaker 1: And they met in Oklahoma--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Muskogee.
Speaker 1: Muskogee?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do they have a story that they tell about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't even know--I'm trying now to remember, you know, did somebody introduce--I don't think she was standing on the railroad waiting for a man to come through, I doubt that.  But I don't really know how they met.  Don't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Those are things that haunt me now that I kind of wish I knew all those stories, and all those answers to the questions that end up, you know, you probe, you know, you wish you knew, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you know what, I think about it now that, I guess we were so happy--it's like I hear the story of sometimes that children who are adopted that they're so happy in their adopted families that they don't want to go and search, while other people go and search.  I think we were so happy probably we didn't feel we were missing parts to our history.  So we didn't think about it.  And it wasn't until later years when they were gone, I guess, that I said that, "Gee, I wish I knew," you know.
Story_ID: 315230
Speaker 1: What was the name of your father's [James Brewster] church?
Speaker 2: Mount Zion, Z-I-O-N.  Mount, Z-I-O-N.  Mount Zion Baptist [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Muskogee, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: That's a famous name in Oklahoma, you know, one of the church--the new church that was burned up in the Tulsa [Oklahoma] riot was Mount Zion.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mount Zion was a big church.  It was kind of common in the black community.  And my father ended up also being a--what they call a state pres--well, he was a moderator; what they called a moderator at the time was a man who was an overseer of several churches, similar to what I guess bishops are today, they have the charge of taking care of several churches at once.  So he was a moderator in the Oklahoma area.  And then he ended up being state president of the Baptist convention.  And that was fun for us because he had to go visit a lot of churches, and we enjoyed going.  We were really daddy's girls, so we ran around with him all the time and just loved it.
Speaker 1: So he was state president of the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: No.  The state's Baptist--
Speaker 1: State--state's Baptist convention.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So was this a black organization?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Uh-huh.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And it--
Speaker 2: And pretty big--
Speaker 1: --wasn't connected to the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was an auxiliary of the national.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So which means he also--then as state president, he went to the nationals as well, and we went with him to the national conventions as well.
Story_ID: 315231
Speaker 1: Your father [James Brewster] was president of the state Baptist convention in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--now, he was--I want to go back and explore this idea that he was the--he worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs [Bureau of Indian Affairs, Eastern Oklahoma Region, Muskogee, Oklahoma]; he was the agent, I guess, or what do they call this job?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what they it, except that they brought the checks to his house, and he distributed the checks to the Indians [Native Americans] on what was known as payday.  And, you know, I hate to say this because it sounds so prejudicial, but he would just tell them and give them all a lecture--he was told to give them a lecture about, "And, now don't go and drink this up all tonight."  And later on--and I was wondering why he would tell everybody that, that it won't be another check until next month.  I think it was a monthly check.  But, you know, the stories went--I found out later that they were known to just get drunk.  And then I thought later, "Gee, that just sounds like what black people--what they say about black people.  Black people always get drunk on Saturday night."  But Indians got drunk on payday.  And he would say to them--he'd always talk to them about drinking.  And he would give them a lecture--I used to ask him, "Why do you take time to, you know, you're just supposed to be giving them the money.  Why you tell them how to spend it?"  But I guess he felt maybe an ecclesiastical need to do it; I don't know.  But all the men--he would tell all the men that, you know, about the drinking.  It was always a subject that he approached with them all the time.  And it wasn't until I read where those Indians would get drunk and fight.  And then I felt guilty later on having ever repeated that because that's what I would hear so often about black folk.  You go in the black neighborhood, you know it's Saturday night, they have to get drunk and fight.  And I'd say, "Well, that's what I used to hear about the Indians," you know.  So I thought it was pretty prejudiced.  But that--it happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems to be something that plagues poor people anyway, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Irish have the same--you know, poor Irish people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --have the same issue, until they get some money and then (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --those kinds of problems, they may get drunk and fight, but it's not on the news--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --or, you know, when people--that's a--some problem that plagues the poor.
Story_ID: 315232
Speaker 1: Tell us about your sister [Xenobia Brewster].  You have a twin sister?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, she's passed now, but--
Speaker 2: Identical twins, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were rare.  As I said, in those days, you know, you didn't have those fertility pills.  So we didn't have many multiple births.  As a matter of fact, there were only three sets of twins in the whole state [Oklahoma].  They wrote about us, all three sets.  But, I remember so well; we were little girls, short in stature; our hair was long to our hemlines of our dresses, and identical.  I mean, we really, really looked alike.  When I look at old pictures or--I remember us, we were really alike.  And every day someone would tell us how cute we were.  And people would stop and--you do double-takes.  Every time--we remember that--I still remember that people would do double-takes, "Oh.  Oh, oh."  I do that sometimes when I see twins or you look, "Gee, they look just alike."  We saw this every day, and every day we would hear the terms, "Oh, they're cute little twins.  And look at the hair.  They got long, good hair.  Aren't they cute?"  Well, my father [James Brewster], I guess, figured, "I'd better do something," because we'd come home thinking we were cute, because we heard it every single day of our lives it appeared.  My father said, "You know, I cannot understand people who use these frivolous terms to describe you girls.  They're using some superficial units.  They're using things over which you have no control.  You didn't choose to be twins, you didn't choose to be little, you didn't choose to be identical; and about this good hair stuff, everybody's hair is good if they wash it, brush it, comb it, keep it clean, it's good."  Well, what that did for us, it leveled us because being black, we found out in our environment that because our hair was straight, it was considered to be good.  And our friends and everybody we knew had what they called--their hair, had to be straightened and coiffed and whatever, and we didn't.  And so, that made us cute with good hair.  My father gave such a balance, an alternative to that, "That your hair is no better than anybody else's."  And so, while we heard that even before we went to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], people would say, "Oh, the twins have good hair."  It was our own lack of esteem, I think, as a race that if your hair is straight it is good.  Just like white people's hair, it's good.  It's almost like better than.  Well, we never thought that.  Now, we ran into girls who really thought they were good and better and cuter because their hair was of a texture that you didn't have to do much to it, and they thought they were cute.  So appreciate my dad more and more and more and more when I ran into people who put superficial importance on stuff over which you had no control.  So my father's admonition was, "You're no better than anybody else.  Nobody is better than you.  Keep in your strength all the time--and in your thinking, all the time those qualities that make you a good quality human being.  Put into your head and into your heart the things that matter; not those exterior things over which you really had no control."  And so, you can control your mind.  You can control your heart.  You can control how you treat people.  You can control how smart you'll be.  You can control where you'll go."  And he went down and ran the list of all the things you can control.  Now, we heard that as often as we heard, "You're so cute."  So to this day, I'm neither cute, nor do I think my hair is good, nor am I better than anybody else, nor is anybody better than I am, and I'm constantly looking for ways to make my life better so that I can make life better for others.  I owe all of that to him.
Speaker 1: You are lucky you got a very wise father, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Oh, definitely.
Story_ID: 315233
Speaker 1: But as a twin, now, people say it's--did you feel special--I guess you'd have to feel special as a twin, and did you have a special relationship with your twin [Xenobia Brewster]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did feel special because when we found out we were rare and people made such notice of it--
Speaker 1: When did you first kind of realize it that something unusual was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, since we heard it every day, we started saying, "Mm-mm, you know, we're pretty special."  But then we were so close.  I mean, my sister and I, it's so like you have a best friend all the time.  Everybody else has to go and try to find one and choose one.  But I had one, and she had one, and we had each other.  And it's somebody you really trust.  I mean, you can tell your innermost secrets to your twin sister, and she could tell me hers.  As a matter of fact, when we started courting, she'd tell me, like, she's going to slip out tonight when we had the curfew on and we couldn't get out after eight o'clock, and she had this hot date that she was determined to keep.  And she says, "I'm going to slip out of the window"--we shared a bedroom; we slept together all the years.  She said, "I'm going to slip out because my boyfriend's going to rap on the window, then I'm going out of the window, and then when I come back, I'm going to rap on the window, you let me back in and Mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster] will never know."  And, of course, I didn't want her to do it, but that was my sister and my closest friend.  And so, she was determined to slip out, that I was going to help her and support her, rather.  And I was the one who really was always Miss Goody Two-Shoes.  You know, I'd say, "Oh, no you can't break the rules.  No, no, no."  But she'd say, "Oh, yes, yes, yes."  And so, since she was determined, I was going to support her because I didn't want her to get a whipping.  And so, like we had those little secrets that nobody knew but us.  But one night it backfired because my mother, having her own level of wisdom, kind of figured something was going on I guess by the behavior pattern or body language.  And so, that night when my sister slipped out and I was to assist her to slip back in when she rapped on the window, my mother opened the window (laughter).  And she said, "Help me in," and the voice said, "Okay," and she thought it was my voice; it was my mother's voice.  And when she came up, you know, she wanted to run back then; of course, it was too late then.  Then when my mother gave her that little spanking, then I cried, too, because I didn't want her to, you know, to get spanked.  But we shared everything, just everything.
Story_ID: 315234
Speaker 1: But it sounds like you were very different, I guess, in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very different.
Speaker 1: --approach to things.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, when we were in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], we were tested by the University of Wisconsin.  They did a national study of twins.  And we were judged to be the most identical twins in the United States.  We were given a test that had to be administered--was monitored, in that we were separated, you know, miles apart so we couldn't relate at all to the test.  And so, then when the answers came back, they were called.  And we found out then from the study that we were mirror twins.  Mirror twins are those persons who will have an exact duplicate response--I mean reaction to an incident, an exact opposite response.  So like if it's something sad, we'd say, "Oh."  Then one would do one thing, and one would do the opposite.  They're showing (unclear), "Oh, my."  We both react, but then we respond differently.  And that really was true.  We weren't governed by the test; we just realized that's true.  And in the test, it said, one is the weaker and one is the stronger; one is the leader, one is the more dominant; and that was true.  I was the dominant one.  My sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I got along famously, because I led her, and she wished to be led; and it worked fine for us.  I was the leader in terms of the good things.  She was the one who went to break the rules.  And I said, "I won't break any rules (laughter)."  And when we went to college we had an old book called 'The Blue Book.'  It was the rules, the policies of the school.  And before I made a move, I'd say, "Let me check and see what's in the rule book."  My sister, "Oh, no.  We're going to do it because it's fun."  So she was the fun-loving, but she also was the weaker one.  She ended up with illnesses that I never had; children's diseases that I never had.  She ended up in dying from Multiple Sclerosis [MS].  She suffered beautifully for thirty years--twenty-nine years.  When I say beautifully, we were both reared with this positive attitude towards ourselves and our fellow man, as my father [James Brewster] used to call it.  And so, she took her illness as it really was.  She didn't bemoan it.  With MS, you have one day that's good, the next day unpredictable and could really be a bad day.  And so, when she had the good days, she'd day, "I'm going to do everything I can today because this is my good day.  I can run to the grocery; I'm going to jump, skip, hop."  And on the days she was confined to bed because she's unable to move, she had just accepted it.  A great example.  She did so much good through her illness.  She was a force that doctors used her to come in and inspire other folk, who, most often would give up once they were diagnosed, they'd just give up.  She would give people hope, understanding, zest for living, and she had it.  And she was just an absolute joy, even through her illness.  I loved every moment she lived.  Didn't think I could live without her, but God has given me strength also to continue without her.  I have her memory though, so I'll always have her with me.
Story_ID: 315235
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're--oh, boy, do I.  And they were also happy.  I don't remember--I don't remember any sadness in my years.
Speaker 1: Did you have an earliest childhood memory?  An earliest one?
Speaker 2: Like--give me an--
Speaker 1: The first thing you remember as a child.  Is there a first thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I do, and I'm not sure--I always wondered did I really remember this or did I hear it so much that it's now a memory.  I'll tell you the incident.  We had an older brother [James Brewster] four years older than we [Clayton and her twin sister, Xenobia Brewster], and as I said, that our home was the center of activity; everybody came to our house because our house was the house of joy.  Our parents [Lillie Elliott Brewster and James Brewster] would just--my mother was cooking all the time, and something was going all the time; my father was a great griot; he told stories all the time, and they being well-respected in the city [Muskogee, Oklahoma]; something was going on all the time at our house, so we stayed home because it was joyful.  So my brother's boys--I mean, his friends, played at our house.  And we had, in one of our houses where we lived, had a high porch; high meaning it was enough room on the front porch that you could play underneath.  Well, I didn't like dirt.  My sister [Xenobia Brewster], who loved to join the boys, would play dirty; they'd get under the house and it--had it rained and you got mud--it's no longer dirt, it's mud, and yuck.  I would say, "Yuck."  And I didn't want dirt; I want cleanliness all the time.  And every day--now I think I remember this--I wanted a bath about midday.  I wanted a bath, I wanted a clean dress, and we had little red chairs, and I wanted to sit on the porch in my little red chair and watch the children play.  I didn't want to get dirty, ever.  And to this day I'm like that; I don't want to get dirty.  And our neighbor would say to my mother, "Why don't you make that child go out and play with the other children."  And she'd say, "Well, she's fine.  She's happy."  And I would laugh when they would fall; they would do something and then they would skate, and I would laugh with them, you know, from afar.  But I never liked to get dirty, and I didn't like to follow the crowd.  Just because they were all outdoors playing that meant I had to do that.  I look at those two qualities today that have kind of followed me.  I don't follow the crowd, never did.  When I was in college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], when everybody said, "Oh, let's go because everybody else is going," more than likely I didn't want to go then, because when you added, everybody else is going, I didn't like following the crowd.  I wanted to be my own standard bearer.  I wanted to set my own rules and I wanted to set--I mean, my standards, not my rules.  But the standards by which I would fit into the rules of my environment.  I didn't like to get dirty; I like to dress today; I like to be clean; I like to put on clothes.  I loved dresses and clothes and looking good, I guess.  And I guess that was an early memory of mine, that I've always wanted those traits that I still have today.
Story_ID: 315236
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  In other words, describe your neighborhood and what it looked like?
Speaker 2: Oh, food was one that was always a smell, and my mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster] was always cooking.  And what I liked on Sundays and I guess most families if you had a special meal at Sunday, Sunday dinner was pretty special.  But we had meals every day.  When I say meals, organized meals.  My mother insisted that we have a tablecloth on the table; never, ever, ever paper plates.  I mean, she wanted the table dressed with a tablecloth and a knife and a fork, and we had to use a knife and a fork.  You know, most times kids just go and grab food with the fingers.  Not my mother.  We had an organized system of eating which was kind of good because you grow up.  You know, of course, nowadays, you can pick--use your fingers, but I still like a tablecloth on the table.  So I smelled food all the time.  It was always fun.  And holidays, I mean, the smell of turkey in our house or a pie cooking.  And she would always allow us children to select the menu, I mean, the dessert for Sunday dinner, and we'd take turns, like--and you learn then to be unselfish because you've got to eat what the other person liked for that dessert on Sunday.  So the smell of food was constant in our house.  It was always good we'd come home from school in the evening, we could smell the bread cooking, and all of that was fun. It was luring you into the house.  The smell of perfume.  We had an older sister [Vera Brewster] who we felt was so beautiful, and she fit what everybody called that beautiful big sister.  I think we all kind of have that because you like your older sister.  And she was a good big sister, and when she got ready to go out, she had perfume, and we were too little at the time to have perfumes.  But she smelled good all the time.  So the smell of fragrance in the house.  Powder, I loved the smell of--today I love baby powder.  I love perfume aromas.  That's the smells I remember.  The sounds, the door.  It was always somebody coming in our house, so the door was always swinging.  Either children are swinging through the doors or guests are coming.  My dad [James Brewster] always brought guests.  But my mother was not, as I said, all that friendly, and a lot of times they would have fights about it.  My mother would fuss at him about, "Why did you bring another guest?  You didn't tell me."  And they would fuss about guests, and--but my father continued to do it and she continued to entertain them, so I guess it wasn't fatal.  But there was always somebody coming, coming all the time, coming.  So I remember that as the sound of the door; the cars, car door opening; somebody's coming.  Those were pleasant memories.  Nobody's ever asked me these questions.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 315237
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Dunbar Elementary, D-U-N-B-A-R.  Dunbar Elementary [Dunbar Elementary School, Muskogee, Oklahoma].  And the school had two floors; the lower floor was the first-graders, the first through, I think, fourth or fifth, I think.  Fourth maybe.  Yeah, fourth.  And the second floor was the bigger kids, and as I said, I had a brother [James Brewster] who was four years older.  I used to love to go upstairs to the second floor, but I was like a principal runner.  You get to be an office runner, that's kind of a big assignment when you're little, to be assigned to the principal's office because you can take a note to the teacher or you got to send something--some (unclear) got to go to somebody else's room.  And when I went upstairs, I remember it had a double set, like you go up and you turn another set of stairs.  And I remember running up those steps, and such energy I had as a youngster.  So going upstairs to the big kids' floor, and I said, maybe I'll see my brother, like you saw somebody--well, you knew everybody in the school.  You knew everybody in town; it was a small city, and so you knew everybody.  But I always enjoyed school.  I never missed one day of school in my whole life.  I loved school.  I loved learning.  I loved my teachers.  I loved my friends.  I loved the principal.  I loved my assignments.  I loved getting grades.  I loved when report cards--days were out.  I couldn't wait, when a lot of kids said, "Oh, I hate--tomorrow's card day."  I looked forward to report card day because I was hoping I'd made that A I strived so hard for.
Speaker 1: Now, Dunbar, probably named after Paul Laurence Dunbar (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it a exclusively black school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we lived right across the street from a white school.  That's why I say some of that racism stuff was apparent, but it was so much a part of everyday life, you didn't question it, you just did it.  You didn't go to the school across the street.  You went to the school up on the hill, you know, where you had to walk to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--now, did Muskogee [Oklahoma] maintain separate schools for blacks, whites and Indians [Native Americans], or was it just blacks in the school?
Speaker 2: Yes, black and whites, but there was an Indian college there, Bacone College [Muskogee, Oklahoma], and it's still there.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: Bacone, B-A-C-O-N-E.  Bacone College.  So we had an Indian college where every--all the Indians went.  But the elementary school--no.  You know what?  They didn't go--there was a community where most of the Indian population resided, so they kind of went to their own schools, now that I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had their own grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Separate schools, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --school, too, separate from--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, sometimes you read where blacks and Indians were at the same schools, so.
Speaker 2: No.  They were separate.
Story_ID: 315238
Speaker 1: You're at Dunbar Elementary School [Muskogee, Oklahoma].  Do you remember any special teachers or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I remember them all probably.  Mrs. Maxie [ph.], Mr. Riley, Mrs. Robinson, Mrs. Hughes, Miss Powell.  I could name them all, and with such fondness.  As I got older, we had two teachers who taught algebra, and algebra--and every kid ran away from algebra.  Nobody wanted to take algebra.  But it was forced.  I mean, it was a requirement.  And the male teacher, Mr. Davis was his name.  All these people are deceased now.  I called their names.  But Mr. Davis was the male teacher, and all the girls chose him because he was good looking and he was kind of a girl-whistler.  So they went to him because they knew you didn't have to work hard.  My sister [Xenobia Brewster] chose him.  I went to Miss Hughes because I wanted to learn algebra.  I wanted to know why did everybody run from it.  And to this day I'm a good mathematician because I learned the basics of numbers and mathematics and algebra.  So I remember her, and she was not as mean--everybody--she had a reputation of being the meanest teacher.  But I found out she was just a good teacher.  She just meant to have you get it.  And so she used all of her time teaching when a lot of teachers, once the bell rang, they would still stand outside in the hall and talk.  And when that bell rang, I mean she closed that door and she went right to teaching.  And you saw all the hour, all the allocated time for teaching.  So I learned.  So I was glad that I took her.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Grammar was my favorite.  And I'm a good grammarian today, meaning I learned the roots of grammar.  Like, for instance, as I often tell people, I learned how to figure out those things which are difficult.  For instance, we use today--people often misuse double, a double verb--no, wait a minute.  For instance, a man says, "Letty and I come to visit Letty and I."  Well, that's wrong.  It should be, "Letty and me," and he always said, "Separate.  If you're in doubt, separate it.  'Come to visit Letty.  Come to visit me.'"  And then I learned how to separate it.  And so, and it's what people most often--Ph.D.s misuse that; "Letty and I, John and I.  Come over to visit John and I."  Well, that's not right.  I couldn't give good examples, but that's one good one.
Story_ID: 315239
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns; observing is Mr. Will Harper [ph.].  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, spelled X, as in X-ray, E-R-N-O-N-A, Clayton, C-L-A-Y-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, thirty, thirty--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --August 30th, 1930--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --born in Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard to give myself an occupation.  I'm the--I have a title.  I'm the president and CEO of the Trumpet Awards Foundation [Trumpet Awards Foundation, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] at this point.  I created the Trumpet Awards twenty-two years ago.  And at that time, I was with CNN, so I was a, an executive at CNN at the time.  And now, after having formed the foundation, I'm the president and CEO of the Trumpet Awards Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February the 21st, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia, in my office, in Atlanta, Georgia, the most prestigious location in Georgia, in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, we are continuing an interview that we began June the 22nd, 2005.
Speaker 2: My anniversary.
Story_ID: 315240
Speaker 1: You were, you were describing the teachers and the instruction and the experiences at Dunbar Elementary School in Muskogee [Oklahoma].  So, I think I, I asked--you were talking about math and how that's helped you over the years from Mrs. Hughes.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I, I think we, we were just about ready to close up the elementary school phase of the discussion, but any other reflections about Dunbar Elementary School?
Speaker 2: I probably covered it all, because I could just now cover it all that I had such good teachers, that I feel like now as I take the retrospective view, that that was the foundation.  When people talk about getting a good foundation, I think I got it, because they were so seriously committed to educating us.  I think they knew at the time that we were black, living in segregated times, and an environment that we gonna have to do well in order to make it.  And I'm sure that's what they had in mind.  And they saw to it that we got grounded, and I think I got good grounding.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, now you went on to high school at Manual Training High School [Muskogee, Oklahoma], right?  Is, was that in Muskogee?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, and I could probably give you the same story, that the high school teachers had the same commitment.  And as girls, they seemed to emphasize that, you know, act like a lady, make demands on the boys.  And we heard that from the males and the female teachers.  And, and I think I, I'd love to tell the story of the one male teacher who taught sex education in an odd way, 'cause they sure didn't have sex education then in the schools.  But he said to us girls that I want you to remember that, you know, he want you to play well, play fairly, play squarely, and remember that the first step toward getting pregnant is you first gotta lie down.  And boy, he scared us to death, and me especially.  I sure didn't want to get pregnant, so I didn't lie down for a week, in my own bed, by myself.  I was just scared to lie down.  But it put the caution in me that he said that you'd have maybe five minutes of pleasure and twenty-one years of pain and expense, talking about if you got pregnant, you know, there's a price you pay.  And I never forgot that.  And so that was a good lesson and good sex education.
Story_ID: 315241
Speaker 1: So when, when you were growing up, did most of the youth your age attend high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, but a lot of them didn't graduate.  We had a lot of dropout.  And I think it's because it was the environment was rural.  And I wasn't quite sure I knew all the time because we lived in the city.  But I heard they had to, you know, like, pick cotton and till the soil in the winter and do those kinds of things, so they had drop out.  And then I guess once you're out, sometimes kids don't get the verve again to come back to school.  And that's my way--nobody really discussed that as the reason, but as I got older I figured it out, that that probably was an attributing factor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you describe the physical facility, you know, the, the facility your high school was in?
Speaker 2: Yes, it [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma] was a good school in terms of I remember the floors being hardwood floors, clean all the time; the classrooms were clean.  And it wasn't like we know today, where in a black school you get the less--we probably was less than the high--the white schools, but we didn't feel like it was.  In the spring, they would open the windows, and the air would blow through, and you felt like springtime in the air.  And have good grounds.  We had green grass.  And so we felt like, you know, when the weather was good we could leave the classroom.  We had a break and go sit out on the grass.  And there was a little store on the corner of almost the grounds where you could, you know, buy candy and stuff that your parents didn't want of course.  But we'd buy something and sit out there on the breaks, and, and it was fun.  And then when the bell rings, it was time to go back to get down to work.  So we had good days.  And when I think about it now, that we knew we were isolated, segregated, and discriminated against, but we had our friends and our circle of, of operations.  So, you know, we didn't worry about it.  And then we, I think most of us had protective parents.  They didn't want us exposed to the realities that, you know, you're less than; that's why you have to go over here.  But it was odd.  We couldn't figure out though why we had a school right literally across the street from where we lived.  Well, we couldn't go there.  But then they just said your school is over there, and you just went, and then you meet your, your friends on the way, the walk to school.  So we had fun days.  And I lived in such a happy environment, had a happy life at home with good parents [Lillie Elliott Brewster and James Brewster] and fun all the time.  So I wasn't disturbed by the laws of the land, as it were.  We lived what was, you know, our style.  Black folk had to go to black schools, and you just did it.
Story_ID: 315242
Speaker 1: You were in a unique situation of having a twin sister [Xenobia Brewster].  And you are mirror image twins, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as you were describing that I think in the first interview.  And so, what was it like?  Most people don't have an alter ego in school with them (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that they can talk to and you know, and--
Speaker 2: But what I can say when people ask me what was it like being a twin, well, I don't know anything else.  I don't know what it's like to be a single.  But what I can say is that one thing about being a twin, you always had a friend.  My sister and I had our little secrets.  She had more boyfriends than I did.  And I tell people all the time I couldn't afford to have a boyfriend 'cause I worried about her (laughter).  She was a little swift, I would call it.  So I wanted to be sure she didn't get into any trouble, so I was busy watching her but protecting her.  And it was kind of what you did.  You know, you didn't want anything to happen to your, your best friend who is your twin sister.  So it's somebody there with you all the time.  And we were so close.  I still cherish those memories of having her in my life.  And we would go downtown [in Muskogee, Oklahoma] shopping for the Easter outfits and getting the shoes, the patent leather shoes that everybody got.  But I remember too that we had those fountains in those stores, you know, colored water and you know, the colored fountain and the white fountain.  And my mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster] wouldn't let us go.  They were always situated seem--seemingly in the corner of the store.  We knew they was over there, but my mother wouldn't let us go.  And we thought maybe she just, you know, was being a little unkind, because we thought colored water was Kool-Aid.  We didn't know it was a racial thing.  And so we (laughter), we wanted to go over there and get some of that Kool-Aid, the colored water, 'cause that's where the colored folk drank, from the colored fountain.  And we said oh, that's good stuff; that's the Kool-Aid.  But she wouldn't let us go, and that was, I'm sure, her way of protecting us.
Story_ID: 315243
Speaker 1: --Father [James Brewster] was a pastor of a church [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Muskogee, Oklahoma], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he also worked for the railroad?  Is that true, at this point, or, or was he--
Speaker 2: Oh, in the past.  Not while we were around, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in his past.
Speaker 1: But, so when you were in high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma], was he working for the Bureau of Indian Affairs?  I mean was he the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he didn't work for them.  He had--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I guess an assignment--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --that they just picked people.  That's the way I think it worked, responsible citizens who handled the affairs.  So, it wasn't a job but more of an assignment, I would call it.  But you know, they didn't discuss it.  You know, I don't know.  We had parents who were loving and kind and protective, but nobody asked a lot of questions.  You know, we just saw what we saw.  And sometimes, even now, I kind of wish I had asked questions about what, what are doing, you know, what's really going on.  But you know, you didn't feel a need to; like, you were happy.  Things are going well.  You were eating regularly.  You had clothes.  You had everything, so there was no need to question, I guess.  That's the way I put it today.  I kind of wish now I were a little more curious about, you know, what are you doing?  What's going on?  What's happening?  But I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--now you're in high school from '44 [1944] to '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that true?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is the latter part of World War II [WWII].  And the--were you reading the national--some, some of the national--was there, was there a local paper, black paper, in town?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it was really from Tulsa [Oklahoma].  The Black Dispatch I think was Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].  And the, the black paper from Tulsa was--you know, I can't remember.
Speaker 1: I can--yeah, I remember the Black Dispatch (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh, I do.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: The Oklahoma Eagle.
Speaker 1: Oklahoma Eagle, okay.
Speaker 2: Oklahoma Eagle, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know it was a strong African American culture, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: There was a lot of writers and people doing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --things, so.  Did your, your parents know the Dunjees [ph.] in--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was well known by everybody, and he knew everybody.  So we got a chance to know the people we later read about.  We met them at our house or wherever, so were knowledgeable about people.  And I'm glad that they exposed us to the black press.  So it was just as important in our house as, you know, the metropolitan paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did--'48 [1948] I think was the year that A. Philip Randolph was gonna have the March on Washington, the first one.
Speaker 2: The first one, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you, did you all know about that--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 315244
Speaker 1: So, as a high school senior [at Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma], what were your career aspir- aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, I said two things I wanted to be.  One was a teacher, and the other was a musician, musician, meaning I wanted to play for a choir at the church [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Muskogee, Oklahoma].  I didn't know at the time that that really wasn't a career (laughter) you plan on.  But I had done that, and I enjoyed it so much I figured oh, I'd spend the rest of my life doing this 'cause this is fun and productive.  So, that was before I went to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and you learn, you know, the other things you did to prepare for.  But that was--and, and, and I started out playing on a chair, like, bump, bump, bump, bump, bump.  And my mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster] knew then we wanted a piano 'cause we didn't have one.  They finally got one--but I, I guess had the musical need, inclination early on.
Speaker 1: Now, did your sister [Xenobia Brewster] play too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But she didn't like it as well.  I think really later on I figured it out, that my sister was smarter than I was, although I was considered to be smarter, because what she would do is I'd learn--we took piano lessons, and I'd learn those hard pieces like the 'Warsaw Concerto,' which is really a difficult piece to play on the piano.  And she didn't practice.  I did; I practiced religiously.  Every day I'm trying to perfect the piece.  And I tried to get her to go, and she'd rather go outside and play, you know, with brother [James Brewster] and the boys.  But yet, when time came for us to go to perform at our lesson, she would have me play it for her, you know: play it again; play it again.  And I'd play it, and she was listening, so I think she captured it by ear and was able to perform as well (laughter) as I did.  I figure oh, I put in the time, and now she's got the skill.  So I think she was smarter than I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, you would learn it for her (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  But I didn't mind, 'cause that was my sister whom I loved.  And so if I could help her out, I did that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's still remarkable that, that she--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --could hear it and then, here you play it and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Story_ID: 315245
Speaker 1: How did you choose Tennessee--it was Tennessee A and I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Well, two reasons: One is, the dean at the school, Tennessee State, was Dr. George Gore.  He happened also have been a Baptist.  So he and his wife attended the Baptist conventions every year and so did we, because we went with my father [James Brewster], who was an officer in the Baptist convention [National Baptist Convention].  So one year the Mrs. Gore, the wife of the dean, who was also the assistant bursar at Tennessee State, said to my father, "I wish you'd let the twins [Clayton and her sister, Xenobia Brewster] come to Atlanta"--I'm sorry--"to Nashville [Tennessee] to go to Tennessee State, and we'll take care of them."  That coupled with Dr. Henry Allen Boyd, who was the head of the Baptist convention, lived in Nashville and was head of the publishing company and--(unclear)--pretty well off, he had already asked my father if he could buy us, buy us, as he loved us as twins and girls and all of that.  And he wanted us to come to Nashville, but he wanted us to go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  So my parents finally agreed that we could go to Nashville, and they left it up to us whether it go--be Fisk or Tennessee State.  Well, with the Gores both being involved with the administrative staffing at Tennessee State, our godfather, Henry Allen Boyd, was okay with that as long as we were in Nashville.  So that's how we got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they gave us a scholarship as well.
Story_ID: 315246
Speaker 1: Now was anything special or significant about graduating from Manual High School [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma].  I mean, I know it's always a highlight--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --of people's lives that graduate from high school, but--
Speaker 2: Well, one thing for me is that they had the smartest girl and the smartest boy in the class who they received--those two students got gifts from the business community, a set of luggage for both male and the female and a locket for the girl and can't remember what the boy got.  But the business community got involved with the graduations in the schools.  And so they had some kind of contest.  And I won the smartest girl in class.  And I remember my luggage.  It was green trimmed in white, and I thought that was the most beautiful luggage I had ever seen ever.  And of course, I took it to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I were involved with a lot of things in school, with contests and whatever was competitive things.  So this was not the most special.  Well, maybe it was the most special.  It wasn't so special-special because we'd had many special moments.  But I guess, you know, being singled out in the end for graduation was pretty special.  So I graduated with that honor, so I felt really smart.
Story_ID: 315247
Speaker 1: Did you do anything significant over the summer before you went to Tennessee State I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No.  What we didn't know though, we had never done any college visitations like kids today.  You go visit schools.  So we didn't know what to take, how to pack, how to prepare, and 'cause nobody in our family had gone.  And no one volunteered to tell us, and I guess we didn't ask.  So we didn't know what to do to prepare for college.  I remember it was a little ignorant moment for us and a little intimidating, 'cause we said should we carry these clothes, or should we carry that?  And I remember that we were embarrassed 'cause we took the wrong dress, which we traveled in.  It was a sleeveless dress, and it was, you know, September.  And, and then when we got to college, the campus, we were the only ones with--I mean we felt like we were--the only ones (laughter) with, with sleeveless, like a, look like a summer dress, and we felt a little embarrassed.  I shall never forget that.  So privately we talked about, oh, we brought the wrong kind of clothes.  And that was pretty intimidating.  It wasn't earthshaking, and it wasn't life-threatening, but it--you know, when you have a moment of embarrassment, because we were together, we could share that with each other.  We said uh-oh, now this is not the clothes we--so we called back and said mother [Lillie Elliott Brewster], send us sweaters and skirts and things like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did--so were you roommates with your sister [Xenobia Brewster]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And that was a big issue.  The school psychologist said that twins cannot develop independently if they're living together.  And they had to separate us so that we could thrive and develop as individual persons and not as a pair.  And we said we won't stay here.  If we have to be separated, we will leave.  And we had firmly decided that was gonna be our decision, and we were gonna act on it.  We were not gonna be separated.  And sure enough, they then agreed to let us stay.  And we ended up with the best room in the dormitory because most of our dormitories were crowded, so they had like four to a room.  But this room we were assigned to had twin beds, you know, two beds to a room, so we had one of the best rooms in the school--I mean in the dormitory.  So our room became the meeting room.  So people came there 'cause you could get in the mirror, all right.  You know, when you got four women in one room to a mirror, it's hard to grasp, you know, your, your lines in the mirror because somebody else is in the mirror.  So they'd come to our room and use the mirror, so that became the meeting room.  So we had lots of fun, lots of fun.
Story_ID: 315248
Speaker 1: In high school and even in grade school, do, do you have--what is your organizational history?  I mean, you are really organized, and you're in a lot of groups, and you convene a lot of meetings.  And people co- you know, revolve around you, you know, like a sun or something, you know (laughter), so-- Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I just wondered like, what is your organizational history?  Did your parents [Lillie Elliott Brewster and James Brewster] have a history of being long into organizations?
Speaker 1: Well, I think that, not really, but I think what happened--that's a very interesting question, because sometimes I try to reflect on, you know, how did I get to be where I am, 'cause people said, you know, people asked me, have you always been like this? You know, and I'd never analyze it.  But now that you've asked that, I think that my mother--but maybe my father--mother made us do things. Like, we had to make up our bed and make it neatly, so that was some sense of order.  But as girls, she didn't teach us anything.  Like, my mother was the typical wife and mother who did everything.  I mean, mother washed and ironed and did the dishes.  She didn't make us do it.  And she cooked.  And so I grew up not knowing how to do anything, you know, like cooking.  But I think because she made us make the beds in an orderly fashion, but I think some of this was kind of like just an innate ability to do it.  Like, I had to organize my music for my church choir [at Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Muskogee, Oklahoma], had to organize the choir rehearsal.  I had to bring order to the meeting that I'm gonna have when we go.  And see, I was a kid.  I was only twelve years old, and my choir members were seniors, you know, older people with families.  So I felt within my spirit that in order for me to control this--you know, they'll run over me as a kid if I go there acting like a twelve-year-old.  So I kind of think or thought that maybe I'd better organize myself, so when I come I'll look organized; I look orderly.  And I think some of that was a motivation just to be sure that I wasn't misunderstood.  So it might have developed at that time.  But my father used to say don't do anything halfway.  He said if you're not gonna clean the kitchen, if it--if your spirit is not in, don't bother with it.  Don't go in there and half wash those dishes, or don't have sweep the floor, or don't half do this.  So he used to preach against half doing anything.  Thoroughly do whatever it is you're gonna do.  And so I guess when you hear that, and maybe you have some innate ability too, that might have been it.  But I'm just adding that.  I don't think I had any kind of prescriptive design for being orderly.
Speaker 2: What are some of the organizations you were involved in Oklahoma before you got to Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Well, I think in school I was always active in something.  Whatever was the order of the day, I wanted to be in that.  And I'm 4'11" by height, and people ask me today, are you tired of people talking about how short you are?  I said no, because I grew up saying that my age was an advantage.  I always wanted to be first.  I was wanna be in front.  And my brother [James Brewster] reminds me that when we play, I'd always choose the top spot.  Like, okay, boys and girls, let's play school.  Okay, then I said I'll be principal.  Okay, let's play church.  Okay, I'll be the minister.  And these were not times--I mean there was nobody ever heard of a female minister.  So, my gender didn't come into play as any kind of logic.  I just wanted to be the top spot.  I didn't realize that, but that's what's, what happened.  And then in school, the teacher would say okay, class, we're going outside.  Let's line up.  Let's line up according to height.  Well, that served me well, 'cause I was gonna be right there in front.  So I've always wanted to be in front, always wanted to be first. And I don't know how I got to be that, but I remember that was my sense of myself.  So, I wanted a neat paper.  When we had spelling, arithmetic, whatever, I had have a neat paper; you know, it had to be or--I remember that.  And I used erasers, like if you got a spot on it, always gotta be wiped clean.  So I was orderly.
Story_ID: 315249
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have like, social organizations or clubs in high school, when you went to college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm trying to remember.  I think it was 4-H. You know, I can't even remember what the clubs were, but just know I was active.  Like, the, the principal would tea- pick a student to be the one, the messenger, like, carry this notice to the classrooms.  Well, I'd volunteer to be one, you know, and so I could go and carry the message.  You know, I just wanted to be the one to do the task.  But we didn't have a lot of organizations, as I--
Speaker 1: Okay. --remember.  You know, we--Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America].  I don't think we had Girl Scouts 'til much later.  So there weren't a lot of the organized groups that you know them to be.
Speaker 2: Now, now, did you--would you say you knew how to run a meeting when you were in high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma]?  You knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --rules and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I think it stemmed for the fact that I was running the choir meetings and, and all of that.  And, and also, in my church [Mount Zion Missionary Baptist Church, Muskogee, Oklahoma], as a participant when we had the, the Bible study classes.  They called them BYPU, Baptist Young People's Union.  And we had to learn the books of the Bible.  It was a contest, and I love contests.  I've always been competitive, and I remember that.  And then when I won, I was really overjoyed.  But I always won, because what they would do is, they closed the Bible.  And then we'd pick sides and sides, no particular order, you know, ten over here and ten over there, just even out the sides.  So on this side, now, when you find the passage you'll say Ephesians, you know, 4:10.  That's what the teacher would call out.  And then when you find it you stepped forward and said I've got it.  Well, I would get kind of angry if somebody beat me out there (laughter), you know.  I wanted to be first, and I almost always was.  But what was interesting, the prizes were pretty balanced, because what they did is on the first Sunday of the month, you're side one, so it wasn't individual, but I'm helping my side win.  But on the first Sunday of the month the teacher would give ice cream to the side that won, so we all, you know, you know, participated.
Story_ID: 315250
Speaker 1: In college, and this is at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], or they, they call it Tennessee A and I in those days.
Speaker 2: Tennessee State is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --'cause it was, it was A and I such a short period of time.  We became State shortly after we got there, so we prefer that better anyway, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, what organizations were you involved at there, and how did that, how did that--
Speaker 2: Probably everything they had (laughter) I was there.  The, I guess one of the first time it was the sorority.  I was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and got lured because my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I were pretty popular.  We got, you know, asked a lot to join this, that, and the other group.  So we were invited to join the AKA Sorority, so we were active with that.  But then, we got a job because we were more like student aid, fit the student aid category, 'cause we got scholarships.  We both got jobs, kind of prestigiously placed in the president's office.  So that was our job, for which we got paid and helped to offset our expenses.  But in the president's office, of course, everything revolves around and emanates from the president's office, but main job was the public relations office.  And that meant you had to help do news releases.  You had to help clip once a story goes out and gets place someplace.  When the newspaper comes back you gotta clip.  Then you gotta have a scrapbook you gotta organize and gotta make a report.  So that was really a test of your skills to get it done, 'cause sometimes it's fast-paced.  You gotta get an--if something happens, you gotta get that story out quickly.  You don't have time to think about it and worry about it and moon it.  You gotta do it.  And so you gotta get the story out.  Then you--when it starts coming back, you gotta clip it and place it and make a report on it.  So that's fast-paced.  And you gotta be good at that.  And I enjoyed that because it was fast-paced.  And then I got into this again with what I'd done in high school [Manual Training High School, Muskogee, Oklahoma], carrying the messages.  The president had to send a message to the engineering school.  Well, that was all guys over there (laughter), mainly.  And so you'd go to the engineering building to carry a message.  And I felt like if--it's important 'cause it's from the president's office.  And then, everybody we knew--everybody knew we were in the president office.  So when you come and saw, like you're a FedEx, this is an important message.  So you got special treatment all the time.  And I remembered--'cause I had to fast forward to this story that I always liked to the reports in an organized fashion, like a nice folder with a graphic on it, you know, saying news and looks like newsprint.  And, and not so much the fact that I got compliments on it, I did it for me, that I wanted it to look like a nice presentation.  And that has carried me to this day.  I still am a presentation person.  And I remember at CNN one year my boss said to me, you know, if we had a hundred presentations and we pile them up on this table, I could reach in and pull yours out.  And that's to this very day.  And I think some of it was then.  But you know, I didn't, I never stopped to say to myself, I'm gonna have the best presentation; mine's gonna be the prettiest; mine's gonna be the flashiest; mine's gonna get--I never even--I didn't think like it, that then, and I don't think like that now.  My style is me, and I do it for me, not for what you think it ought to be, but what I must feel it has to be.  And that was formed early.  I don't know how nor why, but the fact is, it was.
Story_ID: 315251
Speaker 1: What are, other than AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], what else did you do?  You (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 1: --worked in the president's office.
Speaker 2: --the student government, SGA, Student Government Association, the inter -now what was proper term?  All the schools in Nashville [Tennessee], Fisk [Fisk University], Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University], Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University], Scarritt [Scarritt College for Christian Workers], American Baptist [American Baptist Theological Seminary; American Baptist College], and I'm forgetting one.  There were about six or eight schools formed what they called the intermural student association.  And that was designed and created by Dr. Faulkner [William J. Faulkner], who was, he was a very famous man.  He was the dean at Fisk.  It was his notion that if students came together interracially, we would move one step closer maybe to an integrated society in spirit and in truth.  And so we were blacks and whites coming together but under the aegis of we're all students.  What are our common problems?  What can we do to make life better for the rest of the students?  That was the aegis which we formed.  But it was fun for me.  I enjoyed going to those meetings, 'cause you could express yourself.  And it ended up one time that I became the chair of the interstudent--inter--I think it was inter--intramural I think.  But I then was--because I was black, it became then a new story, because all the other chairs had been white students.  And then I became the first black person to appear on the front page of The Nashville Banner, which was the local paper in Nashville.  I also was a member of the--and I can't remember.  It was a religious--the student religious academy, I think.  But anyway, it was made of those students who felt religiously in tuned with the culture of this college.  So we put on inspirational programs, religious programs for everybody to participate, call it Vesper hour.  We did those, and I was a member of that group, actively involved in that.  So we planned Vesper once a month.  And it wasn't a requirement, but we made it interesting so that we used to have crowds.  And some students were really swayed by that in terms of strengthening their religious beliefs themselves that they felt more spiritually conducted because we got it at school.  And then some of them got it at home, but they strayed away from it.  So it was a continuation of those spiritually-directed homes.  Now we got it at school, it was a continuation.  And I was very proud of that because they would confess to us that it was strengthen--strengthening them.  And they went to church more frequently after that.  I really enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 315252
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this: Nashville [Tennessee] and the student activism in Nashville for at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know, reached I guess a peak in 1961 with the Freedom Riders and all the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --agitation down there, Diane Nash and all the other people, James Lawson, you know.  But, so, you were in school ten years earlier and was there.  Could you see the steam building up for that kind of thing at that time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I didn't realize how ignorant I was about race relations until I left and these periods became a reality.  Because what happened is the stores were segregated, but I didn't know it.  Being popular, being identified with the dean of the school [George Gore], being identified with one of the richest men in Nashville, people protected us, so we didn't know.  And then when it was--oh, gee--a company did a national study on twins.  And they sent out notices all over the city where they were going, that we'd like all the twins in the city to come to Harveys--that was our leading department store--on this particular Saturday, to be interviewed and to be photographed.  And since we were twins, we just went down there.  We didn't know it was for whites only.  Being ignorant of it, you know, helped us a lot, because we just kind of walked in to things.  So my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I went and got noticed right away, of course, because were the only black ones.  But there was a representative there from the University of Wisconsin.  The university was getting ready to do a, their own study of twins, and they chose us to participate in the study.  That was really interesting--
Story_ID: 315253
Speaker 1: The University of Wisconsin was preparing to do a national study--and I don't really know how we got picked, but we were chosen to participate--the most interesting study because it got them some results, but it made us aware of who we really were.  And I'll tell you some of that.  Now they had to administer the test so it'll be no coalescing at all.  So the day of the test they put us at opposite ends of the campus, so we could not relate at all.  And so when the study came out, we were identified as the most identical twins in the United States.  And under that umbrella, we found out about us.  We were mirror twins.  And they explained to us.  Mirror twins or it's like you're looking in the mirror; you got the reverse.  Like, we would have the exact same response.  Like, if it's a sad story, ah, we'd both feel sad.  What we would do about it it'll be the antithesis of each--we do just the opposite.  What I would do would be the opposite of what she would do.  And when we got the study we decided to examine ourselves, and it really was true.  And they said one is dominant; the other is passive, and we were.  They--you'd get along real well, but you got divisions of responsibilities.  That was true.  Like, we came along when twins dressed alike.  I was the dominant one, which fit us.  And it was not like we decided to pattern after the study.  We found the study described us as we knew ourselves to be, which was really real interesting.  I was a passive one--I mean the dominant one; she was passive, and it worked well.  My sister [Xenobia Brewster] didn't mind my taking the lead.  I wanted to take the lead.  She was happy with my leading, so we were happy.  I decided what we're gonna wear, the red dress today or the blue dress today, fine with her.  And all along the way, and the only time we had trouble is when people would interfere.  If some outside force, like boyfriends especially would say: You gonna let her tell you want to do (unclear) you know, interfering.  And then we didn't like the boy (laughter) 'cause he's kind of breaking up our relations, 'cause it's working well.  And we found that to be an interesting study that made us see ourselves in a more concrete way, but it was a good way.
Story_ID: 315254
Speaker 1: It's interesting the way you described the piano playing--I mean the piano practicing--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that she [Clayton's twin sister, Xenobia Brewster] would--you would wanna focus on the piano, and she would leave--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and go out and play.  And then when it came time to do the recital she'd ask you what it was, and then you'd tell her, and she'd play it (laughter).
Speaker 2: The same thing happened with our foreign languages.  We had a very, very strict French teacher [at Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And the French teacher said there's no such thing as B, C, and D.  In this class it's A or F, either got it or you don't.  So she didn't play.  Everybody knew that Dr. Neabonga [ph.]--I'll never forget her name, and she was a good teacher.  And you know, people respect efficiency.  So, we knew she was a good teacher.  Whether you liked her or not, you knew she was good at what she did, and she was strict.  You knew her rules: no in between; no B, C; not almost get it; nearly about done it, none of that; either it is or ain't.  So, this particular night, I mean, it was the night before D-Day, when Dr. Neabonga said tomorrow we're having this test.  You're coming in prepared or not, and we knew that.  Well, I perfected the speech, whatev- I can't remember what the lesson was, but I was working on it.  My sister was out with the boys and the girls and having fun.  And I said to her, please come in, you know, and study with me 'cause you're gonna miss out, you know.  And if they throw us out of school, my dad [James Brewster] would die, you know.  Nah, you know, I'll get it.  Well, the night before, she sat me down and said give me the passage; read it to me; speak it to me, whatever.  I can't remember all the details.  But we went over the lesson together.  And I, I can see her now closing her eyes and listening: do it again; do it again.  The next morning we walked into the class, and she says I'm ready.  Well, she can't be ready (laughter).  She just looked at it last night.  But what she's trying to do is get it while it was still fresh, and she did.  That's why we both made almost some of the same grades, because she showed up being smart in the class.  But she didn't study, so maybe I consider that she was smart, 'cause I studied.  I was a good student, but I was working at it.  She ended up getting the good grades, but she wasn't working at it.  So maybe she was the smarter of the two after all, you know.  But I protected her and did that, but she obviously had a quality in her that prepared her to do this kind of last-minute catch-up, because she could, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's quite an interesting situation.  I mean, yeah, and so many thoughts are running--I mean, I wonder if she sees herself knowing it because you know it.  And you know, I mean, you look just like her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and you know, now--after the fact you, you can do a lot of analysis.  You question, you know, how did that--but you know, when you're going through it, it's like, I guess you're in a fire.  You know, how did this fire start?  You know, where, you know, where did the blaze come from?  You, you just want to get out.  You know, you go through it.  And our ends were so victorious all the time.  You know, we just had such a wonderful life.  I keep saying that.  I know you had seen that throughout my presentation, but I was a happy child all through my young years, that I had victories, and I had successes, not without some preparation, of course.  And that's what I'm telling you now, that I, you know, just wasn't born a brilliant genius that I could just do everything; I worked at it because I wanted in--there was something in me saying I've gotta excel here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've gotta achieve this.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I've gotta make the grade.
Story_ID: 315255
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers or instructors at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause, you know, you had different levels, different subjects, and so depends on what you're taking.  Not really.  I've, I found that the ones that people considered mean and strict were fine with me, because I knew then when I get out of there I would have learned something.  So I didn't run away from those hard teachers, and I learned that they weren't so bad.  You know, kids form their own opinions, and you, and you get swayed by them.  Oh, don't go her.  And, and when you're in college, you know, you've got choices.  Like, if you take biology, you got, you know, this teacher, that teacher; you got maybe two or three choices, depending on what time your schedule permits you to go them.  And they'll say oh, take Dr. Davis, you know, 'cause so and so is mean and difficult.  And so you hear other people's opinions, and you just, umm, maybe I better avoid that.  But I've never really got swayed by that.  I guess I was a little tepid on some of that.  But once I got into those mean teachers, they weren't so bad.  So I kind of, I think I recognized that they're here to impart to me the knowledge they had, and I'm here to get it.  And that's where I'd learn to tell children later, give advice.  Listen, the teacher knows something.  I used to hear people, oh, that teacher doesn't know anything.  Well, they wouldn't be here if they didn't know something.  And you're the student.  They obviously know a little more than you know.  And so I took the theory they knew a little more than I know, so let me see what I can get from them, and extrapolate from them that knowledge to improve my mind.
Story_ID: 315256
Speaker 1: You graduated in '48 [1948], right, 1948 [sic. 1952 from Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and, and with a degree in education, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was your plan at that point?  Had you applied to graduate school or--
Speaker 2: No.  I got a scholarship to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So, I used those two as my places of interest, NYU because it's New York [New York], and you just kind of hear New York is a great place.  I had (unclear) fast and successful, and everybody there was rich and famous or whatever.  But Chicago [Illinois] was a slower pace, although was a major city.  It was less fast than New York.
Speaker 1: Had you been to Chicago before?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had an, a favorite uncle who lived there and really was the swaying factor because he was my father's [James Brewster] brother, and we [Clayton and her identical twin, Xenobia Brewster] liked him.  He was a good looking man, you know, physically attractive, and young, and agile.  Well, he wasn't all that young, but he was agile.  And for his age he was really, you know, an old graceful man who had a good job.  He had a political job, which was an easy job.  I mean, he drove the streets in Chicago to be sure that--you probably remember that the alleys had to be as clean as the major thoroughfares because they had a lot of things going on.  So my uncle's job was to drive down those alleys and be sure there was no garbage there.  And then when the snow came, there's no snow, no snow piled up in the alleys.  And he was like a policeman.  He wrote tickets.  And, but he just drove all day.  So we'd go visit him, and we just drive all day long.  We stopped for lunch.  But he liked breakfast, lunch, and dinner.  And he liked interesting places to eat.  So, every morning was Walgreens, so that's why I still love Walgreens today (laughter).  But we had breakfast at Walgreens every day, so it was kind of an exciting life.  We had Walgreens every breakfast, and then some nice place for lunch, and then a special place for dinner.  And so Chicago, now it was growing on us.  And then my father felt like we were still young, although we'd just graduated from college, and that's what, twenty-one?  We were still kids to him, and he didn't want us in the, the big city running wild.  So he said if you go to Chicago, my brother can look out after you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was his protective sense that kind of helped guide us to Chicago.
Story_ID: 315257
Speaker 1: So you and your sister [Xenobia Brewster] both went to University (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --of Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And was there anything special about graduation from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  Did you achieve any special honors or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --distinctions?
Speaker 2: Got, you know, high marks for special--lots of stuff and singled out.  But you know, by then I think we were so grounded with my father's [James Brewster] teachings all the time, like don't think you're so great; nobody's better than you.  That was to give us that security blanket.  But you're better than anybody else either.  So, when you hear that every day, after a while you, you'll be, you'll become kind of stable.  And it was necessary for me and my sister.  And I think I might have told you this in those earlier interviews that being twins, there were only three sets of twins [in Oklahoma], so we were odd and unique, 'cause they didn't have fertility pill at that point.  So we were unique, and then we were identical.  And then what people used to say all the time, and I'm sure I must have said this to you earlier, that we came along when we had long hair.  As a matter of fact, our hair was down to the hemlines of our dresses.  So we had long hair, and people used to call it good hair.  And so, people used to tell us every day, oh, aren't they cute, with long, good hair.  Every day we heard that.  But when we'd come home and we said oh, guess what, they said we were cute with long, good hair.  My father break that down.  Everybody's hair is good if they'll wash it and brush and comb it.  And guess what: they're giving you some kind applause at some, something you had no control over.  You didn't choose to be twins.  You didn't choose to be girls.  So why you're bragging about that?  What you need to brag about is how good your heart is, how bright your mind is, and how stable you are as an individual.  And so when--oh, then we're knocked down.  Oh, he deflated you then.  Oh, gee, we thought we were cute little girls, you know, long, good hair.  But what happened is, by the time we grew up and realized that my father said the emphasis ought to be here and here, then we no longer thought about good hair, the texture of our hair, and our identity by classification.  What do you know and how you treat people, that's what he emphasized.  But the fact is we did get a lot of publicity.  We did get a lot of recognition.  We were nice girls in school.  So as you grow and advance in your years, you get kind of, you know, yearning for, well, another milestone in my life, you know.  I got another award, another recognition, another this, and it becomes like, well, I worked at it.  And so it's, it's less--you're not pompous.  I should put it that way.  You don't get pomposity after a while because, you know, well, I earned this, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did get recognition though, yes.
Story_ID: 315258
Speaker 1: Did you work over the summer, or did you go, did, did, did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you go to Chicago [Illinois] immediately, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, went to Chicago immediately.  And we start working.  We knew two men who was heads, head officers of the Chicago Urban League who took an interest in us.  They had come to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]  with the market developers years before.  And over the years, we became friendly with some of the people in Chicago, and then they became our, our godfathers to watch over us, and they helped us so much.  And there was discriminating practices that they couldn't get a hold, a real firm grip on, you know.  These companies would do nice things, but the league felt, felt like, you know, they're still discriminating.  So my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I were sent out as what we called guinea pigs at the time, called this company, look in the ad--
Story_ID: 315259
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Urban League of Chicago [Chicago Urban League].  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --they needed--
Speaker 2: Well, discrimination was a reality, but they couldn't get a handle on it.  So what they decided to do was, let's see if we can, you know, catch come--let do our homework to see if it's really being practice like what we think.  So the pattern then was to, or the process was to look in the want ad sections and see who's hiring, what jobs are open, and then apply; apply meaning--now, this was in '52 [1952], and requirements or skills were not all that involved.  Like, if you were a clerk, you could apply for a clerk/typist job if you could type and you could spell.  And so you didn't have to have, you know, a medical degree to get a job.  Now, my sister [Xenobia Brewster] and I had graduated from college [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], so you assume we knew something.  We could spell, read, and write, and we could type, and, and we learned how to type in, in college.  And I don't know if you remember a man name Cortez Peters, who was the fastest man in, in America.
Speaker 1: Right, Cortez Typing School [sic. Cortez W. Peters Business School].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a typist.  And we had a chance to meet him.  And he came to our college one year, and I got a chance to meet him, and boy, I was so fascinated by him.  And I said one of these days I'm gonna type like Cortez Peters.  And I learned to be a pretty good typist, you know, of course nowadays it doesn't matter much.  But I learned how to be a good typist, and so was my sister.  So we were both good typists.  And so the Urban League said well, let's do this: you be our front men.  And we'll always like, position five minutes, ten minutes away from where we'd call.  So we called, say Marshall Field's [Marshall Field & Company].  There would be an ad in the paper for a clerk typist.  And we'd call and said, "I see you have an ad in the paper."  "Yes."  "Is the job still open?"  "Yes."  "It's okay to apply?"  "Yes."  Then we'd make a beeline over there, like ten minutes away.  And we'd get there and, "We're here to apply.  I understand you got a clerk/typist at"--we don't tell we're the ones that called.  You said, "I came to apply for your clerk/typist job."  "Oh, so sorry, but we just filled that."  You know, (laughter), well, then you got them right there.  Well, that happened with so many companies, Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.]--well, I don't wanna name all of the companies that were kind of guilty but major companies that looked like they were good guys.  You know, Marshall Field's, everybody went to Marshall Field's.  It was a joy to go to Marshall Field's.  They looked like good guys.  Spiegel was a good mail order place and oh, a lot of places.  And my sister and I went to many of those places that did the same pattern, apply--I mean broadcast the--advertise an opening, and then when you got there, you're black, it's not for you.  And we broke down a lot of that.  And it was kind of, you know, fun job; job meaning, you know, it was assigned tasks.  They were really very--and I was waiting for school to start anyways, then the summer, so it was before we went to col- before I went to school.
Speaker 1: So, so would the Urban League then confront the business in, in a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they would--
Speaker 1: --formal setting--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and then they, they would document it.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: And so they put, I mean had very good documentation, which means--and then they called a press conference.  And of course, then you embarrass the company.  And then the, you know, the good guys say well, we gotta change our image.  You know, we can't be out here looking this bad.  So that's how the integration took place, is all I think just felt embarrassed.
Story_ID: 315260
Speaker 1: Now do you know if Marshall Field's [Marshall Field & Company] changed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: --did get results.
Speaker 2: You know, maybe, not enough, but--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --enough to say, you know, well, we do hire.  You know, so they were hiring clerk/typist.  I'm not sure how many managers they got.  But then the Urban League moved into management jobs like the telephone company (unclear) it's hard for me to remember, you know, everybody but major companies in the areas where people could fill the job.  I mean, you know what: answering a telephone and I mean, while it was important, I mean, you didn't have to have, you know, double degrees to be able to talk on the phone with some intelligence.  So they figure, you know, we're not asking for a whole lot here, just the opportunity.  We want the opportunity there.  If they don't measure up, fire them like you do anybody else.  But open it up.  And that was the Urban League's position, and that's how they broke down a lot of the discrimination.  You know, it didn't solve the whole problem, but they sure made a big dent, and we were responsible for that.
Story_ID: 315261
Speaker 1: Now, at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], now, well, who was the director of the Urban League [Chicago Urban League] when you were there?  I'm sorry I didn't ask?  Who was the--
Speaker 2: I'm looking at their names now. Louneer Pemberton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm trying to think.  It was another guy, Julian somebody.  I don't know how I forget these names 'cause they were so instrumental in my life.  And Leroy Jeffries was the advertising manager at Ebony, and he was their good friend and an old Urban Leaguer from New York when he lived there, so he had the Urban League spirit, so he was at the Urban League all the time.  So the three of them kind of ran the Urban League.  And because they were so-called godfathers, you know, to keep us straight and help us navigate through Chicago [Illinois], we became an integral part of the Urban League.  And I ended up--let me tell you, this was interesting--I ended up later on chairing the fundraiser, which was a dinner every year Urban League had.  And this particular year I became the chair of the dinner and raised more money.  It stood for many years as the, the highest receipts for a successful event for many years after.
Speaker 1: This, this is while you were in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in between--
Speaker 2: Fifty-eight [1958], '59 [1959]--
Speaker 1: Fifty-eight [1958], '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: --something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But let me tell you what I did to one of these--and so they made me chair again.  But one of my years, reason it was so successful--you're probably too young to know Joy Bryant.  Did you ever hear Joy Bryant?  Joy, Joyce--I'm sorry--Joyce Bryant was a sensational singer, nightclubs, Hollywood, Broadway, a big star, decided that she no longer wanted to be glamorous, and she quit the stage and went to pursue her religious acts.  She was a Seventh-day Adventist, and she left to go back to, you know, concentrate on religiosity, broke everybody's heart.  I mean, it was the biggest story going.  But then, she decided, you know, I think I, I'm missing that.  I want to go back.  Well, I was married at the time to Ed Clayton [Edward Clayton], who was the editor of Jet magazine.  And he knew everything that was going on, and he found out she's getting ready to come back now.  She wants to come back.  And I said oh, let me stay on top of that, because if she's coming back, I want to be the one to bring her back.  And I was able to do that.  So now, Joyce is coming back, and I brought her.  And she was our star attraction for the Urban League dinner.  Now that dinner was held at the Morrison Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] every year.  And the Morrison, I don't know if it's still there.  It's on Randolph [Street] and Clark [Street], I think.  Oh, Washington [Street]--yeah, Randolph [Street]--Monroe [Street], I think, and, and Clark [Street] or Madison [Street].  I used to know all these streets so well.  But anyway, and it was, for whatever the times were, we'd, we'd have a, a decent crowd every year.  The Urban League was well supported, so we had a good crowd every year.  But with Joyce Bryant coming, the fire department came to me and said listen, we've got thousands of people out in the street.  I mean, they're trying to get in here.  The place was already, you know, broken the law (laughter) with people inside already and all these people trying to get in.  And what we did is we charged--the people who could not get in we charged them a little fee to let her come out and shake their hand and for a fee (laughter).  So we got the people on the outside.  But I went down in the history books at that point as being the most successful fundraiser.
Speaker 1: Where was the fundraiser held?
Speaker 2: It was at the madi- at the hotel, the Morrison Hotel.
Speaker 1: In, in Chicago, the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Huh?
Speaker 1: The Morrison Hotel in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's torn down now I understand.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: But that's where we had it every year.
Speaker 1: Is that downtown Chicago?
Speaker 2: So it was a--you know, a downtown site, and it was a nice place, and it, it was--you know, you could fill it, or pretty near fill it, where it looked like a good audience all the time.  And as I said, the Urban League was, you know, a good draw.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that's quite (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So--huh?
Speaker 1: That's quite a story, 'cause I don't think that many people know about Joyce Bryant now.
Speaker 2: No, no, you know.
Speaker 1: And with her being--and to think that she was--
Speaker 2: And I can see--
Speaker 1: --such a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) her dresses.  I mean, she was sexy, and she, when she graced the cover of a magazine (unclear) everybody bought it.  So she was hot, hot, hot.  And so when she decided to go, what?  You're gonna leave us? You know, and then, I mean, the nation was sick when Joyce Bryant she gonna remove herself from showbiz, oh no, 'cause we didn't have a lot of stars to go see, you know.  And she was one of the ones who just attract--wherever she went she sold places out.  And now she's giving it up.  Nobody could believe it, and for a religion.  I mean, they didn't find that, you know.
Story_ID: 315262
Speaker 1: Let's go back to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Now, now you, you took courses there, but you didn't, you didn't finish the, the--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't stay because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --what happened is I got so busy that I figured I'm liking what I'm doing better than--all I'll have is another degree.  That's what I--you know, an advanced degree.  I'm doing okay now, and I'm really, I'm feeling so fulfilled, 'cause I was working with poor people, and I was teaching.  Well, when I did start, you know, got that job working with who, oh, with snotty nose, and I was helping them.  And so I felt like, you know, to sit in a classroom is not gonna be nearly as fulfilling.
Story_ID: 315263
Speaker 1: Now did you meet--tell us about meeting your husband, Ed--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Clayton [Edward Clayton].  Now, did, did you--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --meet him while, while you were in grad school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we first came to Chicago [Illinois], when we came, as I said, you know was having been popular twins and the studying and all that, he thought it'd be good to--you know, the center page of Jet was always a sexy page, you know, swimming suits and all that.  And so he thought, well, we never had a set of twins.  And so he came and called us and said, "I'd like to photograph you for the center spread."  And I thought, center spread, that's where you have the (unclear). And he said, "Oh yes," (unclear) no.  Well, my sister [Xenobia Brewster] (laughter) wanted to--well, everybody want to be in Jet.  Jet was so hot.  I mean, everybody wanted to be in Jet.  And so my sister said, "Oh, man, oh yeah."  No, we're not doing that.  Our father [James Brewster] was a minister, and we're prancing around in a bathing suit showing our legs (laughter), our body, said oh no, no, no.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was--
Speaker 2: --and so we said no, it would embarrass him.  And I was just feeling strongly I didn't want to wear a bathing suit, you know, you know, showing your legs to the world.  And I said no, that's not what I want.  And, and then he just said--well, he wasn't the one who--he sent a reporter to call us, and then he decided--you must not have made yourself clear who you were.  Nobody turns down Jet magazine and to be a center spread.  You didn't explain to those girls who you really were, you know (laughter).  So he said something's wrong here.  He said I never her--we don't--we've never had anybody who refused to be in Jet.  So he decided to call.  You know, he's the big shot.  He's the editor.  And I said, "No, Mr. Clayton."  The answer--we did know who he was.  He was pretty clear, and the answer is still no.  Nobody, nobody--no, he got all pumps--sir, looks like you got a first, so I'm not gonna do it.  And I said and--oh, by then I had joined church.  I belonged to the South Shore Baptist Church [Christ Bible Church, Chicago, Illinois], and I started playing for the choir.  And I said, "Oh, I'm a choir director.  No, that's not the image I want."  Well, he was just outdone.  And then, you know, you're young girls.  You know, how you get to be so opinionated.  You, you're too young to say no, you know (laughter), too green to say no.  And then he said, "Well, what's so special about church? " And I said, "Well, it's my lifeline," you know.  And then I asked, "Do you go to church?"  (Laughter) And he said well, yeah, he used to, but he didn't, didn't have membership now.  I said, "Why don't you come go to my church?"  And I invited him to my church.  Well, I was the kind--I, I had a boyfriend by now.  And I can't remember this time sequence.  I might be ahead of myself.  But anyway, I had a boyfriend who was--used to be a, a secretary to Joe Louis, you know, kind of like, you know.  And so, so I met Joe Louis through him, and then I started meeting boxers.  I met Sugar Ray [Sugar Ray Leonard], and I met oh, Wilcox.  Oh, that's not his name.  Anyway--Wolcott, you know, Jersey Joe [Jersey Joe Walcott].
Speaker 1: Jersey Joe Walcott, right.
Speaker 2: And so my boyfriend knew them, so I got a chance to meet them.  And, and I would say to them, why don't you come to my church on Sunday?  And then, and Sugar Ray said, "You know what, I'll go."  I said, "Now don't tell me you're going unless you really mean it."  He said, "Oh, I will."  He said, "Nobody ever asked me."  So I told Mr. Clayton, the editor of Jet, come to my church 'cause Sugar Ray is gonna be at my church Sunday.  And he just laughed me into oblivion, you know, like, oh golly, here's a young girl, done turned me down for Jet.  Now she said she's got Sugar Ray coming to church.  I gotta go see this.  And he came to my church (laughter); then he saw Sugar Ray was there and whoever his opponent was.  Was that--I don't know his--I can't remember.  Jersey Joe or whoever he was fighting was there also.  And, 'cause I had seen them Saturday night, and we were, you know, sitting at the Autry [ph.], and I said come on go to church.  Now really, are you gonna come?  And they yeah.  And you promise?  Yeah.  And they came.  Well, the church was delighted, so they thought I had a magic wand that I could pull people in, you know.  All--I mean, that just spread.  Sugar Ray is gonna be at our church, and then now the editor of Jet is there.  So my husband--wasn't my husband--he saw me differently.  I'd said I, I don't want to be in Jet.  You know, I'm enjoying this.  I'm enjoying my work.  I'm teaching.  I don't want, I don't want that kind of publicity.  And he saw something in me that, you know, was a little special, and he honored the request, you know, so he said okay.  So then, he got so involved in the church, the church said to him--to me, "You think we could get Mr. Clayton to be our men's day speaker?"  And I said, "Oh, I think yeah, I could get him to do that."  And then I got him to speak at the church, and though people thought, you know, the editor of Jet is gonna be our men's day speaker.  So I was delivering him to my church, and the church (unclear) pleased with me.  And I'm making connections and doing a lot of things that nobody else was doing.  So I became kind of like the unique member of the church.  And then we started seeing each other.  So that's how I met him, and we became, you know, close after those kinds of relationships.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you got married in what, what, what year?
Speaker 2: Six--fifty-seven [1957].
Story_ID: 315264
Speaker 1: Married in 1957, okay.  So, now, by this time, like, you're, you're substitute teaching and teaching in the public school of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause then I continued.  But I was, oh, by then I was on the board of the Art Center, of the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois]. I was on that board.  Then, I organized the teachers at my school, just made it--well, wasn't a club but got us together so we could do collectively to make school better.  I was just always doing something, get people to come to the church [South Shore Baptist Church; Christ Bible Church, Chicago, Illinois].  And then, political, I was never politically involved.  I was active in that I could help politicians get gatherings, but I was never active, active political animal but knew everybody in the political circles and became very close to--I'll tell you who I really, really (unclear) Arch Carey and Sidney Jones [Sidney A. Jones, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Archibald Carey [Archibald Carey, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: --uh-huh, and Sidney Jones were my favorite people and Earl Dickerson.  And I worked with Mrs. Dickerson [Kathryn Kennedy Dickerson] with the arts.  And so I got a chance through those circles to know a lot of the movers and shakers of Chicago and became an integral part of their life.  And one thing I, I'll tell you--I guess I can tell you this.  I'm sure they're all dead now.  See if I remember the guy's name.  He was a big numbers man.  And I had been in Chicago long enough to know that numbers was a, a big income producer.  There was a woman, they lived right, really, I think probably in the block where Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] lives.  I hadn't seen exactly where his house is, but it sounds like the address.
Speaker 1: In Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in Hyde Park.  But I lived in Hyde Park too.  And I lived on--
Speaker 1: Hyde Park Boulevard.
Speaker 2: --I lived right on Hyde--my building was on Hyde Park and Woodlawn [Avenue].  And so they had several openings, so I lived on the Woodlawn opening side, the entrance to the building.  But the building had an entrance on Hyde Park.  And the Hansberrys lived right across the street.  You remember the old Hansberrys who owned all the real estate in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 315265
Speaker 1: The man I'm trying to tell you about had a wife, a beautiful woman, who, because her husband was rich and famous, or infamous, but she didn't have the societal acceptance, could afford everything, but nobody wanted her because her husband's a numbers man.
Speaker 2: Is that the Johnson?  Was his name--
Speaker 1: No.  I'll think of it in a minute.  I can see them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a very dark man.  She was very light.  She looked almost white.  And they lived right there on, on, on Hyde Park [Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois].  But anyway, it'll come to in a minute. But the story I'm gonna tell you is kind of interesting.  When I found out that she really had a yearning to get involved, figure I'll put her on my arts committee [South Side Community Art Center, Chicago, Illinois], because we needed money, and she had money.  So I went to her and said you know, will you work with me on my committee?  And of course, she was delighted.  And then she became my best member because we used to had kind of pick and choose where we're gonna meet, you know, have a chip or a dip.  Well, because she now wanted us so badly, she invited us to meet at her home, and she had chips and dips, you know, a feast.  So everybody loved to go to her meeting--her house for a meeting.  But one night, her husband called me after I went home and said, "This call is confidential, and I want to come by and see you."  Now this was before I married, 'cause I was living a single woman, so these stories do get mixed up, time-wise.  Well, I was single, and I lived on 45th Street, right, right near Greenwood [Avenue].  And he called me and said, "I wanna come by and see you, and don't tell anybody."  Oh, gee, here's a guy, you know, 'cause I'm a single woman now, and I'm active in the community, here's somebody else.  So I said no for long time, and he said please.  And so, finally, somebody--I was kind of basically fearless anyway, so I figure oh, what can he do?  If he harms me I'll yell and scream.  So he just seemed like it was so important that he meet with me privately.  And he said, "And please don't tell my wife."  Well, right away I knew uh-oh, this is a man who wants to play around.  I let him come, and guess what he came to see me for.  He said--and they had four children.  He said, "You know, I've learned a lot about you, and I thank you so much for involving my wife.  I'm happy for her because she is so happy working with you, and I've learned a lot about you.  And I want you to--I want to tell you a secret.  This is why I wanted the secret meeting.  This is a secret.  I neither know how to read nor write.  I can't spell my name, and I'm a millionaire almost."  And he said, "It didn't matter earlier, but my children now are coming up.  And if they ever found out I couldn't read, I think I'd be ready to kill myself."  He said, "I can recognize this, and I can recognize that, and I can add money, and I can do this, but I can't read and write.  And so I came--my wife showed me how to spell the children's names, so now I recognize their names, but I couldn't spell it if I had to do it on my own."  Sad story.  "So will you teach me to read, 'cause I trust you, 'cause I don't want anybody to know this?  So will you just teach me to read?  That's all I want from you, and I'd be willing to pay you any price you set."  Well, I felt so sorry for him.  And I could teach reading and writing.  And I didn't really know how you do it.  I wasn't that kind of a teacher that I knew how to teach.  I was just lucky enough to be thrown into a classroom, and I love children.  But I went down to Wabash [Avenue] where I heard teachers go to get supplies and stuff.  So I saw a basic reading thing, and I know the difference between A to Z, and taught him in my own way.  And he offered me so much money.  I said, "Oh, I don't want, I don't want your money.  I'm thrilled now that you asked me, and I'm delighted that I can provide you with this."  And now he said, "I need self-esteem.  That's what I don't have."  And that was an interesting show, because I was walking around with these secrets but joyfully caring them, that I'm, and I could see him making progress.  And of course, I told his wife, 'cause if she saw him driving at my house at nighttime, I wanted her to know that he's coming to my house for that reason.  So she was thrilled also, and she saw the progress and all of that.  And I felt so accomplished.  And I had never had anything--I think this probably the first time I told the story because while they lived, I would never, you know, want anybody to know that 'cause I told him I, you know, keep the secret and I did.  But I felt accomplished, first, is that somebody had faith in me.  And I found that I applied that to a lot of things in my life.  And people have faith in you, right to this day, now I was very close to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and his confidante.  He told me secrets.  I was his wife [Coretta Scott King] confidante.  She told me secrets.  They're both gone now, and I still have their secrets.  And I'm gonna go, and I'll carry their secrets with me.  They learned to trust me, so many people.  You'd be amazed the people you know for whom I am carrying their secrets, because people have faith and trust.  And I learned and my father [James Brewster] said when you give your word to somebody--he used to point the finger, and I hate people pointing the finger.  I wanted to bite it off.  He said, "Young lady," (laughter), "when you give your word you keep it," you know, just like that.  I still see that.  I still see him: keep your word.
Speaker 2: So we can't trick you into revealing these secrets--
Speaker 1: Oh no, oh no (laughter).
Speaker 2: --in this interview.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh no, no.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, all right.  So I won't, I won't start trying to (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --trick you into it.
Speaker 1: Oh no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sometimes it gets tempting, but let me tell you something, you know (laughter).  Well, I just told you one, but, but they're gone, you know.  And you don't know who it was, so it doesn't matter.
Story_ID: 313674
Speaker 1: You had the story from Raymond School [Benjamin W. Raymond Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  You were telling me a school story.  You told that off camera, but tell it on camera.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  One of the assignments I had as a substitute teacher, I was assigned to a school.  Raymond School was on the West Side, Near West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And, and most times--(clears throat)--you know, when you're substituting your mentality is I'm just babysitting, you know, 'til the real teacher comes back.  I didn't do that.  I took every day like, you know, this is my major assignment; this is my major life.  And I even told the kids that if they had any secrets, you know, I wanted them to trust me and come bring me a secret and we'll keep it.  And I said now you know what a secret is.  It's something you tell somebody, and they'll keep it.  Well, I had this one little girl tell me--and they would just love me.  I mean, when they put your arms around you--'cause see, I used to be prejudice.  I didn't like snotty-nosed kids.  You know, if they weren't neatly dressed and clean looking, I didn't want to be bothered with them.  That didn't last but, you know, a very short time in my life, 'cause I learned the snottier the nose the better I liked them.  And so these little snotty-nosed kids would run up to me and hug me and you know, just embrace me.  I would just melt.  This little girl said, teacher, I have a secret.  I said what is it?  And she said you know, mommy sleeps with Uncle Jimmy every night.  And then Uncle Jimmy has been playing with me and exploring my body and telling me different parts of my body.  Well, I'm just now sinking, you know, oh no.  And I said now, what in the world is this?  So now I'm torn between you can tell the teacher a secret, and I'll keep it.  I knew Uncle Jimmy wasn't right.  The setting wasn't right.  Even the mother wasn't right.  Now what do I do?  If I go to the authorities, they gonna take this child out of the home.  And I just had sleepless nights over this secret that I already said I'd keep, that now I can't keep.  But I finally said this is one I can't keep.  You know, we gotta save this child.  And that bothered me for years and years and years, that I had to go and report that girl.  Of course, they took her, and I was too ashamed to keep up with her, 'cause I wanted to adopt her and make her life better.  But I did ask, inquired a little while.  And that thing haunted me for a long, long time.  And it was part (unclear) I probably never should have gotten this teaching job, and I never should have gotten involved with the kids.  I just whipped myself up with that, but I finally consoled myself and said I made the right decision.  But the other thing I did, and, and there were many stories like that, but the one that I used to, that has now come back several years later, is I would say to the kids look out the window.  And I said you see, you see filth and dirt and trash and shabbiness all around you.  This is what people refer to as the ghetto.  And I want you to keep it out there, that I don't ever want you to bring it in here, in your heart, nor in your head.  Dismiss it from you.  Then I want you to purge yourself to the point that you will have an openness where you will fill it with the desire to do better, to never have to live here, never have to want for anything, never, you know, stuff like that.  That's the way I would talk to them.  I don't even remember that I did all of that.  I do remember that I, that was, I was capable of doing that, and I remember some of that, but it wasn't--now, this was in the '50s [1950s] that this happened.  And just four or five years ago, a woman came here to Atlanta [Georgia] to reveal something that just tore all of our hearts apart with the--the whole audience cried because she's a Ph.D, double I think.  She has a big job at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] or the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And she got up to tell us this story.  The story was, I was one of those little girls in the class when I said keep the ghetto out there; don't ever let the ghetto come in here.  And she remembered it every day: do better; cleanse yourself; want to go higher; want to keep clean.  And she just dramatized all of this for us.  And she said and it was she--and she pointed to me--it was she who made me driven, and I kept going.  And I had to pass the trash to get home 'cause I lived there, but I kept going (unclear) that's for here, not here.  And when she dramatized that story and she said and I'm where I am today because of her, and then she told us about her daughter, and that's how she connected with me.  Her daughter had moved to Atlanta, grown of course by now, and moved to Atlanta.  And she used to tell her daughter--this is her story--I hope you'll have a woman in your life like I had.  And she kept saying I had this woman, this woman.  She said she never gave her daughter a name.  She said this woman, this woman who just keep you on the path to do better, keep you growing, keep you spirited.  And, and she came to Atlanta to visit her daughter.  She picked up the paper one morning, and I was in the paper for something.  And she was shocked.  She said to her daughter look, here's the woman.  And she went on to have said you know, I've been telling you about the woman.  Here's the woman.  And she got in touch with me, and she was--and she asked me to verify was I the right woman.  And she cried on the phone.  We kind of meet out--I said oh yes, I want to meet you too.  And I met her and this was, you know, forty, or fifty, sixty, fifty years later that this woman told me the impact I had on her in that school.  And when I think about it now--and now she's become a strong supporter of mine.  Every year she comes to the Trumpet Awards.  She gives me contributions for my scholarship program [at the Trumpet Awards Foundation] to this day.
Story_ID: 313675
Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s] is when Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] really started moving and becoming a national figure, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and then they move on to Albany [Georgia].  And then there's other things going.  So, did you, like, follow the activities of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Yes, for lots of reasons.  One is I had met him as a Baptist preacher.  I just knew him as a preacher, you know.  He wasn't famous when I first met him.
Speaker 1: At the National Baptist Convention?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I knew who he was, but you know, he wasn't any more colorful than anybody else at that time.  But by my husband [Edward Clayton] being the editor of Jet magazine, we kept up with everything.  And my husband had to send reporters down to the scene of some disruption or anything, so I was always up on what was going on, so knowledgeable about the, you know, the conflicts in whatever area they were.  So I was quite familiar with everything, you know, he was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, now you moved to Los Angeles [California], what, in '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: My husband was--I think it was '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But--(clears throat)--anyway, Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] sent my husband to Los Angeles to set up the west coast office of Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Jet and Ebony.  They, they didn't--they had stringers working out of the California area but not staff based there.  So he set up the office there, and that's why we were, we were moved to Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 313676
Speaker 1: While we were there, along the way, and this had to be '62 [1962] maybe or '3 [1963].  March on Washington was--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963], so it had to be '62 [1962], about, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was getting bigger and bigger and having recognized that he needed more organized system in his office, like with speech-writing and public relations and, and organized phase of telling his story.  And as he traveled around the country, he would say who you think is the best writer, the best PR [public relations] man, the best journalist?  He said every place he went Ed Clayton's [Edward Clayton] name came up.  Ed was a very, very smart--he was hired by politicians and governors, people, mayors and governors and people who recognized immediately that he was talented.  He could think fast.  He was smart and on top of everything and had a good reputation.  As a matter of fact, they called him a journalist's journalist.  And he said every place he went they said oh, Ed Clayton's your best man.  He said well, you think I can get him.  He said oh no, you can't get him, said because he's, he makes a lot of money.  And also, Ed had set up a reputation--(clears throat)--that he had a philosophy which I kind of--well, I hadn't totally adopted.  I kind of did.  But he said sell your talent or give it away.  Like, if someone hires you, my fee is $10,000.  And don't stray from that.  That's my fee.  Now if you volunteering, don't give me nothing, 'cause I'm volunteering, say don't mix 'em.  And so people used to say gall, he's really pricey.  And his answer always was you came to me.  I'm not begging you for a job.  You said you needed my services.  And so, he was kind of cocky too, you know.  But people used to say, you know, Ed Clayton's kind of cocky.  Yeah, but he could back up everything he brags about.  You know, he was very smart.  So they told Martin that, that they--he could get him, 'cause he works for Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and, and you know, we were making--well, he was making pretty decent wage at the time.  But he finally called Ed and asked him to come down and look over his operation and wanted to know could he come and work.  Well, Paul came--I mean Ed came down here from California and in ten minutes--this is what Martin said, "In ten minutes I knew this was the man I have to have."  'Cause it didn't take you long.  Ed was smart, as I said, and you, you knew it right away.  He could come up with an idea that you hadn't thought of just like that.  He was so impressed, he said oh, I got to have you.  So, Ed came back home.  Then he followed with a phone call: you gotta come.  And Ed said I don't know if I can come--said we have no money.  Oh, I don't think I can do that.  Well, was a whole lot of coercion, finally, Ed said well, I'll volunteer my time.  For three months I'll go, for three months for nothing.  Nothing meant, you know, he gave him a little stipend or something.  Well, at the end of three months, he said oh no, you can't leave, and that extended three more months.  In the meantime, Coretta [Coretta Scott King] had been bemoaning the fact that she wasn't doing enough to contribute to her husband's cause, that she was a trained concert singer, and she could probably use her singing.  So Ed says well, how about this, and he cave--gave her an idea about how she could do a tour.  You know, the church alone will receive you.  And he said and my wife is at home in Los Angeles [California], and she could help you, and she's very organized.  And he wanted to sell me to Coretta, and that kind of--cutting some of the story short--but that intrigued her.  And she called me, and we got together.  And so I, then I started traveling to her from my base, 'cause we hadn't planned to move to Atlanta [Georgia].  Paul is still volunteer--Ed was still volunteering.  And so I'm traveling with her, and she's getting more pleased.  And one evening, they were on the phone about three and a half, almost four hours convincing us to move to Atlanta.  And I tell people today, I said you all talk about what a great man Martin Luther King was and a, an honest man.  I said he was a trickster.  I said (laughter) Martin Luther King tricked us to Atlanta.  I said he promised me if we would agree to move, he'd give me a house, a dog, a car, a maid (laughter), and a whole lot of money.  And I said and I got none of that, and everybody laughed.  But you know, they finally made it interesting enough that we'll try it, you know, and we moved.  That's how we got here.  But she says--
Speaker 2: So, so, was Ed still working for--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he--
Speaker 2: --was your husband still working for--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Johnson--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at the time?
Speaker 1: But he, he left.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did he leave, actually leave Johnson at that point?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To work with Dr. King?
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: So Dr. King could raise the money to pay him what he--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He still didn't, okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But what happened was, you know, you get to a point where at, you know, at a certain point you, you got a car; you got a house, you know, what else?  You got some clothes.  You start seeing your lifestyle differently.  We had everything.  We had lived a very comfortable life and had saved some money, and we were doing okay.  And then he found the work rewarding.  And so, like, I'm doing something now that's really valuable.  And then you being black in America, he was benefiting because if we got this thing straightened out, we'd all be happier 'cause we can live a free, unencumbered life.  And so he saw that as a value of his work.  And, and Dr. King praised him every day because he just did something different and rewarding every day.  And the people just fell in love with, with Ed because he was just bringing life to the company.  He created a newsletter, and all the ministers liked it because he got their story in the little magazine.  And oh, he just did miraculous things and made a great difference in the life of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].
