Story_ID: 643362
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Ty Harden [Tyneisha Harden].  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Michael Bennett Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman], M-I-C-H-A-E-L, B-E-N-N-E-T-T, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, B-E-N.  Now is there a story behind your middle name?
Speaker 2: It's my [paternal] grandfather's name--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Ben--Bennett--Bennett Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  I didn't hear it right, I guess.  Yeah, Bennett, okay--with a E on the end?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is November 18, 1954, place of birth Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Mayor, mayor of the City of Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Where are we?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We're in City Hall [Columbus City Hall, Columbus, Ohio] in my office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: April 4th--that right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: April 4, 2012.
Story_ID: 643363
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sure, yes--salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: All the places I've yet to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "A city that stays the same falls behind."
Story_ID: 643364
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately, then we're gonna put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Joan Hughes Coleman, H-U-G-H-E-S, Coleman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 11 [1932], don't remember the year, but I'm sure she would not want me to remember the year, so she's eighty.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: All right.  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  Where--is there a point of origin for them or, and do you know what they were doing before they got to Gary or--
Speaker 2: I can't tell you a whole lot about my mother's side.  I know my grandmother, Rose--my mother's mother--her name was Rose Hughes.  They grew up in Gary, Indiana, not too far from The Jackson 5 where they were.  I think near, I think the street was Jefferson [Street], or maybe the high school was Jefferson [sic. Jefferson Elementary School, Gary Indiana], it seems to come to mind.  And we're not sure who the, who my grandfather was and, but I have a picture of her.  Do I show all those now?
Speaker 1: No, no.  We do those at the end (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we do 'em later?  Okay, all right.  And she died a few years ago--Rose Hughes died a few years ago.  I'm not sure who my grandpa was on that side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--I have an aunt on that side, her name is Elaine--Elaine Hughes, now Elaine Pittman [Elaine Hughes Pittman], my mother's sister.  And my mother's eighty, my sister is--my aunt is around--she's my age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's fifty-seven, fifty-eight, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big gap.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your mother's side of the family about how the family got to Gary?
Speaker 2: No, not too much.  My mother, my grandmother was a single parent growing up in Gary, Indiana--steel town.  She lived in a duplex, and we'd visit every once in a while.  I remember for a while there we didn't and--let's see--I remember parking our car there when I was a little kid, it was clean, come back out and it was dirty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Because of the steel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a steel mill town.  And my aunt was very musically inclined and my aunt went to music lessons constantly, and I remember singing and, singing while she played the piano often times and, but not much more than that.  Our--my mother, my grandmother and us were not that close.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where your grandmother was born?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If she was born in Gary or not?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have a sense they came from some other place before her generation or--
Speaker 2: It is--I'm certain, but I don't know much about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now what was life like for your mother growing up in Gary?
Speaker 2: She was, you know, she had a single mother.  You know, in Gary you had to be tough, you know, when you grew up.  My mother was tough, she was very outgoing, you know.  She wasn't--my grandmother was not--far from wealthy, even far from middle class, and I wouldn't say she was poor, but they weren't--they--I'm sure they struggled.
Speaker 1: She had to work, right, for a living, for, you know--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) as a single mother.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  She had to work, and I'm not sure what all she did, but I know my mother made it and she worked hard coming up.  I know she had all kind of jobs coming up, she was very aggressive--she had to be aggressive in that environment that--where she grew up, and she met--she went to college--Indiana University--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Bloomington [Indiana], where she met my father, John [John Coleman].
Story_ID: 643365
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: John Henry Coleman [John Coleman].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August, August 15th [1928], Madison, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the year?
Speaker 2: Well, he's eighty-four.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He's eighty-four now?
Speaker 2: Yes, eighty-four this year.
Speaker 1: So he was born in Madison, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Born in Madison, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now what are the stories about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Lots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of stories.  My father's mother was Cleo, Cleopatra Coleman [Cleo Shelton Coleman], Cleo--great name.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Now I really don't know the story with that--that name is Cleo Coleman, we just called her grandma.  And she was married to Bennett [Bennett Coleman], Ben.  Her mother [sic. Bennett Coleman's mother], which would have been my great-grandmother [Cleo Dean Coleman], was--lived to be, I think, 104 [sic. 102] years old, and her mother's name was Margaret Dean, and Margaret Dean was born a slave, and Margaret Dean was born a slave, sold in slavery, and freed from slavery.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was enslaved?
Speaker 2: In Virginia, and then she was sold to an owner in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have some of that information right there.  I got to kind of look at it again but, and she had, so she was born in the 1830s, died in 1940s--late 1830s, died in the 1940s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now this is your great-great-grandmother or great-great-great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, just great.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Just great.
Speaker 1: Great-grandmother, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah--my grandmother, then my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's just--not that--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --it was not a great-great.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: See how close slavery is.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, this--
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about slavery?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean it passed down through that gener- those couple generations.  She had some stories about the sell and the travel from Virginia to the new plantation in Kentucky, and how arduous it was down the Ohio River.  I had--I keep a picture of my great-great-grandmother--my great-grandmother, grand- they called her Grandmammy Dean, Grandmammy Dean, Margaret Dean is her name--and I keep it in my office--keep a picture of her in my office 'cause it's always a good reminder.  It's a big picture that's in my office, and I walk by it every day, and she looks over the proceedings of this office every day.  So she was born in slavery, sold in slavery.  I'm not sure she ever knew how to read, I'm certain she never voted, and now her great-grandson is the mayor of the fifteenth largest city in the nation [Columbus, Ohio] and the largest city in the State of Ohio.  And I think she would be proud.  The picture of her hangs in my wall, and I want people to see it when they come in to meet with me 'cause it means something to me--a lot--and I have, and behind my great-grandmother in this picture is an outline of my father as a baby.  It's probably--would have, had to been in the early 1930s, I imagine, or late 1920s.
Story_ID: 643366
Speaker 1: Now what was life like for your father [John Coleman] growing up in Madison?  Did he grow in Madison, Indiana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, grew up in Madison.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He grew up in Madison, Indiana.  Well, he was--my grandmother [Cleo Shelton Coleman], his mother, was a maid, and my grandfather trained dogs.  He was a dog trainer and all around handyman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now he would train dogs just in simple obedience, or was it some other--
Speaker 2: Police dogs.
Speaker 1: Police dogs, okay.
Speaker 2: Police dogs.  I remember seeing pictures of my grandfather, Ben Coleman [Bennett Coleman], training, you know, police dogs--around.  He painted, he did all kind of stuff--whatever it took to make a living.  And my grandmother was a maid at a hotel, and they had a hotel in Madison where all the, the white folks could sleep, and she would walk up this--Madison is kind of a hilly area in southern Indiana.  She'd walk up through town every day, every day until she was in her late seventies, early eighties and, you know, well, maybe not that long.  Maybe in her early seventies and late sixties, and changed beds in this hotel and cleaned up rooms, hotel rooms.  It was the Madison Hotel [Madison, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I stayed there, too, by the way, once when I came down to visit--as an adult.  And, so Madison was a great, great little community.  Not many black folks, but everybody knew each other.  In fact, everybody was related one way or another.  And there's a little book that was written by--my father participated in the writing of that book, along with others, about what it was like growing up in Madison, Indiana, and I can't remember the name of it.  I think the name was, 'It Was Just Us, Just Us' [sic. 'All We Had Was Each Other: The Black Community of Madison, Indiana: An Oral History,' Don Wallis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was about growing up black in that neigh- in that city.  And, so it was a very small community, it was more southern than northern.  Southern Indiana was more southern in attitude than northern in attitude, as I sort of gathered coming up, visiting there as a young person.  We'd go down--my dad would take us down there multiple times a year with the whole family.  And my grandmother and my father, they lived in--my father was a young man--lived in a, in a house that had, I think one, two, three, four rooms--one, two--three rooms (laughter), three rooms--a kitchen and two--no, four rooms--two bedrooms and a front room.  But you could stand in the front of the house--it was long and narrow--stand in the front of the house, look in the front door and see all the way through, straight down through the back door.
Speaker 1: I think it was referred to as a shotgun house.
Speaker 2: Yeah, shotgun--right (makes noise), right through.  And next door lived Reverend Gaines [S.M. Gaines] who preached at the church across the street, at the Baptist church [Broadway Baptist Church, Madison, Indiana] across the street.  And next to the Baptist church across the street was this school for--only the black kids went to.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: I think it was Madison Elementary [sic. Broadway School, Madison, Indiana].  No, maybe it wasn't Madison.  I don't remember the name of it, actually, but I could find out.  And it's one or two rooms, and my father went there from--both the church and the school.  They're right next each other, you know, from kindergarten all the way through senior high school--graduated early.  I think he graduated at the age of fifteen, and then went on to--very young age--to college.  Very smart man.  My grandparents made him read, and he read, read, read, and read some more.  They made him work, so he was both an intellectual but also a worker--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my father was and--
Speaker 1: So where did he go to undergraduate school?
Speaker 2: Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where he met my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman].
Story_ID: 643367
Speaker 1: So Madison [Indiana] was a very nurturing black community.  It was very segregated, very southern in many ways--it even looked southern, right there on the banks of the Ohio River.  And my father [John Coleman] would tell me times when walking down the streets of downtown--little, little downtown.  It was only like a block (laughter).  But he--white folks walked one direction and he'd have to cross the street to go the other direction when it, you know, they couldn't walk on the same side of the road and, you know, the colored fountains, colored fountains, water fountains, you know, where they could sit in a movie theater and all that.  And, so I remember my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman], my grandmother actually, you know, Cleo [Coleman's paternal grandmother, Cleo Shelton Coleman] (laughter)--she'd talk about--every once in a while she'd mention the word white folks.  She'd whisper it.  She would say, "You know, Michael [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman], the (whispers) white folks down the street did this, this, and this and this," yeah.  It was just interesting.
Speaker 2: That's a well, a well known behavior--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of that generation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and my--Cleo had an aunt.  Cleo had a sister who we called Aunt, Auntie [Mary Shelton Stafford], and they lived down the street.  In fact, everybody on the street was related to us--everybody, and all the, you know, everybody.  It was, it was incredible.  I loved it because we'd visit there for--we'd go down for weeks at a time.  Me and my brothers [Jeffrey Coleman and David Coleman] and sister [Linda Coleman] would go down there weeks at a time and just enjoy it 'cause you could go anywhere and have fun and, you know, no restrictions, you know.  I--we came from Toledo [Ohio] and--very different environment, and ride our bikes everywhere, shoot BB guns, go hang out everywhere--anywhere we wanna go.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Reverend Gaines [S.M. Gaines] next door would--he lived to be, I think, over a hundred, and he knew every passage of the Bible, but me and my brothers would go over there and spend enormous amounts of time at his house because he was a pipe smoker and he would allow us to smoke pipes with him at the very young ages of nine, ten, you know (laughter).  Sit there and smoke pipes with him, rocking on the chair on his front porch while he would tell biblical stories.  And he was a great guy so, but it was a wonderful, wonderful life my father had growing up, despite the segregation, and there was a strong sense of community and a strong sense of everybody engaged in the success of the person across the street and down the street.  It was a very intimate growing--family atmosphere for even members who weren't families, folks who weren't families in Madison, among the black community especially.
Story_ID: 643368
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about (coughs)--well, I guess I need to ask you about what's your sense of the relationship between Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and black people at the time your parents went to college?
Speaker 2: I think it was probably pretty positive.  I mean for the times, you know.  I look--it's the home base with Kappa, Kappa Alpha Psis [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  It's the, it's the, it's the, it's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was founded there?
Speaker 2: Founder--the Kappas were founded at Indiana University, and my father [John Coleman] was a Kappa, I'm a Kappa, and my father was very young.  He was fifteen years old going to college, and then they were in medical school at Indiana University [Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana] as well.  He was young then, too, you know.  He was just a brilliant guy.  And my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman], you know, was a, you know, struggling person from Gary [Indiana], and she attended there, too.  My aunt [Mary Shelton Stafford] attended there.  So I would have to imagine that, you know, certainly racism was rampant everywhere in the country, but IU probably had a better representation early on--those early years in the--I guess, in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] than many around the country.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My fraternity, a major black fraternity, was founded there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting, 'cause as you were saying about southern Indiana being more like the South that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I think the rest of the Midwest considers Indiana more like the South than any midwestern state, in terms of not--segregation and the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --meanness of the, yeah, of that, you know, the governor.  I think your father, I calculated, was born around 1932 or so.
Speaker 2: Probably, probably (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I think it was just in 1928 that the governor of Indiana was the Grand Dragon [of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK)] himself.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Governor Stephens- yeah.  Stephenson [D.C. Stephenson] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is that right?
Speaker 1: --was the Grand Dragon when he was elected.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did not know that.
Speaker 1: And it's the only state where that happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's a--
Speaker 2: I wonder what part of the state he was from.
Speaker 1: I don't know, I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 2: I bet he was from southern Indiana.
Speaker 1: More than likely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, northern Indiana, Gary--very industrial--lots of black folks in Gary 'cause that's where jobs were.  Indiana- Indianapolis [Indiana] was sort of in the middle, you know (unclear), more midwestern city.  Southern Indiana was like being in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I--we keep hearing that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So (coughs) Indiana U then--it seemed like it was at least as liberal as Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or at another midwestern school (unclear) then.
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: It seems as though Indiana University, when your father was there--I guess in the early '50s [1950s], I guess, was probably as liberal as Ohio State or any of the other--
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Speaker 1: --midwestern schools.
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Probably more--it had a midwestern culture than southern Indiana, and northern Indiana was more like Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chicago [Illinois]--more like Chicago, actually.  Gary and Chicago were like just a few, a stone's throw from each other--right next door, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father went on to medical school as we know, and he got his medical degree there, too, at Indiana University (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At a young age as well.
Story_ID: 643369
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind how your parents [Joan Hughes Coleman and John Coleman] met?  Is there--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know that story.  I need to ask about that story.  I don't know that story, but they met, got married.  I was the first born, and then they moved around a lot because he was in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he--we moved to Washington, D.C., moved to El Paso, Texas where my brother [Jeffrey Coleman] was born.
Speaker 1: Now he was probably a little young for the World--World War II [WWII], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he would have been in the Korean conflict [Korean War]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --era?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I would imagine so, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he didn't--
Speaker 2: He was captain, he was a captain, he was a captain in the Army--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as a physician.
Speaker 1: So he didn't have to go overseas or anything (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he did not.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Story_ID: 643370
Speaker 1: Now I take it your father was the first physician in the family.
Speaker 2: He was the first person that had a college education in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very first.
Speaker 1: So you have any reflections on that and what the rest of the family thought about what was in his mind and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think everybody was very proud of him in Madison [Indiana], you know.  'Cause Madison, again, was that nurturing community of raising families, and I think my father may have been the first person in the--among any black folks in Madison to go to college--is my best guess.  I would, I would bet all my money, what little money I have, on that, that he was probably the first African American ever to go to college, much less go to medical school [Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana], much less become a doctor in Madison, and everybody was rooting for him.  And the good thing about Dad, he's--he never forgot his roots.  He was the kind of person that appreciated where he came from and how hard it took to get where he was, but also the nurturing that he had along the way, and I just remember, you know, as a, as a young kid when, you know, when he became a doctor, you know.  I remember folks in the neighborhood would come go, come see him.  "Hey, Doc, I got a little pain on a--in my back."  "Hey, what can you do for me?"  You know, and it's not Doc, "John [John Coleman]." "Johnny--," it's Johnny, not John. "Dr. Johnny," "Johnny," "Johnny."  You know, they see him, saw him as a little kid, you know, growing up there, and he was a very--and is--continues to be a very giving person, never wanting to be front and center--always in the background--and a really great thing to see the fact that he never forgot where he came from, and he's tried to instill that thought in each of us as children.  And the value system he had in Madison has translated to me and to my brother and sisters--brothers [Jeffrey Coleman and David Coleman] and sisters--sister [Linda Coleman] in our generation, and I hope I can transfer that to my kids as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your dad cite any particular mentor that he had in Madison or at Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the mentors were like everybody.  I mean, everybody was pulling for him.  I mean the whole community was pulling for Johnny to--or John Henry--I hear that, I remember hearing that, John Henry. John Henry or Johnny to do well because he was the only person that went to college in the whole area.  And his mentors were all the black families--mothers and fathers--everybody was his mentor.  Everybody loved him, and they all had a piece of his life, and he never forgot that.  He always gave back.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black doctors in Madison or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --in the surrounding area when you were--
Speaker 2: No, there was not, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when your parents--when he finally--he was settled in Madison I guess--I mean in Indianapolis [Indiana], I guess, when you were born, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Story_ID: 643371
Speaker 1: Does he have a practice in Indiana when he's there, or is he an intern or what?
Speaker 2: I--my recollection is that he worked at a hospital but he also worked for the Indianapolis 500 [Speedway, Indiana], I remember that--yeah, I remember somebody got injured and he worked on some medical team, and there was a picture of him taking care of--somebody had gotten injured on the race track.  I thought that was pretty cool.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad [John Coleman] was a pretty debonair guy.  In fact, he reminds me of--you ever see a picture of Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]?  Very similar features as Adam Clayton Powell, especially when he sported his mustache--not so much when he didn't, but when he did he--it--striking resemblance.
Story_ID: 643372
Speaker 1: Now how many brothers and sisters do you have, and where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest of four.  One is deceased, his name is David [David Coleman]--died in 1977 from a drunk driver--killed him on his way to Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] from Toledo [Ohio] with my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman], so he died on--in September of 1977.  And then my brother [Jeffrey Coleman] is the second oldest.  I always say he's older than me--I'm younger than him.  In fact, now I'm saying I'm younger than everybody, and that they're older than me, but we're only eleven months apart.  And then my sister--my brother lives here in Columbus [Ohio] and he has four children.  And then my sister, she's a physician in the Washington, D.C. area, Virginia area, and she has one child.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But we all grew up in Toledo.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Stairsteps, four stairsteps.
Speaker 1: All right, now--
Speaker 2: Four children--the Coleman kids.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the family left Indianapolis [Indiana] when you were about three?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I think I was around two--moved it--well, after--well, actually, my brother was born eleven months after I was born in El Paso, Texas.  Then we went to Toledo, and I remember El- we left there when I was--I don't know--three or four or something like, three or four, something like that.  And I remember a little bit about--my earliest recollection in life was in El Paso, Texas.  I remember sand, I remember a house, I rem- I was told that I spoke Spanish before I spoke English in El Paso, Texas.  Then we moved to Toledo from there, and then that's where we really all grew up.  And my sister was born there, and my brother was born in Toledo.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) David--Linda [Linda Coleman] and David was next.
Story_ID: 643373
Speaker 1: Now did your father [John Coleman]--was he assigned to a hospital or something in Toledo [Ohio], or how did he end up going to Toledo?
Speaker 2: He ended up actually going to practice with a Dr. Martin [ph.], who is a senior, more senior physician--African American.  And we lived on Prospect Avenue in Toledo and the--my father's medical practice and Dr. Martin's practice was on the street directly behind our house on Lincoln [Avenue] and, so they had that practice there for years together, and there was a alley that separated our house and my father's medical practice, which was on Lincoln, which faced the street behind us.  Dad walked to work every day from the house--go out the back door, through the alley, through the back door of the medical practice.
Speaker 1: Now back in the days when people would go to the doctor, they'd have a family doctor and that sort of thing. So he was a general practitioner?
Speaker 2: General practitioner.
Speaker 1: Family doctor.
Speaker 2: Family doctor.
Speaker 1: And, so I--from those days, I recollect those doctors worked long hours.
Speaker 2: Long hours, very long hours.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was, my father was a, had a very strong work ethic and he was a great guy, great guy.  I--that's one of the people I look up to, is my father--and my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman].  But he had a very, very strong work ethic and, you know, and he would--I remember back in the day that, you know, his practice was, you know, black folks, you know, came to him and Dr. Martin, and not everybody could pay, so I remember from time to time seeing apple pies on the back porch, our back porch--or pumpkin pies and--"Where'd this come from?"  Cake, you know, food, it's--I think what happened, my father--I think what happened with my father, you know, take care of somebody and they couldn't pay, you know, so, "All right, well--," and the next thing you know, they're fixing chicken, fried chicken and bringing it over to the house and cake and ice, you know, and food, and putting 'em on the back porch and, or bringing 'em by, and I sort of remember that growing up over the years.  He was very popular.  People loved him.  Eventually, Dr. Martin retired, and Dad was there alone and stayed there for many, many years at that location 'til he moved to another location on Scottwood Avenue in Toledo, which was a couple miles away.
Story_ID: 643374
Speaker 1: Those were my best years, was when--in Toledo [Ohio] growing up were my best years because it was just a wonderful time growing up in that neighborhood in Toledo 'cause it was a neighborhood where--it was much like Madison [Indiana], where all the black folk--it was, it was, you know, black folks--no matter your education or your position in life, you know, you lived in the same neighborhood with everybody else that was African American.  So next door to us on one side was a factory worker--a family of eighteen kids lived in that household--eighteen.  On the other side of the--was Mr. DeBoe [ph.] and--Mr. and Mrs. DeBoe.  Mr. DeBoe was a guitar, blues guitar player.  Played at night clubs in Detroit [Michigan] and Chicago [Illinois] and Cleveland [Ohio], Columbus [Ohio], you know, Toledo--travel.  He was a very excellent blues guitarist, Mr. DeBoe.  And then across the street was the mailman, the preacher was over there, and down the street was somebody that washed cars for a living.  Down the street there was a couple folks that didn't have, never have a job (laughter)--little small jobs, and then for weeks they didn't have jobs.  Then, down the street was a lawyer, black lawyer, across the street from him was an artist.  It was, you know, you know, it didn't matter your position in life, who you were, what your bank account was.  Black folks lived in the same neighborhood, and we all took care of each other.  When I was bad, which was often--when I did something wrong, when me and my boys and my brothers [Jeffrey Coleman and David Coleman] and sister [Linda Coleman], you know, there, the mothers, along the way, would wear me out before I got home, and then I'd get worn out again when I got home.  And we all kind of raised each other.  It was, it was a great environment to grow up in and, so it was much like Madison.
Speaker 2: So what side of town is this in Tole- is Toledo--demographically, is there a black side of town or several pockets (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was, this was the black, this was the black side of town (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what were they calling it?  Was it--
Speaker 1: It didn't really have a name, but it was on Prospect [Avenue], Woodruff [Avenue], Forest Avenue, Lincoln [Avenue], Norwood [Avenue], Palmwood [Avenue], Dorr [Street]-Detroit [Avenue] area--
Speaker 2: Was it north, Toledo east, west?
Speaker 1: It was like in the center of the city.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right in the center of the city.  Right outside of downtown.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right outside the Art Museum [Toledo Museum of Art, Toledo, Ohio], which is a great art museum, but it was all in that area.  And this area really didn't have a name growing up.  It might have a name now [Roosevelt, Toledo, Ohio].  I lived at 1135 Prospect Avenue.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I would, and I, to this day, go by and go visit my old home, and walk up and down my street to remember all the good times growing up there, and I take my kids now, you know.  I take 'em--they're all--my kids are all adult now.  But we'd walk up and down the street and I'd tell 'em stories about who lived here, who lived there, what we did, the fun times, the good times, the bad times, you know.  It was just a marvelous--I had a, I had the best childhood imaginable, and my brothers and sister.
Story_ID: 643375
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells growing up?  Sights--kids, you know.  My house--my father [John Coleman] and mother's [Joan Hughes Coleman] house was the community center practically, and we'd have dozens, literally dozens of people--kids--at our house all the time.  And lots of noise, a lot of people--lots of noise of all of us, all of our friends, you know.  My sister [Linda Coleman] had her five or six friends, I had ten or twenty, you know.  My brother [Jeffrey Coleman] had his, you know, five or six--ten, and little David [David Coleman] had a few of 'em and, you know, they'd--our house was the house, and in a one mile reach (laughter), every parent said, "Oh, we're going over Coleman's house."  "Oh, okay, all right.  We'll see you tomorrow."  And it was truly a community center.  So my memory of sight was just a lot of children our age, running around playing, doing stuff, riding bikes, having fun, playing baseball, playing football, getting in trouble, doing mischievous stuff, and it was wonderful.  Sounds--lots of noise, lots of kids, lots of people all the time, all the time, you know.  Sitting on the back porch or front porch--just lots of people all the time.  Conversation--talking.  Not so much of that happens anymore--everybody's watching TV.  My dad didn't like us watching TV that much.  I liked to watch TV.  He didn't like us watching, he wanted us to have communication--talk.  Food--the smell of food--my mother cooking all the time 'cause there were so many kids around.  Fried chicken, and the smell, the smell of food always, you know.  Somewhere, somebody's cooking.  "Oh, Miss Brown [ph.] got some, Miss Brown got some--something going on.  She got some--," it's usually chicken, "chicken?  Let's go over there."  We'd all go on the back porch, about ten of us.  "What you got to eat, Miss Brown?"  "Come on in."  We all come in, sit around--little small kitchen--eat her out of house and home.  Or my house--eat us out of house and home, all us boys.  We'd go down to Woodruff [Avenue]--my friend, Eugene Duffy--eat, eat, eat them out of house and home.  Lot of basketball playing, lots of basketball.
Speaker 1: Was it mostly outdoors or--
Speaker 2: Outdoor activities, yeah, outdoor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: We were always outdoors, always outdoors, you know.  Couldn't fit us all in- indoors, all of us.  There were hordes of us, you know.  There was, it was just fun.
Story_ID: 643376
Speaker 1: Was there a particular strip in To- Toledo [Ohio] that the black community had businesses in?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Like in--yeah.
Speaker 2: Dorr Street.  Dorr Street and--
Speaker 1: D-O-O-R [sic.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Detroit [Avenue].  Dorr, Detroit area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: D-O-O-R and Detroit.  Down, up and down Detroit and Dorr Street.  Now my father [John Coleman] and--was also entrepreneurial and--I'll get to that.  Remind me to get to that.  But my father required of us kids to--didn't want us to feel privileged 'cause we were doctor's children and was very careful about us not being spoiled or perceived to be spoiled and expected us to work at a very young age.  And my first job--you all right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, just looking for my glasses.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You can keep going.
Speaker 2: You got your glasses?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: They're here somewhere.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: There they are right there (gestures).  Ty [Tyneisha Harden], can you get him the glasses?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I don't want to--
Speaker 2: It's all right.
Speaker 1: --have her look for that but thank you, thank you.
Speaker 2: My first job was, I think, around nine or ten years old and--me and my brother Jeff [Jeffrey Coleman]--and we worked at the black pharmacy on Dorr and Detroit--Mr. Umbles [Clayton Umbles]--Umbles' Pharmacy [Umbles' Drew-Hale Pharmacy, Toledo, Ohio] on Dorr and Detroit, and on Detroit and I forget the side street.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Woodruff [Avenue].
Speaker 1: This is '64 [1964], '65 [1965] about?
Speaker 2: Probably--something like that.
Speaker 1: You were like eleven or twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Man, I was probably--I was younger than that.
Speaker 1: Younger than that?
Speaker 2: I was ten or eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ten or eleven.
Speaker 1: So '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Mr. Umbles, you know, he was very entrepreneurial.  He owned a number of buildings, apartments, and my job was to clean 'em out.  When tenants would leave, I'd go in and sweep it, clean it, wash it down, sometimes paint.  My first exposure to politics was Mr. Umbles rented one of his storefronts to a guy by the name of Casey Jones--oh, who's running for office--and my job was to clean it out.  It was a mess.  And I remember I didn't like that job very much, but I had to clean out that office and I said, "Is this what politics is all about?"   Casey Jones--he was running for office.  I don't know if he won that first time or not.  This is the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: This is a black politician?
Speaker 2: Black politician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, black politician.  And, so Dorr was the--Dorr and Detroit area was where all the black folks were commercially.  I don't think Detroit institutions--or the storefronts are--they're all gone--demolished--every single last one of 'em, I think.
Speaker 1: When you look back on it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But there was, there was restaurants, there was--and Detroit is all the restaurants, clubs, there was a school, Lincoln School [Lincoln Elementary School, Toledo, Ohio], that I went to, barber shops, banks.  Doctor Adams [ph.] lived two doors down from us at his office on Dorr Street.  I remember that.  But it was bustling, and I remember going over there all the time.  We lived about a--two blocks away from Dorr and Detroit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I walked over there all the time, whether my parents knew or not (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was the place to be, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the place to hang out.
Story_ID: 643377
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I went to Lincoln, Lincoln grade school [Lincoln Elementary School, Toledo, Ohio], which was down the street from us on Lincoln [Avenue], and it was actually around the corner, and that's where I learned how to read.  I remember my first, one of my teachers, Miss Didier--had a crush on her.  I won the reading contest 'cause I read all the books I was supposed to read.  I read 'em--more books than anybody else, so my prize was to go--she would take us to a bookstore and buy a book, and what I thought was so great.  So I went to the bookstore and she bought me a book, 'Green Eggs and Ham' [Dr. Seuss].  I remember getting that book.  She bought that book for me.  I was very proud of that book.
Speaker 1: It's a Dr. Seuss class- classic.
Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. Seuss classic.  I picked it out.  And I remember walking back and forth to school, sometimes taking detours.  You know, those days as a young kid, you know, how old am I?  First, second grade walking back and forth to school.  I don't know if we do that today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--probably not in some--it depends on the neighbor- well, probably not most of the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was about a--I took my time getting home sometimes (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this was about 1960 when you're in the first grade I guess.  You were born in '54 [54], right?
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], yeah, so first grade, first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so you were six years old around 1960.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I walked to school by myself.
Speaker 1: So did your brothers go with you?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Jeff [Jeffrey Coleman] was too young (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they weren't in yet, right?  That's right.
Speaker 2: And then first, second and third grade I went there, I remember getting out pf first, second and third.  And then my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] put us into a Catholic school--St. Angela Hall, in Toledo [Ohio].  There, they'd drop us off every day--take us to school every, each and every day, fourth and fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother do it because she thought it was a better education?
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: 'Cause--
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: You all weren't Catholic, were you?
Speaker 2: No, but she was Catholic.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: My father [John Coleman] was Baptist, she was Catholic, and that may be the reason, that may be the reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She wasn't a devout Catholic, but she was Catholic enough (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now was either school integrated?  I mean was--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: In fact, it was about 50/50, you know.  50 percent black, 50 percent white.
Speaker 1: At Lincoln and at--
Speaker 2: No, at Lincoln it was 100 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At St. Angela Hall it was about 50/50--it's my recollection.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe blacks--there may have been more black kids than white there, actually in St. Angela Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, history.  And I read a lot.  It really advanced my reading when I got into reading Greek mythology or getting a book--big, big, big book.  I still have it, actually.  I checked it out of (pronunciation) Toledo Public Library [Toledo Lucas County Public Library, Toledo, Ohio], and they're probably still looking for it, but I have it to this very day, and it has all the Greek mythology stories in it with pictures, and I must have been second, third grade or something like that and maybe, maybe older but, but that's where I really kind of latched onto reading in history and frankly, I think because of that book, that one book, I became enthralled with history and then ancient history as well, and I remember testing out of history at University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio].  I had a graduate course in ancient history.  And then in high school [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio], I was taking a senior history class, as a freshman, and I was the best student in the class.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the book--it might have been 'Bulfinch's Mythology' [Thomas Bulfinch].  Is that it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  (Unclear) my parents [Joan Hughes Coleman and John Coleman] have it someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I remember that, but, okay.  So that's interesting.
Story_ID: 643378
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in el- elementary school?
Speaker 2: Miss Didier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Miss Didier.
Speaker 1: D-I-D-I-E-R?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  Miss Didier.  She's no longer living.  Miss Mackey [ph.], Mrs. Mackey, remember Mrs. Mackey.  And I really didn't have any favorite teachers after that.
Speaker 1: So those two were both at Lincoln [Lincoln Elementary School, Toledo, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Very young.
Speaker 1: Were they at Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you had like nuns at--I guess at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nuns, I don't remember any of the nuns.
Speaker 1: --St. Angela Hall [Toledo, Ohio].
Speaker 2: I don't remember any of the nuns.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: Only nun I remember is when the nun that my brother [Jeffrey Coleman], who was in the second grade, wanted to use the bathroom and the nun said you could not use the bathroom and, so my brother did his business in his pants, in his chair in class, and my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] came to the school with a bucket of water and, after school, poured it on the nun and made her sit there for about an hour and to let her understand how long her son had to sit in his situation and made her sit there, sat there with her, said, "You will not stand up until I tell you to."  She poured a bucket of water right on her.
Speaker 1: Now you said your mother was tough.
Speaker 2: She's tough, she's--tough lady.  And I think when my brother wanted to go to the bathroom next time, she let him go.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's int- that sounds like tough.  I wouldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's tough, she's very tough.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois], she's very Chicago tough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't ask you for an example when you said it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well (laughter)--
Speaker 1: But, now we have one, and it's a good one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laugher) You got one.
Speaker 1: It was a good one.
Speaker 2: How tough is she?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's kind of what she does (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, she was fierce in terms of her family and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was.  She's fierce lady, she loves her family, loved her family and she'd do anything for her kids, she was a great role model for us.  She was, she was a determined woman, very determined.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, and she, you know, no matter how big we got, she could always wrestle with us (laughter).  We always deferred to her.
Speaker 1: She wasn't intimidated by the fact she had boys.
Speaker 2: No, she's not intimidated big, burly boys.  Big, burly boys didn't intimidate her.  It made her even more--let's say--aggressive's not the word, but it made her even more determined.
Story_ID: 643379
Speaker 1: Now what other activities do you--were you involved in in school?  Were you in the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything like that, or Little League or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did Boy Scouts, Cub Scouts as a kid but, you know, we weren't wanting of activities.  I mean we were very creative as children.  And again, you know, our house was the community center, and it was the place where everybody got their start in Toledo [Ohio].  Everybody was there, and it was, it was truly a recreation center, a community center for all kids in the region, in several block area.  I run into people, you know, fifty years later.  "I remember being over at your house and--." I don't even remember the kids, you know.  I don't remember 'em, you know.  We've changed over the years; we look different.
Story_ID: 643380
Speaker 1: Was your father [John Coleman] involved in NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or any of the civil rights organizations?
Speaker 2: You know, more my mother than my father.  My father was busy making a living.  Now he had a big heart, and he started an org--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The mic [microphone], the mic is slipping.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOCE):  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My mother was more engaged in community activities than my father, but my father had a big, huge heart, and he started the Cordelia Martin health clinic [Cordelia Martin Community Health Center, Toledo, Ohio] for poor folks, so he did his own thing, and he was one of several, but a leader in pulling that together.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now that was--was that named after a relative of Dr. Martin [ph.]?
Speaker 1: I don't--
Speaker 2: Cordelia Martin.
Speaker 1: It could've been, could've been.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It could've been.  It was named after an African American.  Could've been Dr. Martin, could've been.  I don't remember Dr. Martin's first name.  I remember his children 'cause we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah, or maybe somebody that he, that Dr. Martin--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Some relative of Dr. Martin's I'm thinking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cou- Could've been.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it's a woman's name, so I'm trying to think of--well, it u- usually is, anyway.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But Cordelia Martin, the Cordelia Martin health center still lives, still survives, it still is operational.  But he started it.  He was the founder, one of the, one of the founders of that center.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's a health clinic for poor folks.  And that he would volunteer some of his time, as well as establishing the existence of it--would practice there from time to time.  People'd come see him.  And my mother was involved in things, really in, later in life, but she always had an opinion about stuff.  My mother always had an opinion about things, and (laughter) I remember once, 1968 riots in Detroit [Michigan].  Was it '68 [1968]?  There were some riots in Toledo [Ohio], too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And not to the degree as they were in Detroit.  Detroit eclipsed Toledo, and Detroit's right across the street from Toledo.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about forty miles away?
Speaker 1: Yeah, not very far at all.  So (laughter), I remember in the car, driving along, my mother was driving along and somebody was getting ready to throw a brick through her window--a rioter.  She rolled the window down, she said, "Look, you throw this brick at my car, I'm going to whip your ass right here!"  They backed off.  "Yes, Miss Coleman [Joan Hughes Coleman]."  But they were engaged, you know.  My father--they both were engaged in ways.
Story_ID: 643381
Speaker 1: I remember Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Toledo [Ohio] before then, before '68 [1968], 'cause he was assassinated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Right.  On this--
Speaker 1: Actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) this day--
Speaker 1: This day--
Speaker 2: --actually--today, yeah.
Speaker 1: This day in '68 [1968].  I remember when he was a younger person, he came to Scott High School [Jesup Wakeman Scott High School, Toledo, Ohio], and I remember the--he was in the gym and the whole community, black community--came out, and several thousand people squeezed in the gym on little steel chairs, the fold up chairs.  And I remember standing on the fold up chair 'cause I couldn't see, and I remember it was just an exciting time 'cause he preached, he spoke, and while I didn't understand everything he said, I said, "This is a great man.  He's doing a great thing.  He's helping us some kind of way."  And I remember in those days where Dr. King and--would pay for his next trip, by the trip, by what he was doing there--said, "Pass the bucket."  And in this case, the bucket was a steel--literally, a steel bucket was passed person to person, and it came to me.  I was standing on the chair and I, and everybody, and there was all this quiet money in the bucket--dollars--and it was filled with ten dollars, five dollars, one dollar--lots of money in this big steel bucket.  Came to me, and I reached in one pocket, I felt lint, reached in the other pocket, felt a nickel.  I took out the nickel, dropped it in the bucket, and I heard it hit the bottom of the bucket, clang at the bottom of the bucket, and I passed the bucket along.  I was so proud, so proud to make a contribution to this effort of saving people.
Story_ID: 643382
Speaker 1: Now do you remember watching the March on Washington when you, when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I do, I do remember that.  I remember--
Speaker 1: --I guess, you were about nine.  You would have been about nine years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember that, and my father [John Coleman]--that was one time my father says, "You need to watch TV.  This is--you gotta watch this."  And we were watching TV upstairs in the family room and he said, "You gotta watch this.  You ain't gonna watch anything else but this."  And we watched it and it was, we talked and describing things during the broadcast on TV, you know.  It was, it was news.  I remember it was live or it was on the news, but I remember watching it and I remember my father was just talking about why this is important, what's going on here, and all that; remember it very well.
Story_ID: 643383
Speaker 1: I also remember the assassination of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] as well.
Speaker 2: Right, that was the same year, yeah--same--
Speaker 1: Yeah, same period, yeah.  And on that front, we were coming from St. Angela Hall [Toledo, Ohio], and we're on a bus that time.  That time, we're on a bus coming home, and the bus driver told us all to hide under the chair, the bench in the, in the, in--because we were about to have a nuclear war and if you--and, so we all got underneath the chair in the bus, and drove home, then we--guy--he said, "Colemans, you're home!"  Get out underneath (claps), run out, on the day that he was assassinated.  And I remember watching the funeral as well--at home as well.  My father [John Coleman] made us watch that, too.
Story_ID: 643384
Speaker 1: I also remember, really--I talked to about my first encounter with politics was Casey Jones?  I think my first encounter with politics was when my father [John Coleman] was dressing us, dressing me to go to school.  As a very young age, I was always lazy and--take me a long time to get dressed, you know, brush my teeth and I was--took me an hour to eat, you know, play a- play around and, so I remember my father said, "Michael [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman], you gotta stop this."  "Stop what?"  "You need to get someplace on time, you gotta take fifteen minutes, fifteen minutes to get dressed to go to school."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "Because," he said, "it takes the president--it took President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]," Ike, "fifteen minutes to get dressed, and he's the president.  If he can get dressed in fifteen minutes, you can get dressed in fifteen minutes."  And from that point on, I got dressed in fifteen minutes from that age.  I remember that.  Anyway, I'm--
Speaker 2: Have you done that the rest of your life?
Speaker 1: No (laughter).
Speaker 2: Fifteen minutes--okay.
Speaker 1: No, I'm a fast dresser when I'm ready to go, though.  But I think about it every once in a while.  That was my first memory of an elected official, when my father says--and wanting to be like somebody.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I got dressed that fast.
Speaker 2: I know it's only--he was a, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected when you were about six, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You see, but Eisenhower was a general in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I loved, and this was after--I think while Kennedy was president, and my father was in the Army, and I liked Army things as a little kid, so that would, that impressed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you used that to inspire you.
Speaker 1: That impressed me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 643385
Speaker 1: I'm thinking about the election of 1960 was one of the most--was on tele- the debates were on television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the first time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And there was a big--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --national spectacle.
Speaker 2: I remember, I remember that.
Speaker 1: Do you?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I do remember that, I do remember that as a little kid.  I remember observing it, you know?  Not fully understanding it but observing it--I remember that.
Speaker 1: It was one of the last times that the black community was kind of split on who the candidate was.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there were black folks that worked for Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], and I know those were--who backed Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] in those days and had--Republicans were a little different from the way they are today so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there a debate in your household about whether Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] or Nixon--
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think my parents supported Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]--I think.  Not sure about that but I'm pretty sure my dad [John Coleman]--'cause he's [U.S.] Army.  But I think when Kennedy came along, they were supporting Kennedy; and I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were supporting Kennedy.
Story_ID: 643386
Speaker 1: Were there any role models in the community in terms of being a lawyer?  I mean did you, did you look at that as a career when you were coming up, as something that you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually wanted to be like Thurgood Marshall.  He was my idol.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father [John Coleman] and mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] play a role in introducing him as a role model to you?
Speaker 2: I just read about him, followed him closely and I, you know, our community, we talked about this tall, black man beating segregation and became solicitor general under Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and then became supreme court justice.  He was just, I was born the same year that Brown versus Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was established by the [U.S.] Supreme Court, overthrew segregation in public high schools.  That same year I was born and for some reason, I just--I've always wanted to be like Thurgood Marshall coming up.  He caught my attention as a young person.  You just talked about him--on the porch, on the back porch, on the, you know (claps), hanging out with folks.  "Thurgood Marshall, Thurgood Marshall, Thurgood Marshall."  I read about him--I started reading about him.
Story_ID: 643387
Speaker 1: Now in high school [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio], now did you run for office in high school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I ran for student body something (laughter).  Student body something, something or another.
Speaker 1: Did you win?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I won, I won, I won.  I didn't know what the hell I was doing, but I won (laughter).  I enjoyed it, it was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said the population mix was about, was it in, high school was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now in high school, in high school--that was grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was St. Angela Hall [Toledo, Ohio], then I went to a very exclusive middle school.  It's called Maumee Valley Country Day School [Toledo, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Maumee Valley Country Day School?
Speaker 2: Maumee Valley Country Day School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a--very few minorities in that school, and it was mostly very wealthy white folks in that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you graduate from high school from that school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I was there middle school.
Speaker 1: Middle school, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And it's--best school in that part of the State of Ohio, Maumee Valley Country Day School--very high standards and very academic.  It was, it was the Harvard of schools--for high, for--
Speaker 1: Middle school.
Speaker 2: Middle school and high school.  It had a high school, too.
Speaker 1: Did--okay.
Speaker 2: So I went to middle school there and--
Speaker 1: Did you keep up with the work pretty good there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I excelled. Okay.
Speaker 1: I excelled there, played sports there.  I realized that, you know, I never considered our family as well to do, although we're--I'm a doctor's kid, but we didn't act that way, nor did my father [John Coleman] or mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] treat us that way.  You know, a very strong work ethic so really--and we lived in the hood as well.  So the exposure to white folks was interesting. I mean, I'm just as good as these folks, and I remember going over to, you know, there's a--growing up, you know.  Going over their houses and--beautiful palaces (makes noise).  Unbelievable!  But I realized, you know, hey, I'm smart as these guys.  They're no smarter than I am.  And I really got my competitive nature in those, you know, six, seventh and eighth grade--that's when I really became competitive in that environment where it was competitive.  Competition was encouraged.  Competition, intellectual competition was encouraged, and academic competition was encouraged.
Story_ID: 643388
Speaker 1: From there, I went to St. John's High School [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio], which is a all-boys Catholic high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's the Jesuit high school, right?
Speaker 1: Jesuit high school, correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now is there a reason why you didn't stay and graduate from Maumee [Maumee Valley Country Day School, Toledo, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: You know, I think it was because some of the wealth was over the top for me, and my parents [Joan Hughes Coleman and John Coleman] insisted on strong education, and they'd say I had to go someplace where the education was top notch, so I said, I--"Can I go to St. John's?"  You know?  And, but I did well at Maumee Valley but I, what I saw were some of the black folks, the few black folks that were losing their way, losing their identity--very bright, very capable and I looked at that--some of the folks older than me and, you know, it was at a time in the '60s [1960s] where you starting to feel proud about being black and wouldn't get that feeling there.  It was a--so I felt like I was gonna lose my way, and I needed to--or not lose my way, lose my identity.  So I said, "Let me go (background noise) someplace where I think I can retain it while getting a good education," and my parents let me go to St. John's High School.
Speaker 2: St. John's near downtown Toledo [Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was--all kids had to be bused there.  It was fairly well integrated.  Not real integrated.  I mean not--I'd say there was--about 30 percent of the students were African American--all boys, all boys environment, which was good.  Same sex education is a good thing.  It's a good thing, especially in high school.  And it was a good environment.  St. John's was a very good school for me--athletically competitive, academically competitive.  Strong religious values were instilled in all of us.  That was a good environment.  And I could go back to--and I, and I felt like I could maintain because there were other black folks there.  There wasn't any at Maumee Valley--very few--a handful.  But here there were, and I felt like I could maintain some identity from folks that I wasn't getting at Maumee Valley.
Story_ID: 643389
Speaker 1: So were there any teachers or mentors at St. John's [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio]?  I mean that stood out, you know.
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really, no, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really took mentorship into my, from my neighborhood, my family, father [John Coleman], mother [Joan Hughes Coleman], and people I read about, people I read about, people I said, "I wanna be like that person."
Speaker 1: So who are you reading about other than Thurgood Marshall?  We already men- mentioned him but who was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Malcolm X, you know, reading about where I could.
Speaker 1: So this is about the time the autobiography ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley] was published?
Speaker 2: This is--when was that?  That was in, was that in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Probably sixty- I think it came out right after he--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]?
Speaker 1: --was killed--'65 [1965], '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it got more and more popular, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Biographies of people, you know, presidents, people I just read about and say, "I--that's pretty cool.  I like that, I like that."  I thought about, at one time, being a architect as well, and I started reading about them--or an artist.  So I can't say that I had mentorship outside my family.  I really can't say that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Active mentorship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's still--the community is really the base that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the community was my mentor.
Story_ID: 643390
Speaker 1: Now did you date girls from the neighborhood, I guess in the?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had a girlfriend at Rogers High School [Robert S. Rogers High School Toledo, Ohio], and we dated all through high school.  Her name was Sarah [ph.].  She's now a steel magnate (laughter).  She owns a few businesses--steel companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did you play sports in high school [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I played football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Played football and a lot of intramural sports, but I loved football.  Ran track.
Speaker 1: What position in football?
Speaker 2: Tailback.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a key position in high school 'cause--
Speaker 2: Key position.
Speaker 1: There aren't not a lot of great passing attacks in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were running tailback--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before--okay.
Speaker 2: I thought I was pretty good.
Speaker 1: Did you all do any good in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were average, you know.  I mean my team, you know, St. John's High School football is usually a contender for the state championship, but during the years I was there, we were pretty average.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were a five hundred team.  But it was the fun of it, the camaraderie of it, and I thought I was pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any offers to go to college to play?
Speaker 2: You know, Michigan looked at me, Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] looked at me, but I injured my knee pretty badly as a senior.  Actually, Michigan was much closer to Toledo [Ohio].  Most people in Toledo identified with the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] than Ohio State.  Other schools, smaller schools, looked at us, looked at me--Toledo [University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio], Bowling Green [Bowling Green State University, Bowling Green, Ohio].  But didn't go anywhere because I injured my knee pretty badly my senior year in high school.
Story_ID: 643391
Speaker 1: But you were academically doing fairly well anyways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was, I was a B student.  Probably could've been an A, easily become an A student, but a B student.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so when you were in high school [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: And I worked, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Worked all through high school.
Speaker 1: Now we have here you worked at a Kroger's [The Kroger Company], is that it?
Speaker 2: I worked at a Kroger's, I worked at my father's [John Coleman] rib joint, which is right next to a nightclub, the Green Light nightclub [Toledo, Ohio] and a rib joint.  My father owned the rib joint and my father's partner owned the nightclub, and it was part of the Chitlin' Circuit, so Bobby "Blue" Bland would regularly come through, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King would regularly come through, many other names I can't remember off the top of my head right now would come through the Green Light Nightclub, and we shared the same wall as the Ribs, L-T-D, Ribs LTD [Toledo, Ohio].  And at the age of thirteen, fourteen, I was cooking ribs, selling ribs and preparing ribs 'til the wee hours of the morning.  People leave the night club, they come next door to buy ribs from me.  I had the best ribs in town.  Folks come from Detroit [Michigan] to eat my ribs--they were that good.
Speaker 1: You say yours 'cause you were cooking 'em, right?
Speaker 2: I was cooking 'em, and the sauce was a secret sauce--family recipe, and I was pretty damn good, good rib cooker--barbequer and, but I learned a lot in that period of time.  People come next door and they talk to us, "Go see Michael [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman]," you know, and it was interesting time (laughter).
Speaker 1: I can imagine people coming in late night.  I remember the days and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: You ever have any trouble late at night like that?
Speaker 2: We were robbed once.  I remember that, and that was not a pleasant experience.  And, you know, every once in a while there were some hookers that would come from next door, at least, I--in hindsight, I see they were hookers.  They'd always try me to give 'em some ribs (laughter), by leaning over the counter, being--revealing their stuff.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I never gave 'em ribs (laughter).
Speaker 1: You had inte- integrity (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, integrity (claps), right.
Story_ID: 643392
Speaker 1: As mayor now [of Columbus, Ohio], now one of the key concerns in every city is crime and that sort of thing.  Di- when you look back on Toledo [Ohio] in those days, what was it like in the black community?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, growing up, it felt safe.  I had a pretty free reign to walk, do anything I--we wanted to do on our bikes.  Probably the worse trouble I got into was riding our bikes out to the suburbs one day.  We said we were gonna ride our bikes and see how far we could ride 'em and we rode like ten, fifteen, twenty miles outside of Toledo.  Come nine, ten [o'clock] at night, we weren't at home, you know.  We gotta be home by the time the lights got dark, you know, dim or the lights came on--we had to be in the house.  That wasn't the case.  We got in some pretty big trouble for riding our bikes way out in the hinterlands.
Speaker 1: So you got more in trouble at home for doing it than you did when you actually went out there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, you got in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean, and like I said, you know, the people took care of each other.  We all took care of each other and, you know, the incidents along the way of crime, you know.  It's hard to get away with it 'cause we'd all tell on, tell on each other.  "Hey, you did what?  You what?  You did what?  You broke into So and So's car?  I'm going tell your mama."  And guess what?  They never broke into a car again.  So it was this family environment in those days where, when there was crime, it got nipped in the bud 'cause we always took care of each other--everybody did.  We just took care of each other.  And that doesn't happen too much anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right now I don't think people sometimes even know who their neighbors are.  Right now, you know, crime takes place, there's no conversation with the police.  The police are the bad guys and, you know, everybody keeps a secret, you know.  Somebody's--a shooting?  "I didn't see it, I didn't see it."  But back in those days, we all took care of each other, and with--somebody moved outta line, they got back in line because that was the expectation everybody had for each other.  You fall outta line, you get back in line, you know.  From parents, from kids, from people down the street, you know.  We all had that same expectation--that doesn't exist anymore.
Story_ID: 643393
Speaker 1: So on the verge of graduation [from St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio], you gotta choose a college.  How did you end up choosing University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I was accepted to a number of schools.  The story is this.  At St. John's High School we had counselors, and I had a counselor that I went to, and the counselor told me that I should not go to college, that I should go to a trade school, and I said, "Well, why is that?"  He said, "Well, you just should."  I said, "Well, I got, you know, B, B plus average, you know, I'm in student council, I'm doing this, I'm playing football, I got all this, this, and this."  Well, you know, he said, "You should go to a trade school.  People like you should go to a trade school."  And I told my parents, and my father [John Coleman] said, "You going to college, and you're gonna apply to every college you can think of."  And my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman]--both said that.  And I did.  I applied to lots of colleges.  Around ten, fifteen of 'em--accepted to every one of them.  Every one of them I applied to I was accepted to--Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]--and it just goes on and on.  And I brought back with me, in a brown paper sack, all the acceptance letters and laid 'em on the desk of the counselor and said, "I'm going to college, boom, you said I shouldn't."  And I, and he also said I wouldn't be accepted.  I accepted every one of 'em.  I remember doing that just to get spite, just to lay it up there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now let me just interject this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for anybody watching this.  We have maybe--out of two thousand interviews, I know we've at least got a hundred bad counselor stories, where a white counselor tells a black student they shouldn't go to college.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's exactly what happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, so anybody that searches the whole collection later on can find lots of these stories.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they don't, they all seem to be unfounded, you know, suggestions made based on what?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that's a, that's a--yeah, it's the same thing I've heard from many people.
Speaker 2: I was told, yeah, I was told not to go to college but to apply for a trade school 'cause people like me should go to a trade school, and I will never be accepted to a college.  I was accepted at every single col- fifteen colleges, I think, I was accepted to.
Speaker 1: Now did he know your father was an M.D.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't matter.  It don't matter.  It did not matter what my father was or what I was, you know.  It didn't matter--that's the reality of the situation.  Years later, I retold that story when I ran for mayor [of Columbus, Ohio].  I spoke about it 'cause I spoke about it someplace, and the reporter listened to me.  He went back and talked to my high school and they said it never happened.  The guy's dead now.  He's dead by then, you know, deceased a long time ago.  And it did happen.  It absolutely did happen.  I'll never forget it.  But anyway, it's beside the story.
Story_ID: 643394
Speaker 1: So I was--considered--going to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] was my first choice, but I looked at the price tag.  It was five thousand dollars a year.  I look at it now, it's like fifty [fifty thousand dollars], right?  But it was five thousand--said, "Man, that's a lot of money."
Speaker 2: That's out of state, state tuition, right?
Speaker 1: Out of state tuition at the time.  And, so I almost went there and, but I was concerned about two things--the cost, then I was concerned about my mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] showing up unannounced (laughter), unannounced.  'Cause I considered myself kind of a ladies' man, a, you know, not, you know, not a ladies' man, but I didn't want my mother to interfere with my dating, my dating and, but I could envision my mother knocking on the door and--unannounced.  So I said, "No, why don't I do this?  Why don't I stay in state and go to the furthest college I can go to?"  That was University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], 'cause it's not so easy to knock on the door and there she's standing, you know.  So went to University of Cincinnati.  That's how I got there.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, University of Cincinnati.  That's a--well, tell us about what it was like.
Speaker 1: It was interesting.  University of Cincinnati is a very urban environment, very urban school.  I enjoyed being there, you know.  I remember (laughter) the first night when my parents dropped me off, you know, I went out and bought a bottle of Boone's Farm, Boone's Farm, right.  I also--no, it wasn't Boone's Farm, it was MD 20/20, MD 20/20--a little flask.  I just took a little nip.  Tastes like grape juice.
Speaker 2: Was this your first taste--
Speaker 1: My first, my first, my first taste, you know.  I said, "Hey, it's great being in college" (laughter).  So, but I liked University of Cincinnati.  I met my, one of my best friends in life really, on the first weekend there, named Tyrone Yates.  He's now a municipal court judge there, all--former state representative as well and member of city council [Cincinnati City Council] as well.
Speaker 2: Is he related to Tony Yates, who was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, not--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not related, but they know each other.  He grew up in Cincinnati [Ohio] and, so we quickly became friends, and to this day we're close--very, very close, and he was a very, he's very unusual person then, and of course that's carried on throughout the years, still unusual (laughter).  But we met my first weekend, and we became roommates, and he ran for student council president, I ran for student council vice president, and he won the presidency, I lost it, lost the vice presidency.  But I liked University of Cincinnati.  I, you know, it was, it was a big environment, big school and, so sometimes I felt a little, that it was a little bit too big for me, you know.  St. John's [St. John's Jesuit High School; St. John's Jesuit High School and Academy, Toledo, Ohio] was a small school, you know, intimate, lot of hands on with people--teachers.  Lot of hands on activity there.  In the University of Cincinnati, you're on your own, and I did real well my first year--slamming.  My second year was awful. Almost didn't get through it.  In fact, I did so poorly my first quarter my second year--came home and I had dropped out of almost every class, and my father [John Coleman] was fit to be tied.  Fit to be tied--that's a whole 'nother story.  I straightened up quick, and from that point forward, I said, I promised I would graduate in four years.  I had one bad semester that put me behind significantly, and my grade point average dropped, and I worked my butt off, and I graduated in four years with a pretty good GPA [grade point average], a B, B type GPA.
Story_ID: 643395
Speaker 1: Now were you pledging during the time you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't pledge 'til I got out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was there a black student organization on campus [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was.  And another one of my friends, Mark Alexander, was head of it, and we were roommates at one time, too, for a short period.  He's from Cleveland [Ohio].  He's a teacher up in Cleveland, and he was head of the black student union.  It was called the Black Student Union [sic. United Black Association; United Black Student Association].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was involved in that, and I also was involved in a newspaper--the student newspaper called The News Record.  Where I wrote a number of articles for The News Record.
Story_ID: 643396
Speaker 1: What was your political orientation at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you a story.  I was looking for a summer job and I wanted to be engaged in public service and politics.  There was--a Republican [U.S.] Congress member had a internship available, and this may have been my freshman, between freshman and sophomore year [at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And I had one suit and it was a jeans suit, I had pretty long hair, pretty bushy, long hair, and in those days you wore high heels, you know, those platform shoes, right?  It was back in the day, in the '70s [1970s].  We laugh at it now, but it was the--it's what young folks wore back in those days.
Speaker 1: And the jeans suit, too, with some denim (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And a jeans suit--
Speaker 1: Those suits they even had three piece--
Speaker 2: Denim, denim jeans suit.
Speaker 1: Denim suits.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I wasn't so much into party stuff--Democrat, Republican, but I went to this Republican congressperson's office to get interviewed, and we're all sitting in there and there were other candidates.  They're in their nice suits and ties, you know, I'm--flower shirt (laughter).  I don't know what the hell I was thinking about but, and I came in and sat down.  About two minutes later I was escorted to the door.  "Thank you, we're not interested."  And I say, "I'm qualified as anybody--these other folks sitting up in here with the white shirts and ties and suits."  And these guys were Republican.  No wonder I didn't get hired.  I became a Democrat at that moment (laughter).  So that's how that happened.  So I became oriented towards a Democrat because I was shunned by the Republicans, and then as I got to understand the differences between the parties I was, I was a Democrat by nature anyway.
Speaker 1: But Democrats and Republicans in those days, in Ohio, I know, there were liberal Republicans still, in those days, I, as I recall.
Speaker 2: Well, but this Republican was not interested in a jean suited young African American with long hair.
Speaker 1: Now he would have been--be the antecedent of John Boehner, I guess, or someone, or--maybe.  I don't know if that is--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Is that the district (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's before, before his time.
Speaker 1: He would have been the predecessor of--
Speaker 2: Predecessor, predecessor, yeah.
Speaker 1: --of John Boehner, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he represents that--the northern part of Cincinnati [Ohio], I guess, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know this guy.  I think his name was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) southern part of Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: I think his name was Gradishar [ph.], maybe?
Speaker 1: Gradishar that sounds (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe.  I'll have to check that out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I'll have to go back and re-look at that.  I don't wanna give him a bad rap or a good rap (laughter)--depending on your perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he, did you ever get an internship with a politician in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did--the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio].
Story_ID: 643397
Speaker 1: All right is there anything we've--we need to talk about before we move you on?
Speaker 2: Well, just that the, during the summers there [at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], I worked for a youth program--me and Tyrone [Tyrone Yates], and a--called Upward Bound.  That's the name of the program, Upward Bound.  And I was a counselor for--every summer, and I was providing guidance to high school kids in college.  It was great.  I loved it.  I learned a lot, a lot about myself.
Speaker 1: So that's a local prop- program.  I mean, I mean it's a national pro- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a federal program.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a national program--
Speaker 2: Federal program.
Speaker 1: But implemented--
Speaker 2: And I met (unclear) Smith [ph.]--all kinds of folks.  I mean it was just really a good experience for me, really good experience for me and Tyrone.  We did everything together.  We, nothing we didn't do together.
Speaker 1: It was focused on bringing the high school kids from Cincinnati [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --area high school to--
Speaker 2: And they lived on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was in charge of 'em, a portion of 'em.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can we pause for a moment, we're getting too much sunlight on you.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Yeah, I see it.  Want me to move up?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, I think I can just raise this light.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got involved in some of the city council races, passed out literature--stuff like that, you know, in college.  Had great time, great time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, and your major was political science?
Speaker 2: Political science was my major.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Political science was my major.
Speaker 1: And you said you took some ancient history before you left school?
Speaker 2: Ancient history, political science, yeah.  I loved ancient history--still love it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't get as much time to read, you know?  I just kind of envision myself being a archaeologist at one point, you know, being a Indiana Jones type person, you know, before Indiana Jones was Indiana Jones, you know, but I ended up doing politics.  I also thought about being a writer and a reporter, and it was also during the--and a, and I reported for The News Record, which was a college newspaper.
Story_ID: 643398
Speaker 1: Now did you participate in Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] campaign or Ted Kennedy's [Edward M. Kennedy] in the, in '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Did not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --did not participate.  Did in the second go round, though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In '76 [1976], '76 [1976], yes, '76 [1976], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Though the first go round I did not, so that would have been in--what was it--the first time Carter ran.  What year was that?
Speaker 1: Carter ran in '77 [1977].  That was the only time he ran was in--no, it's seventy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: No, I guess he--no, didn't run in '76 [1976] and won in '76 [1976] and was president from '76 [sic. 1977] to '80 [sic. 1981]--
Speaker 2: Right, and lost in '80 [1980].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Because I was involved in the '80 [1980]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'80 [1980] race.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy six [1976] I was not.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I graduated from law, from undergrad school [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] in '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 643399
Speaker 1: Now did you know Jerry Springer, or did you know of him in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I did.
Speaker 1: And what--'cause he was a young politician, molded on the, in the way of the Kennedys (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think he was mayor at the time or a city council member [Cincinnati City Council] at the time.  And I remember he was quite a character.  I remember once he stole a bus.  He didn't steal it, but he was doing some kind of showing off a new bus for the new mass transit system, and I guess he started driving it and just kept driving it, you know.  I remember some checks he had written to a prostitute or something like that in Kentucky or something like that came out.  I remember his TV commercials--I remember that.  They were actually pretty good.  His TV commercials were pretty good for the day.  Yeah, I do remember him, I do remember him.
Story_ID: 643400
Speaker 1: I guess--
Speaker 2: The mayor was a guy by the name of Ted Berry--African American mayor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Theodore Berry, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first black mayor of Cincinnati [Ohio].  I remember him, I knew his son.  We were contemporaries, his son and us.
Speaker 1: That was an interesting time because you had like Carl Stokes as mayor of--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Cleveland [Ohio] in '68 [1968].  Now this is a long time before you got to college [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: But when you--
Speaker 2: But I remember when Carl Stokes became mayor because Toledo [Ohio] and Cleveland were, you know, it was a big deal.  I remember walking down the street, and I remember this so well, how--walking down Prospect [Avenue], we would talk about Carl Stokes.  "Can you believe it?  Black mayor.  Can you believe it?  A black mayor in Cleveland!"  It was an, it was an amazing feat.  It was the eighth wonder of the world for Carl Stokes to be mayor of Cleveland, and it was--I remembered everybody talking about it growing up in Toledo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the first may- black mayor of a major American city.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was, it was astonishing, astonishing.  I remember even--these are little memories coming back--seeing the first black person I saw on TV, and it was a commercial, a soap commercial on a Detroit [Michigan] station.  You could get Detroit TV stations in Toledo.  I said, "Dad [John Coleman]!  Come here!  Look!"  I remember it very well.  It was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days and--
Speaker 2: That was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in Cincinnati, James McGee [James H. McGee] was the mayor of Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: James McGee was the mayor of Dayton, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Theodore Berry then becomes the mayor of Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: That's right--Ted Berry.
Speaker 1: And, so, yeah.  So I don't know--
Speaker 2: Very honorable man.  Good man--both were.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And I idolized Berry because I was in undergraduate school in Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] while he was mayor.  It was, it was--black mayor of a city.  Big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Big deal.
Speaker 1: So do you think you would have paid as much attention to the mayoral politics or the mayor, the po- politics in the city if he had not been the mayor?
Speaker 2: No, I probably would have continued to 'cause I was interested in politics.  I was interested in politics--I paid attention to it, read the paper.  In fact, in undergraduate school--well, no, it was--in undergraduate school, I would cut out political cartoons of The New York Times and put 'em on the wall.  I would, I would put my favorite poem, put that on the wall in undergraduate school and in law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio].  My favorite poem was Robert Frost poem 'bout a walk in the woods.  "Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, and I took the one less traveled" ['The Road Not Taken'].  And that was my inspiration in undergraduate school and law school, and I started making up my own little sayings back in those days.  I remember in law school I wrote a saying I put up on the wall that--it said something like, "I can get up--," I slept late 'cause I stayed up late, and I said--write my little inspirational note, said, "I can get up in the morning at nine [o'clock] and be rested, or I can get up in the morning at six and be a lawyer."  And I'd put that up in my bathroom by the mirror--see it every morning, and that inspired me.  And, you know, so I was always kind of politically attuned anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd cut out little sayings, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] sayings; Malcolm X sayings, you know.  Put 'em up, you know, kind of just to inspire me to move forward, you know.
Story_ID: 643401
Speaker 1: Now when you were in Cincinnati [Ohio], had you met any black lawyers then that kind of, that you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dwight Tillery.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Dwight Tillery, he was a professor at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], then he later became mayor of Cincinnati.  Dean Temple [Ronald Temple] was the dean of the college, University College.  We would go--me and Tyrone [Tyrone Yates] would go over his house and eat him out of house and home, and he was kind of like a godfather for us, mentor for us--let's see.  What was the question?  Black lawyers?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Ted Berry would--I think he was a lawyer.  In college--the U.S. Marshal, I can't remember his name, was appointed by--must have been Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]--was black--out of Cincinnati.  And there were others.  Oh, Mallory [William L. Mallory, Sr.].  He wasn't a lawyer, he was a politician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a state rep [representative], and he also taught at the University of Cincinnati.  He's taught state and local government.  And took his class, and he was one of the deans of black elected officials in the state house [Ohio House of Representatives] at the time, and his son [Mark Mallory] is now the mayor of Cincinnati.  And I got a A out of his class, by the way (laughter).  So those are a lot of people to reach up and touch and emulate, and it, and it, and it made a difference for me.
Speaker 1: Now was Nathaniel Jones [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Jones] a federal judge then?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was it Nate Jones?  No, he was not then, he was not then.  There was--oh, gosh, what's his name?  He was solicitor general, African American, and I'll think of it here in a minute.  He was from Dayton [Ohio]--I mean he was--he's from Cincinnati-Dayton area, and he was solicitor general.  McCree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wade McCree [Wade H. McCree].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wade McCree, Wade McCree.  Highly regarded, very highly regarded.
Speaker 1: Now let's see, let's see--somebody else.  Oh, I was gonna ask you about the--did you attend, or were you aware of, at the time, the National Black Political Assembly?  I know they met in Ohio around 19--in Cincinnati in seventy- I believe it's in '74 [1974] or '5 [1975], I believe.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Maybe, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it may have formed out of that meeting in Gary, Indiana in '72 [1972], and they met like in Ohio in the late '70s [1970s].  I know I was at that one, but that, but it was in Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But it's, you know, it went under finally, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Over the years it didn't stay, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: For several years it was strong.
Story_ID: 643402
Speaker 1: Now did you get married in college, when you were in--at UC [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got married after law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, all right.  So at the end of--now how did you choose University of Dayton for law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, now as easy as it was to, for me to get into college, it was more difficult to get in a law school, and I didn't apply to very many of 'em, but a little story behind this one real quick--I'll just keep it short.  Tyrone [Tyrone Yates] and I wanted to change the world, so we rented--the day, the night before the Law School Admission Test [LSAT] exam, we rented documentary movies, the reel, those old reel to reels, on a series of books, I think, by Theodore White [Theodore H. White], on the making of the president.  And he wrote Eisenhower ['America in Search of Itself: The Making of the President 1956-1980'], Kennedy ['The Making of the President 1960'], Johnson ['The Making of the President 1964'], Nixon ['The Making of the President 1968'] and, for inspiration purposes, we were gonna watch all these doc- one hour documentaries, two hour documentaries, in our room the night before the LSAT.  So we watched 'em all, and went to sleep about six in the morning.  And this is a all day test.  You had to be at the exam place at eight o'clock.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: So we show up, get up, go over to take the exam at eight o'clock in the morning and, and it's all day long.  By eleven o'clock or twelve o'clock, I had fallen asleep (laughter) on LSAT day.  By 9:00 or 9:30, Tyrone had fallen asleep.  So while we were very inspired about the idea of changing the world 'cause we both wanted to be whatever--change the world, we're watching these movies to inspire us, to get us going.  We fell asleep during the test.  Now having said that, I did all right on the test, he did very bad on the test (laughter).  I slept through half the test, he slept through three quarters of the test.  He retook it, I didn't.  I wasn't about to take that test again, so whoever accepted me based upon those scores, whatever they were, they weren't that great--that's the law school I went to.  So I was accepted, I think, into some law school in Kentucky, two or three law schools in Ohio, the--and one of 'em was the University of Dayton.  And I said, "I wanna go to the University of Dayton."  There was really no thought given to it.  It was, "Hey, seems okay, that's where I'll go."  And I think if I had studied or worked hard for the test, I probably would have gone someplace else.
Story_ID: 643403
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So are you very familiar with Dayton [Ohio] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I am now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a fine law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio]. I didn't like the city--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't like the city.  I--there's some good people there, I worked, during law school, three jobs sometimes for a judge, Alice McCullum [Alice O. McCollum], a law firm, Dick Austin [Austin, Jones, Littlejohn and Owens, LLP]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was head of the NAA- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Richard Austin.
Speaker 2: Richard Austin, head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I had a little painting company.  I painted people's houses, and I was busy, and I worked hard.  My brother [David Coleman] had passed.  He got killed the--within a week or two before I went--a couple weeks before I went to law school, and it really rocked me hard, and that first year was very difficult for me but I got through it.
Speaker 1: Is that the brother that you're eleven months apart from?
Speaker 2: No, no, that's my--no, I--the last--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the youngest.  He was seventeen when he was killed by a drunk driver.  So that rocked me pretty hard, but I figured it out and struggled through my first year, but that really (clears throat)--in my heart and my soul, it was kind of--almost didn't make it because of that.  But I got through my first year (claps), and the final two years were great.  But I had three jobs during law school.  And then also during law school, that's when I, one summer I worked in the White House [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as well.
Speaker 1: Now tell us how that came about.  Now we were talking to [HistoryMaker] Ray Miller earlier this week and he was, he was also working in the White House at that period of time, I think, when you were there--or was he?  Was he there when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was not there.
Speaker 1: He wasn't there yet?
Speaker 2: He was not there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I was there--wait--what happened was that me and Ty--excuse me--me and Tyrone Yates wrote a letter to the president of the United States, John--Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and we said we wanted to work in the White House on a, on just like (claps) a whim.  Got a letter back from the president, said, "Come to Washington, D.C. and we'll interview you."  Well, we went.  I borrowed money from my law professors and friends, and got my little green Pinto [Ford Pinto].  Remember green Pinto- Pintos?  They blew up, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the rear--if you hit 'em in the rear (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, hit the rear, they blew up.  I went to Washington, D.C. and interviewed and was hired to work for the White Houses as a legal intern and, so both of us worked for a summer, and I spent several nights in the White House and in the Old Executive Office Building [Eisenhower Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C.] and I--it was a--one of my best experiences in life, to work there.  I met all kinds of folks, including Thurgood Marshall and others--Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], Judge Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], Pat- Patricia Harris Roberts.  Roberts Harris, or Harris Roberts?
Speaker 1: Roberts Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris], I think.
Speaker 2: Roberts Harris.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Louis Martin [Louis E. Martin], we worked for a guy by the name of Louis Martin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Louis Martin's a legend in civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we worked for him, Karen Zuniga, many people.  I just, you know, met the then civil rights commission [U.S. Commission on Civil Rights].  Ed Berry [ph.]--what was her name?
Speaker 1: Oh, I know.
Speaker 2: Berry--
Speaker 1: Mary Frances Berry.
Speaker 2: Mary Frances Berry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it was one of the best experiences of my lifetime.  They had to drag me out of the White House to come back to Dayton, literally (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what year was that when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.
Speaker 1: I know Ray Miller was there the last year.  He said sev- '79 [1979], he was there.
Speaker 2: That was the year, the year before.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Year before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Year before.
Speaker 1: And he actually worked for Louis Martin.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so did I.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But as an intern.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was great, it was great, and it made a big difference in my life.  I was still molding myself, still in law school.  It was great inspiration to meet my hero, Thurgood Marshall, and others.  It was just fabulous.
Story_ID: 643404
Speaker 1: Now was this your first time in D.C. for anything significant?
Speaker 2: No, my father [John Coleman] took us to D.C. when I was eleven, twelve, thirteen years old, and I remember that as well, too.  He had--made us all dress up.  I remember going to the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], and that, too, was very influential to me, to go to Washington, D.C. as a young person, and I thought it was the coolest place in the world, with all these monuments, as a young guy said, "I wanna come back here."  And I did--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when I was in law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds like a great experience, though.
Speaker 2: It's great--wonderful experience.  Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, you know, giving an assignment--I remember I had a job of helping to organize a reception for somebody, and I think it was for Patricia Roberts Harris.  In fact, I'm certain it was.  And part of my job was to call movie stars and stuff to, folks to come to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to attend this reception, and they had telephone numbers of luminaries and icons, and I had to call them and ask them to come.  It was great.  And I remember one of them--female--she starred in the, in the television show 'Room 222.'  Who was that?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Denise Nicholas.
Speaker 2: Deni- Denise Nicholas.  I had a crush on her unlike anything else in the world, and I called her, had her telephone number.  I called her and I said, "This is Mike Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman], and I'm calling from the White House."  She could not believe it.  "You're not calling from the White House."  "Yes, ma'am, I am.  And my name is Mike Coleman, and I'm calling from the White House and I'd like to invite you to the White House for a reception for Patricia Roberts Harris."  "Really?"  "Yes, really."  "When?  What time?"  It was great, it was wonderful.  Now she ended up not coming--that would've been a great thing but--'cause I had a real serious crush on her.  But security in those days was different.  Back in those days, you could come up to the guards and call somebody and say, "Hey, I'm Joe Smith, I'm out in, out here.  Can you let me in?  Can you let a brother in?"  "Yeah, come on in!"  (Makes noise) Come on in.  It was great, it was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, things sure have changed since then, though.
Speaker 2: Oh, things have change a lot, things have changed a lot.  I remember a mayor couldn't get in the door 'cause he wasn't on the list, so I had to go down and talk to the guards and let him in.  It--yeah, it's just wonderful, it's great.
Speaker 1: Did people ever crash these events?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the time, you know.  It was just, it was loose as a goose.  Nothing like it is today.
Story_ID: 643405
Speaker 1: Did you get any sense of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration being in the, in--around as an intern that summer?
Speaker 2: I was so enamored by everything.  I remember Hamilton Jordan, who was the chief of staff at the time, sitting in a meeting and I was just enthralled by everything and in wonderment, you know.  It was like I was in a dream.  I couldn't believe I was there.  I remember--literally--I spent the night, slept on the couch 'cause I didn't wanna leave, and I brought a toothbrush.  Brushed my teeth down the street, down the, down the hallway--washed up.  It's just, it was just too much to behold, and I was gonna take up every minute in the White House [Washington, D.C.], and it was good, too, because sometimes I'd work on the weekends, but every once in a while I'd go out and party.  Washington, D.C. is a good place to party.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when it was Chocolate City.
Speaker 2: Chocolate City.  And go to a party and say, "Where do you work?"  "I work in the White House" (laughter).  Got a lot of dates out of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Could you actually bring a date to the White House and show her the White House and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't do that, I didn't do that, didn't do that.  I wasn't bold enough to do that but it was a, it was a great time, great time, wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Now I think that's when they said Chocolate City, the City of D.C., was 80 percent black.
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was a--
Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a--I cannot tell you how much I benefitted from being in the White House and meeting my heroes and seeing people that I loved and adored, read about, that I could actually touch, shake their hand, rub their shoulders, be in the same room, and it was, it was, the experience was like--unlike anything else I've ever experienced in life.
Speaker 1: Did you get a conversation with Thurgood Marshall (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, yeah.  Very brief, very, very brief, but it was just incredible.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that summer, that's the summer of '78 [1978].  So you come back to Dayton [Ohio] and graduated in--okay, well, that's--did you graduate in--from law school [University of Dayton School of Law, Dayton, Ohio] in '80 [1980], right?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1980.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now did Tyrone [Tyrone Yates] go with you to D.C.?  Did he get (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we were there together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were there together.  And then he was at the University of To- yeah, he was at the University of Toledo [University of Toledo College of Law, Toledo, Ohio].  He lived with my parents [Joan Hughes Coleman and John Coleman]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in University of Toledo.  We're not at Cinci- Dayton together.
Speaker 1: I think it's really interesting you guys plot to do this--these things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they actually (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And actually did 'em. It was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --had some good times.
Story_ID: 643406
Speaker 1: So you received your J.D. degree from University of Dayton law school in 1980 and, so what did--you went to work for the attorney general--
Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for a while.  Who was the attorney general then?
Speaker 2: William J. Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was his political orientation then?
Speaker 2: Democrat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  But also--before we go to--Larry [Larry Crowe], you know, here's how I got that job.  While in the University of Dayton School of Law [Dayton, Ohio], there was a icon in black politics by the name of C.J. McLin--state representative T- C.J. McLin.  And I wanted a job during another summer in law school and, so the word was I had to go see him first.  He owned a funeral home [McLin Funeral Home, Inc., Dayton, Ohio], and on Saturday mornings he'd be in his funeral home, people would line up down the street waiting to come see him--the old, the old school politics.  So I had to go see him, so I went to go see him, and I sat at the chair in his funeral home, and he asked me what I wanted--he was very to the point.  I said, "I'd like to get a job, and I know the funeral director from Toledo [Ohio]--the other black funeral director from Toledo."  Say, "Yeah, I know him."  So, "Well, you know, they're recommending I talk to you and, you know." "Oh, I know him.  Yeah, well, I'll get you on."  A week later, I got a call from the attorney general's office [State of Ohio Office of the Attorney General] and interned at the attorney general's office during the summer bef- 1979 summer.  That was my first experience in Columbus [Ohio], and in--really great environment, but it was C.J. McLin that got me that job.  In exchange for the job, I had to pay ten dollars to the Democratic Voter's League and--for the privilege of passing out old literature for candidates that he supported.  So I paid my ten dollars and in the Democratic Voters League, I passed out literature all over the city of Dayton for candidates that C.J. McLin supported.  He was the most important and most powerful African American state representative or elected official period, in the State of Ohio at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And there'd been nobody like him since and nobody like him before.
Speaker 1: I know when we were discussing the research for this trip, I mentioned him.  I grew up in Dayton [Ohio], my mother went to school with C.J.  And I just mentioned him, and I always felt a little shy about saying that he was the most important 'cause it sounds like I'm a Dayton homer, you know, but--
Speaker 2: It's true, it is true.  And he got me my first opportunity for a real job after law school because he gave me that first opportunity as an intern.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Another C.J. story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: He got [HistoryMaker] Ray Miller the job in the--
Speaker 2: D.C. [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: --Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration, too.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  I know he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So any- anything else about him that--I mean, because he's the kind of person I guess we should say something else about, maybe.  I don't know--that's--
Speaker 2: C.J. was a--he--when I went to the attorney general's office, he helped sponsor a law called, The Five--House Bill 584 [sic. Ohio State House Bill 584], which was the law to provide minority set asides for minority contractors in the State of Ohio and as I'm told he asked that I work on it as a young lawyer with, a young intern, for the attorney general's office.  Not--it was a law clerk, law clerk in the, in the attorney general's office.  And I traveled around the state with him for, with public hearings, and I helped write the law and research the law back at that time.  And the law passed, and I helped write it, helped research it, and played a big role, and he's the one that sponsored it, and he's the one that wanted me on the job, you know.  "I like this kid.  He's smart, he's talented.  I want him to be part of what we do here."
Story_ID: 643407
Speaker 1: Well how long did you work for the attorney general?
Speaker 2: For a year and a half.  I hated it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was given a choice of what section.  Attorney general is involved in a number of areas of sec- there were divisions within the attorney general's office, and black folks always went to the civil rights division, and I said, "You know what?  I don't wanna go to civil rights division.  I wanna go into a business section--I wanna learn business."  So I signed up for the antitrust division.  I hated it--antitrust work.  One case, depositions.  People lived and died over one case--it was horrible.  And it was, it was, it was terrible, so I got out of it and, but the gov- the attorney general was running for governor also so, "William J. Brown, I'll help you with that.  In fact, I will throw a fundraiser for you in Toledo [Ohio] and I'll raise you X number of thousands a dollars."
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: He said, "Really?"  I said, "Yeah, I'll do that for you."  Said, "Man, you don't even know where the bathrooms are.  How you gonna raise," whatever it was, "twenty thousand," whatever it was, "dollars?"  I said, "I can do it."  I raised 'em--exceeded the amount of money that I promised that I'd raise.  Got his attention quick, and I became a rising star immediately within the attorney general's office [State of Ohio Office of the Attorney General], 'cause he was running for governor.  And, so he ended up not run- winning the governorship.  Guy by the name of Dick Celeste won, Governor Celeste.  But William J. Brown was a very strong candidate, and I supported him 'cause I worked for him.  But--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A friend of mine from the family was--just won city council [Columbus City Council], and I helped manage his campaign while I was assisting the attorney general when he ran for city council--and he won.  His name is Ben Espy.  And then I became a legislative--then I left the attorney general's office to become a legislative assistant to Ben Espy.
Speaker 1: Now before we get away from William J. Brown, now was he white or black?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: White, okay, all right.  With a name like that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The Brown name in Ohio is like the Kennedy name in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 643408
Speaker 1: He [Ben Espy] had a reputation as a football star--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who rose into politics--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --here?
Speaker 2: Yep (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ohio State Buckeye [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a family friend.  He married the--Kathy Duffy, then Espy [Kathy Duffy Espy], who's like a sister of mine, and her family and our family grew up together in Toledo [Ohio].  His brother-in-law, Eugene Duffy, was my best friend as well--one of my best friends as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right.  So you're working for Ben Espy and, well, tell us about that experience.  You're a legislative aide for him.
Speaker 2: Legislative assistant for Ben, and Ben was a very good council member--ambitious, young, smart, talented lawyer, but he practiced law.  He didn't do a whole lot of politics and--legislative assistant--I did most of it--did a lot of it.  So you had an organization called the Columbus Youth Corps [Columbus, Ohio] that he wanted me to help organize, which I did, and it needed private sector funds.  The idea was not to use city funds but to use private funds to have a summer youth program for kids, and it was a great idea, his idea and, but he told me to put it together.  Well, I put it together.  So I went out raisin' money from the private sector.  Somewhere in that process, I went to a guy by the name of Mel Schottenstein [Melvin Schottenstein], who was a--one of the great powers of this community, one of the wealthiest people in the state, owned a law firm by the name of Schottenstein Zox and Dunn [Schottenstein Zox and Dunn Co. LPA; Ice Miller LLP, Columbus, Ohio], owned a development company by the name of M/I Homes [M/I Homes Inc., Columbus, Ohio], and he was president of Chamber of Commerce [Columbus Chamber of Commerce].  He was the man.
Speaker 1: Now is this the same Schottenstein that the Schottenstein Center--the arena [Jerome Schottenstein Center, Columbus, Ohio] is named after?
Speaker 2: Same family.
Speaker 1: Same family?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Same family.  Not him specifically, but it's the same family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Back in those days, he was the man.  Every community has the man.  In the business community, he was the man.  So I said, "You know, I'm going to go ask him for money for this program."  And I asked him for sixty-four thousand dollars, and I sold him on the project.  And I did a presentation and I'm what, twenty something years old?  Did a presentation, and he wrote me a check for sixty-seven thousand dollars from Ben's program.  And he said, "You know, anybody who can talk me out of sixty-four thousand dollars needs to come work for me."  So a few years later--go--not a few years--months later, he offered me a position with Schottenstein Zox and Dunn.  I was the first African American lawyer in that law firm and somewhere during--just before then, Ben lost his leg through a terrible accident on Gay Street.  Building fell on him.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so I stuck around long enough to him to get--fairly good situation.  So two years, I think, with City of Columbus as a legislative aide but went to Schottenstein Zox and Dunn--gosh, I don't remember what year that was.  Must've been 1984, 1984 or '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '84 [1984] is what we have here.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know if that's--
Speaker 2: So was a legislative aide from ninety--'82 [1982] to '84 [1984].
Story_ID: 643409
Speaker 1: So '84 [1984], you're at Schottenstein [Schottenstein Zox and Dunn Co. LPA; Ice Miller LLP, Columbus, Ohio].  Now how did--now that--this is really--well, contrasted to--now you had worked for politicians before, now you're with a law firm.
Speaker 2: As a, as a associate.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Different world.  It's pretty controversial.  This is a predominantly Jewish law firm, African American--I didn't know it was so controversial 'til I ran into one of the clients in the bathroom, and he told me how controversial it was for me to be there.  "Oh, okay."  I didn't, I didn't feel it, didn't feel it, you know, 'cause you pick those things up.  I didn't feel it--they didn't treat me differently or anything.  It was a pretty good relationship, actually.  And Mel Schottenstein [Melvin Schottenstein] became a mentor of mine and, you know, he was the man in this community, and he mentored me over the years with that law firm and I learned a lot.  I learned a lot about business and transactional work, and they also allowed me, at that time, to do community activities, too.  I enjoyed the community activities, really did.  And while as I did more community activities, you know, sitting on boards, organizations--hell, I started a group called the Young Black Dems [Columbus, Ohio] back then, and Young Black Dems was an organization I founded, along with a couple other folks, while I was in the law firm.  And we founded that organization because folks weren't listening to us young folks, and so we're gonna organize our own group.  So I organized Young Black Dems, and we had fundraisers, we interviewed candidates, and we supported candidates that supported us.  And we would turn out the black community, we would pass out literature of--we'd pass out literature with my name on it--said, "President of Young Black Dems, Mike Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman] wants you to support X candidate because he's gonna support us--he or she's gonna support us."  And it worked.  It was wonderful.  We raised money, as young, young, young black folks.  We were like thirties and twenties, twenties and thirties and we made a difference in the city.
Speaker 1: Now what issues did the young black vo- Democrats have that were different from say the older black Democrats?
Speaker 2: Well, the issue was we wanted folks to listen to us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You listen to us.  And whatever the issue was, we weren't feeling like the more senior folks were listening to us.  We count--my opinion counts.  You may not agree with it, you may not like it, it may sound stupid, I may not be fully educated about the particular issue, but by God, you better listen to me.  So we formed an organization, and let me tell you, the white politicians and black politicians start listening to us--all of 'em.  Because if they supported our position, we endorsed 'em, they got a check--raised money, they got a check for their campaign, and we campaigned for them.  We assigned people out.  "You work on that campaign, you work on that campaign, hey, here's five hundred dollars."  And it worked, it worked.  It was a great thing.  And it's not like it's done today, but we started our own thing; and we had, we raised a lot of money, ten dollars at a time, twenty-five dollar- big parties, you know?
Story_ID: 643410
Speaker 1: Now what was the political situation in Columbus [Ohio] in those days?  I see when you started at Schottenstein [Schottenstein Zox and Dunn Co. LPA; Ice Miller LLP, Columbus, Ohio], the mayor, from what I have here, was Dana G. "Buck" Rinehart [Buck Rinehart], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember him?  And what was--how did the community feel about him, and what was he doing, and what were his challenges in those days?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Buck was (laugher), Buck was Republican, he was a--in those days--this would have been the '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984] through--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --whenever it was he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember all the issues, but his style was very boastful, very--he jumped up and down a lot.
Speaker 1: He was a former Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], it says here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, former Marine.  He had a idea a day.  He was a great cheerleader for the city, I guess.  I don't think he accomplished a whole lot.  But he was a great cheerleader.  I think the one thing he did accomplish is he got, finally got a downtown department store--or a mall built--downtown indoor, enclosed mall [Columbus City Center, Columbus, Ohio] built--that was a pretty good accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was more flash and dash than substance, generally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that city needed that at that time.
Speaker 1: I think we--now--here, we have--we've heard it from several peo- people that Columbus had a kind of reputation as a capital but sort of a cow town of a place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --without a lot of--so would--that was one of the issues that, that he was trying to deal with.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And that's the issue that we--even to this day--we--I think it's--we've finally rid ourselves of it, but it's taken this administration to really make it melt away.  But he worked hard at that issue.  That was a good thing, that was a good thing, you know.  He did--in fact, that was the thing--Columbus was considered a cow town, and he was like, a lot of flash and dash.  We needed that--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in the city.
Story_ID: 643411
Speaker 1: Now when did you start thinking about running for city council [Columbus City Council] yourself?
Speaker 2: Actually, what happened was that, as a result of my community service as a lawyer, while I was a lawyer, it became a natural extension of what I was doing in law, in the law firm [Schottenstein Zox and Dunn Co. LPA; Ice Miller LLP, Columbus, Ohio] with the committee work and community groups and all that kind of thing, and I said, "You know what?  I'd like to make a bigger contribution," and actually I got a little bored with practicing law--not bored, I just had, you know, billable hours, and the work you put in as being a lawyer, then I would go out in the community and I'd do something that would have an impact.  I'd say, "That's more satisfying."  So, you know, I start shifting my focus over time, actually and I said, "You know, I'm gonna run for city council."  Jerry Hammond had stepped down, I applied for his position--Jerry Hammond was the president of city council.  I applied for his position 'cause you get, you gotta apply and the council members appoint you.  I was not selected for that position.  Ben Espy resigned, went to become a state senator and, so I applied for his position and was ultimately appointed through a, really a community process, particularly in the black community, saying, "We want that guy."  And city council, most city council members, supported me except for maybe--the president at that time was Cindy Lazarus.  She finally agreed to support me 'cause the black community and some key members of council, like John Kennedy [John P. Kennedy] and others, and became a member of council in 1992--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and ran for the seat in 1993--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and won.
Speaker 1: Now you had been in the, in the '80s [1980s], you had been, it says here the--a member of the Columbus Convention Center Citizens Advisory Group, the Retail--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Retailers Task Force for the Downtown Development [Columbus Downtown Development Corporation, Columbus, Ohio], and you won a community, a community service award from the Columbus Bar Association in 1989.  So this is all the service you actually (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd like to see what you're reading from (laughter).  Where you getting this stuff from?  It's all good.
Speaker 1: This is--it's all good research from The HistoryMakers staff in Chicago [Illinois] and--
Speaker 2: I'd love to see it (laughter).
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I forget half that stuff.
Speaker 1: (Unclear). But this is building a case, your case for community service, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was building a case, that was building a case.  I enjoyed it.  It's satisfying and gratifying to serve, and so I wanted to be on council to step it up.
Story_ID: 643412
Speaker 1: So when you first became a member of city council [Columbus City Council], the mayor was Gregory S. Lashutka.
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Lashutka.
Speaker 1: Lashutka.  And he had been an athlete and a football player--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and an Eagle Scout and, so what was his administration like?  What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, well, Buck's--Buck Rinehart's--Dana Rinehart's was flash and dash, go, go, go, Lashutka's was very business like, management oriented, you know, ran an efficient government, just kind of steady, steady management.
Speaker 1: Somebody alluded to some kind of a controversy with him, with the black community at some point about something--around the police?  Was it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it's probably about Chief Jackson, Buck Rinehart appointed--to his credit.  Oh, he--Buck was very smart politically, very, very smart politically, and he got in trouble with some affair he had, and all that kind of stuff.  But he was his own worst enemy, too, but, so Buck appointed Jim Jackson [James G. Jackson] as the first African American police chief.  Jim Jackson, very proud guy, pretty stubborn guy, pretty hardheaded, sued everything, everybody, hard to get along with--very hard to get along with.  It was his way or no way.  Greg Lashutka, the mayor, had an idea--ideas, that Jim Jackson didn't like, and then, and then, you know, the safety director, Tom Rice--I don't remember all the details but, you know, details were ugly.  They made accusations, mostly untruthful accusations about Chief Jackson--baseless--big investigation, and Jim Jackson survived it, Chief survived it, and there was the, among the ugliest things this community has seen--lot of charges going back and forth, allegations--it was ugly, ugly, ugly in every possible way you could think of.  And frankly, most of it was not true about the chief.  Chief's a hard guy to get along with. I had a hard time with him, too--very difficult person.  Not a good person to lead, wasn't a very good chief overall, but he did not do the things that was charged by the former administration, and a lot of frustration came out on both sides of that issue, and it was, it was a ugly, ugly scene for everybody.  The whole community, whole community was split.  It was, it was, it was racially--frankly, you know, it could have been, it could have been racially motivated--not by the mayor, 'cause I don't think Greg Lashutka was a racist, but by people, people underneath him, and I think the mayor got, you know, engaged in it sideways, you know, and it was just not, not good.  Just not good for anybody, not for the mayor, not for the chief, not for the community.  The department was split; it was just nasty, ugly, all out brawl, brawl.
Story_ID: 643413
Speaker 1: This is being acted out during your first term, term at city council [Columbus City Council], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere--I don't know if it was my first term, but I think it was my middle term--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my middle term.  I was on city council for seven years, I spent three of those years, I think--or maybe two--as president of city council.  Maybe it was two, I--something like that but--
Speaker 1: So you became the president in '97 [1997], it says here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --at least for one time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for one term.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  And you know, hell, I thought I was the damn mayor, not just the president of city council (laughter), so Mayor Lashutka [Greg Lashutka] didn't like that too much.  No, I had ideas, and I had programs I wanted to push, and I got 'em funded and got 'em going, and I was very active, very active president--supported my members, made sure they were successful.  I had ideas and they got done because I made 'em happen.  I controlled the purse, the purse strings.  And, you know, Greg was a good guy--the mayor was a good guy.  He's a good guy, solid guy, as was the former mayor before him, Buck Rinehart, but his management style was more management, and I was more let's get it done, get some (unclear)--let's--we got a problem over here, let's get it done.  Let's do something different.  Let's be innovative.  Let's use our resources to solve this problem.  And, so I formed a, I did a lot of things as a, as a, as a councilmember, bunch of stuff.  Formed a corporation, a redevelopment corporation called Columbus Urban Growth Corporation [Columbus, Ohio], I formed youth programs, I formed a urban infrastructure program [Urban Recovery Fair] to rebuild infrastructure in the older areas of the city, started a--mentorship programs [Boys to Men] for African American males, I started a loan program for small businesses.  It just goes on and on.  And I was president, and I was finance chair at one time, zoning chair another.  So I was very engaged, very active, and I made a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Very political.
Story_ID: 643414
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], you were the running mate for gubernatorial candidate Lee Fisher.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, but he lost the election, right?  To--?
Speaker 2: He did.  His loss was frankly my gain (laughter).  I was on the ticket.  It was--he raised a bunch of money at the time.  I learned how to raise money from Lee Fisher, and it's not an easy process.  And I was his lieutenant governor candidate, and it was, you know, it wasn't--I didn't enjoy it that much, but I wanted to have the experience, and the experience was--it grew me, made me a better politician, better campaigner, made me smarter, made me tougher, made mistakes, and the statewide politics in Ohio is pretty vicious--very tough.  And I, and I got thick skin from it.  I didn't have thick skin before then, but I got thick skin from that race.  I became a better person also.
Speaker 1: In a sense that you would--weren't--you--
Speaker 2: I knew, I learned so much about life and about politics that I thought I knew, that I didn't know.  I understood--began to understand people's motivations the nature of politics much more and, so that experience--we lost in November of--was it '98 [1998]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And in November of '98 [1998], I also declared my candidacy for mayor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the City of Columbus [Ohio] after we lost.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had you won that, had he won that election, you would be the state (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If I won, I'd be lieutenant governor?
Speaker 1: The state governor, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, which (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Right.  Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I would have been lieutenant governor and maybe governor, you know.  I ran for governor before--put my toe in the pool--2005, I think.  Yeah, as well, I actually ran as lieutenant governor, and the first statewide office I ever ran for was 1998, and it was a fairly close election 'cause Bob Taft--the Taft name in Ohio is a big deal.  I mean the Taft name in Ohio that is another Kennedy type name in Massachusetts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: You know, Taft, the Taft name in Ohio is a very important name.  Everybody knows Taft.
Speaker 1: And Mr. O-H-I-O (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: That's his campaign slogan (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so he was a--
Speaker 2: But it was a close race.  I think it was a 4.4 or a 3 point loss.  It was a close race.  In a state that's--you know, largely leans Republican, that was a close race, and Lee Fisher did a good job.
Story_ID: 643415
Speaker 1: But you announced your, you were running for mayor [of Columbus, Ohio] right afterwards and--
Speaker 2: Almost right afterwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In a few weeks.
Speaker 1: Now who was running, who were your, who was running for the seat as well as you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Ben Espy, and the long and the short of it was that I had expressed to Ben that I was interested in running but I would not run if he would run and--"But Ben, you gotta make a decision if you wanna run or not."  'Cause he had run before for mayor and lost back in the '90s [1990s], early '90s [1990s]--1990 or something like that, '92 [1992], '90 [1990], 1990.  And Ben would not make a decision, and I said, "Well, Ben, if you're not gonna make a decision, I'm gonna have to make one.  I'm gonna give you 'til a certain period of time to make the decision."  He said, "I'm sorry, I'm not ready to make a decision.  I'm not gonna make a decision."  I said, "Well, Ben, time's flying.  I got--I'm not gonna sit around and wait for you to make a decision.  I'll make a decision, I'm gonna run."  And our families are very, very close, you know.  Again, his wife [Kathy Duffy Espy] is my, like my sister.  His sister's, his wife's parents [Helen Jones Duffy and Franklyn Duffy] are like my parents, her brother [Eugene Duffy] and brothers are like my brothers.  It was an extraordinarily close relationship that--very difficult on both families.  So I think Ben decided to run in January or something like that.  I decided to run in November.  So I raised a bunch of money as president, you know, council [Columbus City Council].  You can raise that money, kind of money, and I did.  And frankly, it--we did a poll, and there was a Republican woman, Dorothy Teater was running, so Ben Espy, Dorothy Teater, and Mike Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman].  And our poll showed that I was twenty points back from Ben, Ben being the lead, Dorothy being close behind, and me being way back, and I just worked my tail off.  I wanted to be mayor.  I was the only person I felt that could lead this city the way it should be led, and despite my close relationship with Ben I worked my tail off and left no stone unturned.  I was at every community meeting, we had a full staff, raised whatever was necessary.  I don't know--sev- we ended up raising like three million dollars, or something like that--in 1999 dollars, and quit my job as a partner in a law firm [Schottenstein Zox and Dunn Co. LPA; Ice Miller LLP, Columbus, Ohio] and I devoted my life to this city at that point.  I'm devoting my life to this city.  And, so I--there was a, there was a primary, and Ben came in third and, so he had to drop out, you know, top two.  It was Dorothy Teater and myself.  Dorothy Teater had been in politics for twenty-five years or something like that, and I beat her by twenty points ultimately.  And I just worked, I worked my tail off.  And black community, white community, every community.  There was no community not touched by me in that first campaign.
Story_ID: 643416
Speaker 1: Tell us something about the democratics- the demographics of Columbus [Ohio] in those days.  I mean, what was the black population's--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --percentage?
Speaker 2: First of all, I was the first African American mayor ever elected in the city, number one--the first Democrat elected in something like thirty years, something like that, and the demographics were--it was around 20 to 22 percent African American.
Speaker 1: So it--they're clearly not the majority of people in the city.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, clearly not the majority of people in the city so, you know, you don't run as a black candidate.  You run as a candidate that's black, but not as a black candidate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that I wanted to be not just the first African American mayor in the City of Columbus, my goal was to be the best mayor in the City of Columbus.  Obviously, I wanted also to represent all people in City Hall [Columbus City Hall, Columbus, Ohio].  That means the African American community was gonna be represented as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  So I wanted to represent everybody.
Speaker 1: You know, politicians approach this in different ways when they are minority candidates running from a--for--in a majority city, and some choose to try to be some--an abstract human without any racial ties whatsoever (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you can't be.  I mean, it's not--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --realistic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm, you know, I'm African American, born that way, gonna die that way.  But as a mayor, I represent everybody, and I do have--and as such, I make sure African Americans are represented, too--everybody's represented.  And I can't say, I can't say that former mayors represented everybody, but I can say I can, and I did, and I have.
Speaker 1: Okay, I get it.
Speaker 2: You know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 643417
Speaker 1: Now you've been mayor now, for--as we sit here in 2012, for thirteen?  Is it--
Speaker 2: This is my thirteenth year as mayor of the City of Columbus [Ohio] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thirteen years, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm long serving--I will be, at the end of next year, the longest-serving mayor in the history of the City of Columbus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--elected four consecutive terms and at December 31, 2013, I'll be the longest serving mayor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the history of the city.
Speaker 1: And it seems to be--and not just because I'm sitting here in the mayor's office talking to you, but everybody seems to say that Columbus is like a boomtown now.  It's a--
Speaker 2: It's a--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: It's--it is.
Speaker 1: --growing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We are--Columbus is near a renaissance.  We're not quite there, but the renaissance is just before us.  I'm very proud of the city, how far we've come.  We still have a ways to go.  We're exciting.  I mean when I took office, we were kind of sleepy.  We had potential as a city, but we weren't reaching it.  We were kind of slow and sleepy, and still had kind of the (pronunciation) cow town sort of feel about it and--no more.  You gotta rid it, you gotta do things.  We can't just talk it, we gotta, we got--we can't just talk vibrancy, and being strong as a community, we have to be that.
Story_ID: 643418
Speaker 1: Was it difficult here in the cit- now the city is, got the great Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], you know, largest university in the country, you know, in the center of it.  So that might, how does that affect the attitude of the average white voter in Columbus [Ohio] (unclear) towards a minority, any minority candidate?  Do you think that makes it a fa- more favorable place or--
Speaker 2: Well, I think people kind of misunderstand the city.  Ohio State is very important to us, but it's not the only thing to us.  It's a lot, one of the largest universities in the country, but I think what it brings, it brings a lot to our city in the sense that it brings a lot of young, a lot of people from around the world to the city, and my goal is to keep 'em here.  I don't think past mayors frankly were too enthralled about Ohio State because Ohio State overshadowed the city, and I haven't taken that approach.  My approach is I embrace Ohio State, and with the realization, understanding that it's a part of the city.  It's not the only thing in the city, and we need to work together and be a great partner with the City of Columbus, and let's keep these young people here.  And a lot of what I've tried to do as the mayor is develop economic development policies, and do things with the idea of attracting youth and talent to our city because yeah, the natural asset of Ohio State and all these young folks over there, and they're--they--I don't want 'em to move to New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois], I want 'em to stay right here.  So I'm trying to create an environment and a quality of life that is very attractive to young folks, and I can say now, that I couldn't say thirteen years ago, that these young folks now that are graduating from Ohio State are staying here, are starting to stay here.  We used to be a brain drain city.  We're now a brain magnet city, and that is a big shift.  And that there's a recognition that Ohio State's not the only university in the city.  There are twenty, twenty-one of 'em, twenty-one colleges and universities--
Speaker 1: Now someone--
Speaker 2: --in the City of Columbus.
Speaker 1: --told me yesterday that there were seven, and they were proud of that.
Speaker 2: Seven?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they thought it was only seven (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twen- there are twenty-one.
Speaker 1: Twenty-one?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one in the reg- in our Central Ohio region, eighteen within the city limits.  So I included the ones that are just out--city limits to be part of our community, eighteen--so twenty-one.  And there are a hundred thousand students at any given time, college students, at any given time in the City of Columbus, and something like twenty thousand graduates every year from some college or university in our city.  We have more college students in the City of Columbus than any other city in the country except for the City of Boston [Massachusetts], we're number two.  We haven't taken advantage of that in the past.  I'm trying to take advantage of it, and what's the advantage?  When you can keep young people in your community, they end up with a job here, they buy a house here, they spend their money here, they raise their children here, they bring in fresh ideas from wherever they came from here, and it makes the city much more diverse, much more vibrant, much more economically viable.  So it's not just designed--my concepts are not just designed for Ohio State, which is a big partner for us, it's also these other you know, colleges and universities--try to keep 'em close,  try to, try to, you know, create a, like a Short North of our community that's now the hippest place ever.  It is, it is so cool.  The riverfront is like off the chart.  The bike paths, the electricity in the downtown area in certain parts of the community.  You know, this is a city where the average age is thirty-four years old, thirty-four.  How 'bout that?
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: Young city.  And we're the only city in the state that has grown.  During my term as mayor, we've grown 12 percent population.  We have the best economics and employment rates in the state and among the best in the country because we really work at it.  We work at a lot of stuff to make sure there are--you know, with our economy, to make sure it's strong and growing.
Story_ID: 643419
Speaker 1: So I'm very proud of our city, and we have our challenges, just like any city.  We have the blight of vacant and abandoned housing, which I've got, we got a plan for that, (makes noise) and I'm convinced in three or four years, it'll be all gone.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Move south that problem.
Speaker 2: Someone was telling me about--now you have a plan--you don't really focus on tearing down a lot of homes (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, actually, here's what we're doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We have actually a comprehensive effort.  We are gonna be tearing down the worst of the worst homes.  We haven't done that in the past, but we are now gonna do it because you can't--they're unrepairable.  They're burnt out or they're just not gonna be repaired--nobody will, nobody can.  I'm tearing 'em down.  That's one hand.  The other hand is out of this equation is that I'm remodeling and rebuilding homes that can be saved, so it's kind of a two prong approach, and we're trying to preserve housing as well.  So tearing down, you know, we got a plan for tearing 'em down, spend $11.5 million to tear down nine hundred homes.  We have federal dollars and city dollars, it's totaling now well over 40, $45 million in rehabilitating homes.  So it's comp- comprehensive, a comprehensive effort.  And by the end of this term, we will not have a vacant abandoned problem in the City of Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Now did the housing crisis of 2008 affect the--or how did it affect Columbus?
Speaker 1: Well, the housing crisis, the financial crisis affected Columbus by virtue of--like every other city--caused a lot of houses to go foreclose and become vacant and abandoned, which left blight in the neighborhoods all throughout--old neighborhoods, new neighborhoods; and that was a problem we had to deal with, and we're dealing with it.  And we're getting it done.
Story_ID: 643420
Speaker 1: Now I've asked Columbus [Ohio] residents like what is the economy here like, and they mention, they say, "Well, it's some diversity."  Can you, can you speak to the diversity in the economy?
Speaker 2: Very diverse economy, you know.  We--there is no industry sector that's more than 15 percent of our economy.  Some cities you have automobile industries--50, 60 percent of their economy.  In our case, there's nobody more than 15 percent.  That's in the top end.  So we have great insurance companies, financial institutions, banks, some manufacturing, universities, again we've got twenty-one colleges and universities in the City of Columbus and the state capitol.  We're a retail giant.  We have the companies like The Limited, Victoria's Secret.  You didn't know Victoria's Secret was headquartered in Columbus, did you?
Story_ID: 643421
Speaker 1: We were talking about the di- the diversity of the economy in--
Speaker 2: Diversity economy of high tech--
Speaker 1: Medical, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High tech industries are big here.  We're becoming Silicon Midwest, you know.  We're just booming in healthcare, insurance, banking industry, retail industry with Limited, Abercrombie and Fitch, Victoria's Secret, you know.  We guess--we're doing so well that we're--we have, we have models walking down the street.  You just walk on Broad [Street] and High [Street] and you see a--I'm just kidding (laughter).  We're a very diverse economy.  We have manufacturing as well.  Again, that's not more than 15 percent.  So, the way this works is, except for this past recession, that usually when the, when the country goes into a recession, there's usually one or two industries that get hit the worst, and those cities that have those one or two industries experience that recession the most.  In Columbus [Ohio], however, because we have a dozen or so industry sectors that we're all strong in--it's like a mutual fund--when one's down, the other's up.  That's different than this past recession.  This past recession, everybody got hit.  All our various industry sectors was--were hit--around the country, including the City of Columbus.  But typically, when one industry's down, another one's up.  So we're--up until recently, we've been recession proof.  We now have experienced a recession, this past recession that we were hit really hard--along with everybody else.
Story_ID: 643422
Speaker 1: Now I was asking off camera like what year do you think Columbus became the largest city in Ohio?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  It could've been, could've been the mid-'80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], but we've really taken off since then, even more so, you know.  And I like shopping flea markets and antique stores and I saw a old Lifetime magazine--Life magazine, you know, those old Life magazines?  Nineteen--
Speaker 1: Big ones, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, pictorials, 1965.  And the cover of this Life magazine was about cities--the decay of cities in 1965.  What are we gonna do about it?  So I picked it up and looked at it, and it talked about all the great cities of America, and the best city in America with the strongest mayor in America was a guy by the name of Mayor Cavanagh [Jerome Cavanagh] from the City of Detroit [Michigan].  And then it had a listing of all the great cities in America by population.  Columbus wasn't on the top twenty-five list--nowhere to be found.  The first city was New York [New York], the seventh city, I think--sixth city, was the City of Cleveland [Ohio] (background noise).  Detroit was number four or five and--along with many other cities.  Columbus was nowhere in sight.
Speaker 1: Cincinnati [Ohio] on the list?
Speaker 2: May have been, may have been at the bottom, near the bottom, about twenty, something like that.  Yeah, I think it was.  So I looked at this year's census, and now Detroit is smaller than the City of Columbus by about sixty thousand people.  Cleveland is half the size of the City of Columbus--less than half the size of the City of Columbus now.  And Cincinnati's 'bout a third of the size of the City of Columbus.  And we are a prosperous, progressive city, prosperous and progressive.  And we've had the greatest prosperity, actually, in these past thirteen years, I think.  We're--and, but I think the best prosperity is gonna be in the near future.
Story_ID: 643423
Speaker 1: I was living in Chicago [Illinois] when Harold Washington was mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I saw him try to relate to the white ethnic communities in Chicago and that sort of thing.  How do you relate to the traditional white communities here in Columbus [Ohio]? I mean is there, is it a challenge at all, or have you had any problems (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hasn't been a challenge at all, hasn't been a challenge at all.  I think, at first, you know, people weren't sure, you know.  For example, people weren't sure, you know.  I was the first African American, so I had to blaze a path here, and show folks that I wasn't a--somebody with the horns in my head, that I would treat everybody equally, and I'd work in all neighborhoods and try to make all neighborhoods good and better.  That absolutely included black neighborhoods, didn't exclude black neighborhoods, as it had been in the past.  So I think, you know, except for the first couple years when people were kind of like wondering, "Is he?  What's he gonna do?"  You know, after that, I think things smoothed out pretty well, you know.  Even the press was a little skeptical, you know, and, you know, the Dispatch [The Columbus Dispatch] was our local newspaper, and I have a great relationship with the editor of the Di- the owner of the Dispatch now, and they endorsed me for mayor back in 1999, but even their reporters, some of their reporters were a little concerned because I--they did something that was very interesting they have not done since or before to any elected official ever.  During that campaign, they kept track of everything I said, everything I promised, everything I said I would do.  That's okay.  I don't mind that because I said I was gonna do it.  But on a annual basis or a quarterly or some point, they published it--first couple years, couple--maybe my first term, maybe three years, something like that.  And they published what I said and what I did, what I said in '99 [1999], and what I did throughout my first few years.  Now I did exactly what I said, then they realize, hey, he's for real.  He said he was gonna do this and he did it.  So it was a checklist.  I've never seen a publication, over a period of time, set out a checklist of what that person said, and what they did over time.  This newspaper hadn't done that, haven't done it since, they haven't done it--before then.  I thought that was interesting.  And the truth of the matter is, when I say I'm going to do something, I'm going to do it--most politicians do.  Most folks in elected office, they have an intention of doing something, they're gonna try their best to do it.  But it's kind of interesting that I was (laughter), I was--actually had a checklist people can go down.  "Well, did he do it?"  (Makes noise). "Did he do it?" (Makes noise) For several years after I first elected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were under kind of microscopic scrutiny.
Speaker 2: Micros- yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely.  Things were a little different.  I had a standard that was much higher than my predecessors in every way, and the expectations were very high, very, very high as the first.  And I just worked my tail off; and I, and people began to understand that--how much I love the city.  I love the city.  I love every part of it, and it sort of came across.
Story_ID: 643424
Speaker 1: Can you tell me like what are the, what would you consider to be your major accomplishments as, as mayor?
Speaker 2: My gosh!  So many now, it's hard to talk about, but let me just put 'em in big buckets as opposed to individuals.  I can go for days to talk about every little thing.  I think--in total, I think I've made the city a better city.  The city [Columbus, Ohio] is a better city than when I took office.  We're a city that was spread out and the, and the inner city areas were being neglected, downtown was being neglected, inner city neighborhoods were being neglected in many ways, and I helped turn that thinking in the investments back inside the city and, and now you're starting to see the results of that--the investments taking hold now, you know.  I've turned around neighborhoods--gone into neighborhoods like the King-Lincoln district [King-Lincoln Bronzeville, Columbus, Ohio] and tried to turn that around, and we have turned it around.  It's now moving on its own.  Downtown, turned it around.  It's moving on its own now.  It's been--our economy.  You know, my biggest accomplishment, I think, is just making the city a better place to live, work, and raise a family.  And our next big challenge is to make sure that our city is up there with the other top cities, to make sure that we're recognized for the greatness that we really are.
Story_ID: 643425
Speaker 1: What's been the biggest challenge, I guess, being--as--to be the mayor in, of the City of Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge is many.  Being mayor is a challenge.  Any mayor will tell you that, but I love it.  I love being the mayor, nothing like it.  It's like I was born for this role as the mayor.  I can't imagine doing anything else right now in my life.  So the biggest challenge is keeping the city moving in the right direction because there's a lot of distractions along the way, lot of folks wanna pull you down and beat you up, but you just gotta keep going.  Bring allies to the table, bring divergent views to the table, making sure--is that all right?  Is that okay?  Okay.  Making sure that all views are considered.  It takes extra work to bring divergent views to the table.  I think these recessions were very difficult for me.  I've been the mayor through two recessions--one right after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and this most recent one.  I got passed a tax increase during a recessionary period--maybe the only city in the country that had a tax increase.  I told the folks, "Hey, we're there.  We need a tax increase."  And they trusted me, and they believed me and they, and as they should, and they voted themselves a tax increase.  The challenges of running a city in a big city like this are many because every day is a new challenge, every day is a new crisis.  You know, (unclear) here's how I define it.  One third of your time is spent putting out the crises, putting out fire, dealing with the crises.  Another third of your time is making sure the city works and runs--moves in the right direction--just management.  And another third is planning for the future.  Vision, making sure the vision is there.  So it's--I break it down into thirds--putting out the fires, making it work--efficiencies; and the other third, the final third, is establishing a vision and getting people to buy into it.
Story_ID: 643426
Speaker 1: Now do you plan to--you said you can't envision yourself doing anything else other than being the mayor [of Columbus, Ohio] at this juncture.  Are you gonna--I mean, do you see yourself retiring at any point or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't see myself retiring ever (laughter).  I don't know how long I'll be mayor, you know?  I might run for a fifth term.  I don't know that--I won't make that decision for another few years now.  I just got reelected this past November for my fourth term so, you know, I'm not gonna put the cart before the horse.  I'll make that determination later.  If I can't get--it depends on how--what I get done this term.  If I can't get things done I need to get done, then I'll probably run.
Speaker 1: I read in our research that it's been said that you're really into details.  That's how you're able to be so successful.
Speaker 2: Well (laughter), maybe--my staff says maybe too many details.  Maybe so, you know.  I think my style is--I try to set a community vision, I try to make sure that we begin walking down the path of that vision and to bring people together in solving really hard questions and tough problems and in paying attention to details in a way that--you gotta have the vision, but you also have the details to meet the vision.  So you gotta have both, and one without the other, you're not gonna be a good mayor or a good leader very long.  And, so the nuts and bolts have to work, as well as the vision has to be in place.
Story_ID: 643427
Speaker 1: One of the things that you mentioned just a while ago was trying to turn the focus away from the outer ring of the city back in, back towards the inner city.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I know Columbus [Ohio] still has a--inner city problems and crime problems--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --education problems and other problems.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What has been, I guess--well, I guess just--well, just--can you talk about how you approached solving those--I mean, how you were able to turn the attention back to those problems?
Speaker 2: Well, as the city developed really since 1954--actually, the year I was born and the year Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was decided, the city had a policy that was established that areas of the city--farmland and unincorporated areas can be annexed into the City of Columbus and, so when that occurred, the city would invest in those new areas of the city to the point now, to the point where the city became the city of 200 plus miles, 220 plus miles.  So the investment would go out there.  From 1954 all the way to me changing the policy in 2003 or '4 [2004], something like that.  So the old policy was to grow at all cost expansion wise.  When you did that, you also--people that lived here, their tax dollars were used to support new areas of the city, okay?  So as a result, there was basically divestment in the central city that occurred for fifty years in the City of Columbus outward.  Those outer areas were very nice.  So I became mayor and I said, "You know, we gotta change this."  And the new policy is pay as we grow.  So as the new areas come into the city, they have to pay for their own growth.  The people that live here don't pay for that growth any longer.  Now over time, what's going to happen, and what we're trying to accomplish here, is to transfer the wealth--not necessarily the wealth but the investment of, back into the central city, and investing in areas that heretofore have not been invested in in some of the central areas, and there's many, many efforts, many, many projects I can talk about if you want--about what we did in the inters- in the inner circle to help increase investment.  And it's now starting to take off.  Now it's starting to have an impact.
Speaker 1: Well, maybe if you can give us an example of one of those things 'cause--
Speaker 2: Well, a couple examples would be Cleveland [Avenue], 11th Avenue, called the Four Corners [Columbus, Ohio], a project on Morse Road was one time a suburban area but no longer is a suburban area--it's more central city than suburban.  It declined and failed, we brought it back. Cleveland, 11th, that area, the whole (unclear) area, we're--start bringing 'em back.  King-Lincoln area [King-Lincoln Bronzeville, Columbus, Ohio], bringing it back. south side, we have a plan in place now that is going to bring back areas of the south side.  West side we've got Franklinton [Columbus, Ohio].  We're bringing it back through strategic investments in planning and working with people to make sure it happens.  And the private sector.  And downtown as well.
Story_ID: 643428
Speaker 1: You entered city council [Columbus City Council] when, I think, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was pre- president in '92 [1992] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you'd been there through George--both of his--George Bush's [President George Walker Bush] terms and, now President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is the president of the United States.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Has it--how have the things changed in terms of federal monies that are available for--
Speaker 2: Drastically.
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: Things have changed drastically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: First, you know, Bill Clinton's administration was a great administration.  I've now been mayor through three presidents, and the end of Bill Clinton's term, I was president of council during the middle of his last term, and then mayor during the end of his last term.  But his administration was great for cities.  We got a lot of support from the federal government, from the White House, in terms of resources and investment in cities.  Our country was moving, and we had a surplus at the federal level, cities were booming.  We were doing great.  George Bush--and also in the Clinton administration, I talked to people, from cabinet members to members of the White House, you know, and George Bush days come along and George Bush--I never had a conversation with anyone in the White House, any cabinet member, anybody, for eight years, in Washington, D.C., D.C. outside of our own representatives.  It was locked down.  There clearly was a major disconnect between cities, in this city and the Bush White House administration, and his entire administration.  I remember George Bush came to town at the beginning of his administration.  I went to one of his events--it was to unveil some idea or something.  So I went to it, and he mentioned my name from the podium, and his Republican colleagues, I heard later, jumped on him because, "Why would you mention the mayor of Columbus [Ohio], a Democrat?  Don't ever do that again."  He never did.  Never got a courtesy call ever again after that saying come to an event.  It was shut down, total shut down.  And then Bush began doing these tax cuts to the rich, we'd gotten this deficit situation, we started spending all this money, cities were ignored, totally, including the City of Columbus and including me--every way, every possible way.  Barack Obama comes along, I'm one of the first mayors in the country to endorse him, we become friends, and then this president is--I'm talking to the White House all the time about one thing or another, giving input about one thing or another.  We have a different financial situation in Washington because George Bush spent all the damn money and leaving this president with no (laughter), very few resources.  But having said that, we're getting more attention now.  We're dealing with problems that real people have.  In the area of the housing crisis, we were the recipient of several grants for vacant and abandoned housing, you know.  About forty-something million dollars in grants from the White House and the administration.  We have an excellent relationship on every single level.  I can pick up the phone right now and call the president or his right hand people.  Might get the president, might not, but I will get to his right hand people.  If we need 'em, they're there.  It's a totally different deal, totally different.  This president understands our problems.  The last president didn't care to understand about our problems.
Story_ID: 643429
Speaker 1: Now what today, when you look at all you've done in these thirteen years--in fact, your, all your life's work--what today would you consider to be your legacy?  'Cause I know you've got more to do.
Speaker 2: Man, it's hard to put a legacy on--I mean, you know.  I don't think my legacy's yet established.  I mean people ask me that all the time.  I was asked by the press yesterday.  Yesterday, I announced that we're gonna narrow the Scioto River.  Scioto River is a wide river, and we're gonna narrow it by taking out a dam.  We're gonna make it more narrow--we're gonna have thirty-three acres of new green space and park land, and (claps) open up 110 acres of developable land, and the reporter asked me, "Is this gonna be your legacy?"  I said, "I don't know, that's for some- somebody else to decide."  Not too long ago, somebody asked me about some other effort--the Lincoln Theatre [Columbus, Ohio].  "Is that a, that a legacy?  That's--your name's all over it.  You brought that back to life in the black community.  Is that your legacy?"  I don't know, I don't know. You know, you know, look at parts of downtown and say, "Well, you know, your name's all over this, Mayor.  Is this your legacy?"  I don't know.  That's for somebody else to decide.  I'm not gonna decide what my legacy is, you know.  "You built twelve thousand homes in the City of Columbus [Ohio] with your efforts.  You've created sixty-five thousand jobs while you were mayor.  Is that your legacy?"  I don't know.  That's somebody else to decide, you know.  I'm not gonna make that decision.  Others will make that decision.  And hopefully, it's not just one thing; hopefully, it's many things.
Story_ID: 643430
Speaker 1: Now likewise, when you look back at things you've done, is there any major thing that you would take back, if you could?  Or not have done?
Speaker 2: Probably would not have pursued the governorship in 2005.  I looked at it very carefully, went around the state, raised a lot of money, and we had some family issues, and it was also, in addition, tough to pull away from what I loved, the city [Columbus, Ohio].  And I probably would not have wasted my time on that.
Story_ID: 643431
Speaker 1: Who are your most trusted staff members and peo- people that help you get this job done?  'Cause I know no one can do this by themselves.
Speaker 2: Well, been around thirteen years now as mayor [of Columbus, Ohio], and there's a lot of people that I've relied upon over the years.  I've had like four or five chiefs of staffs, and I've--well, each of them have been very important to me.  Maybe four chiefs of staff, deputy chiefs of staff, cabinet members have been here, you know.  What--I try to hire the best and brightest and loyal people.  Party politics is not as important.  My safety director is a Republican, African American--Mitch Brown [Mitchell J. Brown], a Republican, and he's been safety director since my first year in office.  This is his thirteenth year as well.  And I've gone through development directors, utility directors--each one of them brought something really good, really strong.  But here's how I'm looking at things is this, I've been here long enough where I have successfully matured and raised enough people that I have brought in here that are now out, and I have, you know, like the former, the--one of my chiefs of staff became the president of the Chamber of Commerce [Columbus Chamber of Commerce].  Another chief of staff became president of the Downtown Development Corporation [Columbus, Ohio].  I have other members of my staff that have created businesses, that have gone on to do great things, but they started here.  And, so what I'm doing is I'm creating this whole army of people that were here, that are now out in the private sector or some other role, who are making great contributions to the world.  And, so I view this as the incubator of talent in many ways.  So while I rely upon these folks to come work for me, my greatest success is seeing them go out and change the world on their own 'cause you come work for me, you're a--and you can't work for me unless you wanna change the world.  You have to have that mentality--change the world.  And then you do it while you're with me, and then it's time to go out, and you go out and do it for others.  So I guess I have, I don't know what you call 'em--apostles of some sort.  I don't know what you call 'em (laugher).  I don't wanna, I don't wanna use that word.  That's the wrong word.  But shape and form people to go out and do good for the world or do good for themselves or start a business.  A lot of people have come up in this office and in the city, that I have matured and nurtured over the years that are now out there doing great things for the world.  That's a good thing, that's a good feeling.
Story_ID: 643432
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, today, African community--African American community is the highest unemployed, least educated in the country, and that's got to change.  It's gotta change.  Education's the key to everything and, you know, I would love to see greater employment, greater aspirations fulfilled.  But those are the two things--leastly educated--least educated and the least employed.  That's gotta change.
Story_ID: 643433
Speaker 1: Now you have children, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You have--can you tell us something about your chi- children and your family today?
Speaker 2: I have three wonderful children.  J.D. [John Coleman] is youngest.  The next youngest is Justin [Justin Coleman], and then the oldest is Kimberly [Kimberly Coleman].  Kimberly is a banker in Chicago [Illinois], Justin is a police officer in Columbus [Ohio], the first police officer kid of a mayor, that I know of in the city ever, I think, and I'm really proud of him because he cut his own path in the division of police.  And then my third son, J.D., he's been to Iraq twice, a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], sergeant sniper.  He's outta the Marines now, and he's trying to get into the intelligence agencies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very proud of all my, all three of my children.  I'm divorced, ex-wife [Frankie Coleman], good lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your parents get a chance to see--are they still living?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father's [John Coleman] living--lives in Washington, D.C.-Virginia area with my sister [Linda Coleman].  They live one mile apart.  He does some practice with her a little bit, you know, one day a week or something.  He's eighty-four years old.  My mother [Joan Hughes Coleman] lives there, too, and they're doing great in retirement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And from what you said about your sisters and brothers [Jeffrey Coleman and David Coleman], that they should be proud of all of you, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  My--they're proud of all of us.  They love us dearly, and they're still in charge of the family.  They're still in charge.
Story_ID: 643434
Speaker 1: Is there anything I need to ask or talk about before I ask my last question?  'Cause I know you're busy.
Speaker 2: I think you got it.
Speaker 1: All right.  The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Two things.  One is the best mayor ever in the history of this city [Columbus, Ohio], clearly.  And the other is that I changed this city.  I made a difference--made it a better place, made our country a better place, our state a better place.  I made a difference.
