Story_ID: 278314
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is James Herbert Cameron, J-A-M-E-S, C-A-M-E-R-O-N [HistoryMaker James Cameron].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You wanna put a doctor in front of that?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, I'll do it.  Dr. James Cameron.  All right.  What was your middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: No middle name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is--
Speaker 2: A lot of people call me Herbert, but that wasn't my real name.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did it come from?  Where did the Herbert come from?
Speaker 2: From the newspapers.
Speaker 1: Oh, they just added, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My place, my place of birth of La Crosse, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was born February the 23rd, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are the founder of the American's Black Holocaust Museum [sic. America's Black Holocaust Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?  Oh, I know.  I just wanted you to say it on tape.
Speaker 2: Juneteenth Day [June 19th] in 1988.
Speaker 1: This is when you founded the museum?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And today is July the 14th, 2005.  And we're in the museum, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 278315
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.  And the first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite what?
Speaker 1: Food.  Food, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  I don't know.  I eat most anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: In the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The more you learn, the more you can do.  They say that on television too.
Story_ID: 278316
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Cameron, Sr.] side.  But I'll start with your mother's side.  All right?  Okay, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's, my mother's full name was Vera, V-E-R-A, Vera Carter, naw, Vera Cameron.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Carter.
Speaker 1: Carter, okay.  All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how old was she when you were born?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I imagine she was about 23, 24 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So she was probably--
Speaker 2: When I was born.
Speaker 1: --yeah, she was probably born about 1890, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  What do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: She had ten sisters.  My grandmother [India Carter] had twelve children all together.  I think my mother was the fifth or sixth one.
Speaker 1: Was your mother born in Wisconsin too?
Speaker 2: No, she was born in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did she talk any about her family history any, about what her people did in Kentucky or what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she talked something about her father.  His name was Carter, George Carter [sic. Jerry Carter].  She told us how he used to go fishing in the Mississippi River and catch fish and bring it home, and mama would know just what to do with them.
Story_ID: 278317
Speaker 1: I stayed in La Crosse [Wisconsin] about four years.  Then mother [Vera Carter Burden] and dad [James Cameron, Sr.] moved to Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My dad was a barber.  In those days, white people had black barbers cutting their hair and shaving 'em and everything.  You'd see a man seventy years old, never shaved themselves, always went to a black barbershop.  But then they cut all of that.  And the white barbers began going to barber school and taking all that trade away from the black barbers.  So when he moved to Birmingham, Alabama, he was still cutting white people's hairs.
Story_ID: 278318
Speaker 1: What was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: James Herbert Cameron.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his middle name was Cameron, I mean Herbert?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have no idea and they say he was born in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was born in Indianapolis, okay.  Do you know how your parents met?  Is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they met at the, going to the African Methodist [Episcopal] Church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Indianapolis, Indiana].  And they took a liking to each other.  And they went together for a while and then finally, they got married.
Speaker 1: Where did they meet?  Did they meet in--
Speaker 2: Meet at, they met in the church.
Speaker 1: But in what state?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Indianapolis.
Story_ID: 278319
Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' personalities for us?
Speaker 2: My mother [Vera Carter Burden] was a sweet thing.  My dad [James Cameron, Sr.] was a no good sucker.  When we moved to Birmingham, Alabama, he moved into his mother's [Amanda Cameron] house.  His mother looked like an ole white woman.  She didn't look black at all.  And she didn't like it because my dad married a brown-skinned girl.  He said he could have married a light-skinned woman, you know, wanting to keep it in the family, I guess.  And that's when the break up began in our families.  It goes on in the family, and mother had to put in for a divorce.  And daddy gave her a divorce, and then one time he came back by the house with some yellow women.  And there were three, three of us playing in the front yard.  We had Idella [Cameron (ph.)].  Della was first born--and, nah, Marie [Cameron] was the first born, and I was the second born, and Della was the third born.  He came by the house and wanted my mother, wanted mom to go to bed with him.  And she wouldn't do it.  He pulled out a derringer and pointed it at my mother.  And he was gonna kill her if she didn't.  And mom said I got at the foot of the bed and mom said I got up in front of him and stood in front of the gun and said, "Don't you shoot my mama."  And he put it away and went on out and got in the car and drove on away.
Story_ID: 278320
Speaker 1: I saw a lot of things in Birmingham [Alabama] that--
Speaker 2: So this is in Birmingham?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is in Birmingham.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We stayed there about twelve years.  My mother [Vera Carter Burden] had to work and take care of us three children all by herself.  I remember one time she worked at a place where you could get a glass of beer, root beer and one cinnamon roll for a nickel.  Things were very cheap then.  Now, and one morning a man came in there trying to, he looked like he had consumption, all skinny and everything and not nice looking.  And he wanted to make a date with mom, and mom, mom went up on him on side of him and come down on the other.  And he told the boss, so the boss came in and checked to see how the day's receipts is going.  He told a lie on my mother that she had told some of the customers that the cinnamon rolls was stale and she oughta--they ought to round to the next place where they get some fresh cinnamon rolls and root beer.  So my mother got fired off of her job.  And she came home crying, and we, we kids were crying too 'cause we didn't know what was gonna happen.  So the judge gave her a divorce and told her to get a .32 pistol, and if that son-of-a-bitch ever come back there again, shoot him and she wouldn't have to do a day for it.
Speaker 2: Now, this is in Birmingham, right?
Speaker 1: In Birmingham, right.
Story_ID: 278321
Speaker 1: We stayed there [Birmingham, Alabama] for twelve years.  Then we moved to Kokomo, Indiana where we stayed with my Aunt Marion, my mother's sister.  My Aunt Marion Dupee, D-U-P-E-E.  She lived at 901 North Bell Street, 901 North Bell Street in Kokomo, Indiana.  I stayed there for a couple years.  And then mother [Vera Carter Burden] moved over to Marion, in Marion, Indiana to be with her mother, my grandmother [India Carter].  And it was there in Marion, Indiana, I went to school and worked on the farm.  One old farmer paid me fifty cents a day, and he tried to work me to death.  I had to hoe corn and shuck corn and feed the cows, horses and things like that.  But at nighttime, me and--see, I was, I was 14, 15 years old then.  Me and some of my buddies would go over to the farm in the nighttime, and we'd ride horses bareback.  And he didn't know nothing about it (laughter).  But I (unclear) winters back then they were so cold. Mother, mother, my mother married an Indian [Native American].  His name was Hezikiah Burden, B-U-R-D-E-N.
Speaker 2: Okay, so she married an Indian?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Do you know what Indian group he was from?  Or do you know what tribe he was from?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know.  I can't remember.  But he turned out to be shiftless too. I forgot to tell you about my grandfather [Jerry Carter].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He knew all the butchers in town.  And he'd go and sit up on the mountaintop and look down.  When he'd see smoke coming out of the chimney, he knew grandmother was getting dinner ready.  And he'd go around in all these butcher shops and they'd give him pigtails and pig ears and pig and pig heads and pig feet.  But now they've kind of made a luxury out of it.  So grandma knew just what to do with it.
Story_ID: 278322
Speaker 1: Well, one time, Hezikiah [Burden] went away out in Oklahoma.  And he was gone for a couple of weeks.  And it was during that couple of weeks, I got in trouble.  And when he came back and found out Tommy [Thomas Shipp] and Abe [Abram Smith] had been lynched, and I had been beaten almost to death, then he got his shotgun and his rifle and his pistol.  And he said I'm gon' kill all these damn Marion [Indiana] policemen 'cause the policemen had helped to carry the, the policeman had helped the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] clear a path from the [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana] up to the people at the top of the (unclear) which was just a half a block from the jail.  And he shot about seven or eight of 'em--no, I think it was eleven, it was eleven he shot altogether.  And the only way they could get him, they had to take a airplane and fly over the cornfield where he was hiding and where he was shooting from.  And then they shot him in the leg.  And they wanted to take his leg off, and he wouldn't let 'em take his leg off.  He got one and ten in Michigan City [Indiana State Prison, Michigan City, Indiana], he got sent to prison for disturbing the peace or whatever you wanted to call it.
Speaker 2: So he didn't kill any of 'em, but he shot 'em?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't kill 'em.
Speaker 2: But he shot 'em.
Speaker 1: But two of 'em, he was in the ambulance with one of 'em and he spit in his face.
Story_ID: 278323
Speaker 1: The Ku Klux Klan [KKK] had marchers out there in the, ten to fifteen thousand people clearing the path.  They had their hood on, and their robes, but they didn't have their masks on.  And they were bringing me up to the tree.  I looked from right to the left, and I saw people that, whose lawn I mowed, whose errands I ran, whose shoes I shined 'cause I was a shoeshine boy in the urban station, something like a Greyhound [Lines] bus station.  So they got me up to the tree, and that's when they put the rope around my neck and pushed me up under the tree 'cause they wanted me to be, hanging me some feet in the air.  And that's when I prayed to God.  I said, "Lord, have mercy, forgive me my sin."  And all of a sudden a voice came out from above, an echo voice, said, "Take this boy back.  He had nothing to do with any killing or raping."  And that crowd that had been acting like a baseball game fan, suddenly became quiet, and those hands and clubs and things that had been beating me and trying to beat me to death, they all became soft and tender.  And they took the rope off my neck and allowed me to stumble back to the [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana], which was just a half a block away.
Story_ID: 278324
Speaker 1: And the sheriff [Jacob Campbell] was, the sheriff was out in front.  He said, "I'm gon' get you outta here for safe keeping."  Well, hell, it was too late for that.  He knew since early that morning because black and white people all over town had done called him and telling him to get us out of there for safekeeping so we could have a fair trial.  He did get me out of there for safekeeping.  He had three out-of-town detectives to take me in a car over to Huntington, Indiana.  It was in Huntington, Indiana I looked up and I saw silos.  And it said "Huntington, feed the children, feed the soul."  I said, "Oh, we're in Huntington, huh?"  And the driver said, "Oh, you--we had some niggers come over there and steal some chickens last week.  I bet you was one of 'em."  They had to get that chicken (unclear).  So they put me in a jail, but they were using something else, they were building a new one.  It was a regular, looked like a three-room shack to me.  And when I went in there, when they locked me up, they had three cells on one side and three cells on the other side.  There was a young, white girl across the aisle, in one of those three cells.  And she was, you could tell she was mentally deranged.  And my heart went out to her.  I don't know why, but my heart went out to her.  And in those other cells where I'm glad they had this, other three cells, they had an old white man in there.  His hair was white as snow.  And he had the bluest eyes I've ever seen in my life.  And he said, "I heard that--" he told me, he said, "--I heard that the police talking to a turnkey,--" and said or "--I knew there was a lynching going to take place over there."  He said, "My son tried to put that rope around your neck."  He said, "I tried to get him to stay out of Marion [Indiana], but he went anyway, and had me locked me up in the jail here."  And he said, "I wanted (unclear)."  You know, I didn't say a word to him.  I just stood there listening to him.  And as the cars drove by, lights, the headlights going through the window, I thought maybe that was part of the mob that had come over from Marion and found out where I was.
Story_ID: 278325
Speaker 1: Well, that morning, they took me back to Marion [Indiana] on Highway 9 [Indiana State Road 9].  And one of them said, "So they run a crowbar through that one nigger's body."  That was Thomas Shipp, they ran a crowbar through.  They had hung him on the jail windows 'cause they didn't take him up to the courthouse square.  They brought him out of [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana] and took him around to the other side of the jail and hung him from the jail windows.  You could see the jail bars, but I don't know that they was the ones that they hung him from in there.  But we have a section of the jail bars.
Speaker 2: Here in the museum [America's Black Holocaust Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right here in the museum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they said, let's go through Marion and see if that nigger's still there, see if he's still hanging.  So they asked me, said, "Was you scared, nigger?"  That's when I wanted to kill a white man, anybody, long as they was white, I wanted to kill a white man, especially those in the car with me.  The drove around in the square of the courthouse.  And that time the neighbors had, I kind of pulled a--they had me on the floor covered with floor mats.  And the windows was down.  It was hot that night.  It was August the 7th, 1930.  The windows was down, and after I pulled the floor mat off of my head and tried to look up and tried to look out the windows.  They said, "Get your damn black ass down there.  I ain't gon' hurt protecting a damn nigger like you."  And then they drove on down into the Indiana State Reformatory [Pendleton Correctional Facility, Pendleton, Indiana] which was about twelve miles away.  They registered me and some of the policemen, some of the guards coming off of duty, off of night shift and the other guards were coming on the day shift.  The day--the night shift wondered how it feel to have a rope around my neck.  And, you know the, talking about how pale I looked.  And they asked me was I scared and all that kind of stuff.  And while they was making fun of me and laughing, these other men that just came on duty, they had tears in their eyes.  They had tears in their eyes 'cause they were sorry for what had happened to us.  But I found, I found out that it was the white people, some are good and some are bad, just like some black people are good and some are bad.  So they put me in a cell, they had cells in the guardhouse.  And they prepared something to eat 'cause I hadn't had anything to eat in a long time.
Story_ID: 278326
Speaker 1: As soon as, when they put me in [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana], the jail had six floors to it, first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth.  They put Tommy [Thomas Shipp] in--they put Abe [Abram Smith] in the first floor on the right side.  And on the left side of the fence, Thomas Shipp, and upstairs, right, I'm move over, and Thomas Shipp was right between.  That's why I could look out my window and see what was going on, and a big crowd of white people out there.
Speaker 2: Now, this is before they lynched you all, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's before they lynched.  So, so in that cell block where I was incarcerated, there was twenty-one black men in there for riding a train.  They were hobos, going from job, looking for jobs 'cause jobs was really scarce.  And one of 'em had a sixteen-year old boy.  We could a passed for brothers.  I was sixteen at the time.  And he was sixteen.  And they had four white guys in there.  The jail was not segregated.  But the town was.  They had signs all over, "white," "black" and all of that stuff.  You had to go to the back door to get a hamburger and all that stuff.
Speaker 2: This is Indiana, right, Marion, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Indiana, Marion, yes.  Marion, Indiana.  You have to understand, Indiana at one time had over 500,000 Ku Klux Klansmen [KKK].
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  And the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at one time the governor was a Grand Dragon, right?
Speaker 1: No, he wanted to be the governor, D.C. Stephenson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: D.C. Stephenson.  He was, he was a kingpin.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 278327
Speaker 1: After that, after they hung Tommy [Thomas Shipp] and Abe [Abram Smith], they came back up to get me [from Grant County Jail, Marion, Indiana].  I could hear 'em coming up the steps.  They had the keys to the cellblock.  The sheriff [Jacob Campbell] had given them the keys.  And they said "[HistoryMaker] James Cameron, come forward."  Well, James Cameron wasn't about to come forward, when I'd seen what they'd done to Tommy and Abe.  And he had on, his hood, and the robes--nah, he didn't have his robe on, just his hood and he had Thompson submachine gun in his hand.  And he said, "James Cameron, come forward."  Well, James Cameron wasn't about to come forward.  And then he walked over to the sixteen-year old boy and asked him his name, he told him his name was Charles Haynes or something like that.  And I forget what I told him my name was.  By that time, the sheriff came up.  He had two guns, one was in his right hand holster and the other one was out in his hand, hanging down.  And he said, "Cameron ain't here.  So you done hung two of 'em.  That ought to satisfy you."  Then he said, "These ain't none of the boys."  So the mob turned around and the 10 or 15 people that came up with this guy with the machine gun, they all went back down stairs told the others, "Cameron is not in there."  And the rest of them said, we want him.  They began to chant.  "We want Cameron, we want Cameron, we want Cameron."  They turned around and came back up with the sheriff, entered my cellblock, said, all you damn niggers get over on this side of the cellblock.  You white guys get over here.  Well, all the so-called "damn niggers" couldn't get around, I had to get with the white boys.  And he still got that submachine gun.  Said, "Cameron is in here, and if we don't get him, we gonna lynch every god damn one of you niggers."  And when he said that, half of those blacks fell down on the floor and started crying like babes in the woods, like trained seals in a circus, holding the pant legs to their nostrils, kissing their hands, and saying, "Mr. White Folks, that boy ain't in here, honest he ain't.  We just a bunch of poor ole niggers jumping a train.  Please don't hang us."  And the other half of the black men was over there with the white guys, they wanted to fight, but they didn't have nothing to fight with.  They stood there with a defiant look on their faces.  One of the mobsters came by and slapped him on his face and knocked his teeth out.
Story_ID: 278328
Speaker 1: And you were telling us that they were, the crowd was calling for you, and the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] and the sheriff [Jacob Campbell] had all the black people on one side of the room [cell at Grant County Jail, Marion, Indiana], and they had, he had a gun on 'em, and some people were begging for their lives, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were begging like little kids lost in the woods.  They were saying, "Mr. White Folks, please don't hang us.  We ain't nothing but a bunch of poor niggers, did nothing but train riding.  We ain't done nothing.  That boy ain't in there, honest, he ain't."  They were trying their best to save me.  But it didn't work.  The half of the black guys was standing on the other side, they wanted to fight, but they didn't have nothing to fight with because there was about fifteen or twenty of the crowd came up with this monster with the machine gun.  And finally, after this, all this hooping and hollering went on, about five or ten minutes later, this other sixteen-year old boy's father said, "There is he is Mr. White Folks, the one on the other side, that's him right there."  And then they charged in on me, and they started beating me.
Speaker 1: How did you feel at that point?  I mean I guess you--
Speaker 2: I felt like all the veins in my body were changing were turning into icicles.  And I kept saying, I haven't done nothing to deserve this.  I haven't done nothing to deserve this.  I haven't done nothing to deserve this.  But they kept on beating me down the steps out in this crowd.  When I got out there, everybody tried to hit me.  At the [Indiana State] Reformatory [Pendleton Correctional Facility, Pendleton, Indiana] where I was in this cell where they had taken me for safekeeping, they gave me some food to eat 'cause I hadn't had anything to eat.
Speaker 1: Now, this is after the lynching, the next day, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did anybody tend your wounds?  I know you were beaten up pretty bad, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a brain concussion about, for three or four years, I guess.  My head just kept hurting all the time.  My mother [Vera Carter Burden] told the doctors down there to examine me.  And he said something about, if I didn't get out of there and get outta of that cell, I was gonna go into TB [tuberculosis].  But they fed me and took good care of me down there in the cellblock.  That was on a Friday.  That was on a Friday.
Speaker 1: What day of the week was it when they, when they lynched you all?  I mean what day was it when they did that?
Speaker 2: It was on a Thursday night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thursday night, August the 7th.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: August the 7th.  August 6th is when the crime took place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's August the 7th, 1930, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So how long did you stay, did they--
Speaker 2: I stayed in the- the thing that's, was great was the wall around us in that cellblock.  I went to sleep and I didn't wake up until the next morning, Saturday morning.  When I woke up Saturday morning, I heard a- I heard a noise like a crowd of people.  And I said, oh, Lord, I bet you they done come down here and tore their wall down and come on in here to get me.  So I rapped on the door with my tin cup.  And the guard in the guardhouse came down, and he looked at me--I didn't have to say nothing to him.  He said, "No, son, he said, that ain't no mob."  He said, "That's a, that's a crowd of people coming in to see our ballgame.  See the department gonna have a good ball team.  Some of the big league scouts picked out a couple of 'em and put 'em in the big leagues and got a pardon for 'em, you know, got a parole for 'em, rather than a pardon."  And that gave me a big relief when I heard that.
Story_ID: 278329
Speaker 1: They had an election in January, no, in November they had an election.  This is in 1937.  My mother [Vera Carter Burden] had my trial changed from Marion [Indiana] over to Anderson, Indiana which was just twenty-nine miles away.
Speaker 2: So you were in jail for six years before they tried you?  Or did--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I was in jail for one year.
Speaker 2: Okay, one year, all right.  So that's 1931?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1931.
Speaker 2: Okay, so your trial was in Anderson, Indiana?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened during the trial--now, what did they charge you with anyway?  What did they think you all had done?  What was it?
Speaker 1: They charged me with murder, rape, auto banditry, highway robbery and bad associations.  All those charges they had against me.
Speaker 2: You could be charged with bad associations?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you can--you have to watch your associates.  You could get in trouble fooling around with bad people.  A lot of people don't know that.  You don't have to commit the crime, just associate with 'em.  They gon' pick you up because you're a member of the gang and you gon' have a hell-of-a-time explaining it to 'em.
Speaker 2: Now, I've heard this.  Can you tell us the story of what happened that got you all in trouble?  I know that it had something to do with trying to rob somebody at a Lovers Lane, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lovers Lane.
Speaker 2: In Marion, right?
Speaker 1: In Marion.
Speaker 2: Okay, what happened, and how did they get you to go with 'em to do this?
Speaker 1: Well, they [Thomas Shipp and Abraham Smith] was gonna give me a ride to go home.  But they wouldn't let me out of the car.  And they kept on driving.  They said, we, let's hold up somebody and get some money and get a new car.  I said, "Nah, let me out, 'cause--let me out of here.  I don't wanna have nothing to do with this."  They drove on out by Soldiers Homes [National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers, Marion Branch, Marion, Indiana], crossed the 38th Street Bridge and went down to Lovers Lane that ran parallel to the Mississinewa River--the Mississinewa, the Mississinewa River.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, (laughter) all right.
Speaker 1: They came to the car and parked on the roadside.  And- they said let's hold these people up and see if they got any money.  So they got out of the car and went through the underbrush, and I followed them just, I was tied to 'em.  We got to the car.  We had our hats on.  We got out to the car.  Abe [Abraham Smith] pulled a gun out from his bib overalls.  And he said, "Here, Apples, you hold these people up."  Now, they called me Apples because when I was in these country schools, my mother raised a whole lotta apples.  And I'd take and put a whole lot of 'em in my shirt and looked like I had an inner tube on and go to school and give 'em out to the kids and put some under my desk.  They had a desk then.  One time the teacher, Hunter Terry [ph.], Hunter Terry was his name, the school teacher.  He was putting something on the board, a problem or something.  And I reached under my desk and got that apple and took a great big bite up out of it, filled my mouth up with it.  And the kids started snickering on me, telling on a sly, you know.  You know how kids snicker in school and tell on you.  He turned around and looked.  He said, "Bring that apple up here, Apples."  And from then on, that was my name, Apples.  I go back to Marion right today, and I've been back there about five or six times.  They still call me Apples.
Story_ID: 278330
Speaker 1: Well, I took the gun, went up to the car and opened the door and said, "Stick 'em up, this is a hold up."  And the man [Claude Deeter] got out and as soon as he got out, I could see he was a white friend of mine.  I had my hat on, and he didn't recognize me.  And this young girl [Mary Ball] got out, this white girl got out of the car.  And she was so pale and lovely and frightened looking.  And when I saw who he was, 'cause I was his shoeshine boy.  He come in from Fairmount [Indiana] every Saturday, and have me shine his shoes.  He wouldn't let nobody else shine his shoes, but me.  So he was the one I was holding up.  I gave the gun back to Abe [Abraham Smith].  I said, "Here, I don't wanna have nothing to do with you guys."  And I left and ran down the road about two blocks away, when I heard some shots, bang, bang, bang.  I wasn't about to go back to see who was shooting who.  I was foolish for being out there but I wasn't crazy.  And just then a car came down the road to the Lovers Lane, the headlights on.  I jumped over in the gully, hoping a snake wouldn't bite me.  And the car passed.  Then I got out and ran all the way home, like I say, about six miles.  When I got home, my mother [Vera Carter Burden] said, "Look at you.  You're ringing wet with sweat.  Are you in some kind of trouble?"  I said, "No, mom, I've been playing football in Old Man Henderson's field."  She said, "Go on upstairs.  I'll talk to you in the morning."  And I knew when the in the morning come, that woman was going to pick me as clean as a turkey 'cause she had a way of talking to her children.  So I stumbled up the steps like a drunken man, staggering, (unclear) like I'd been drinking all night.  I put my old nightgown on, made out of some old bleached flour sacks.  See, they put flour and things in, put in cloth bags in those days.  And now they put in paper or cartons.  Mother used to take those and boil 'em and make sheets and pillow cases.  And my two sisters, Marie [Cameron] and Della [Idella Cameron (ph.)], she made draws for them, but they didn't like to wear 'em because they were too itchy.  But they had to wear 'em anyway 'cause we was poor.  We didn't have the money to buy things like other people.  So I'm pacing the floor up in there with my gown, with my flour-sack gown on.  I feel like the leg is, the veins in my leg wanted to jump out of there.  I was wondering what had happened out there in Lover Lane, who was shooting who, was Tommy [Thomas Shipp] and Abe still out there or had they run too.  This goes on for a couple hours.
Story_ID: 278331
Speaker 1: After a while, it was a knock on the door.  We lived in an old barn that had been made into living quarters.  It still had cross ties on the floor.  So we tried to cover it with linoleum, but it wouldn't work.  So my mother [Vera Carter Burden] opened the door when she heard that knock on her door.  And there was about twenty or thirty automobiles.  All of 'em had followed the police out there, and their headlights was shining right into the door where my mother was standing.  And they wanted to know if [HistoryMaker] James Cameron live here?  She said, "Yes, he's my only son, said, what's the matter?"  Said, "Is he in some kind of trouble?"  They wouldn't tell her.  She broke down and started crying.  I mean she hit the ceiling.  They said, "Where is he?"  She said, "He's upstairs."  Then I could hear 'em coming up the steps. They looked tall, looked like they reached up to the ceiling.  One of 'em had a flashlight out, flash it on the room where I was sleeping, where I was trying to rest.  I didn't go to sleep.  They said, "Get up outta that bed and put your clothes on."  I ain't feel the- a thing until the flashlight coming through the clothes- robe I had on.  They said, "Did you tell your mother what this is?"  And I- I said, "We haven't done nothing."  He said, "The hell you haven't 'cause you went out here, and you raped a white woman [Mary Ball] and you shot a white man [Claude Deeter]."  I said, "I don't know nothing about that."  He said, "Come on, she wants to see you."  So I slipped in my tennis shoes, put my overalls on.  They grabbed me by the arm and held onto me going down the steps, got out, down the steps where my mother was.  And she was just begging them, please, crying like a poor woman.  And she was a poor woman.  She was crying, and telling 'em, "Tell me what they want him for, what are you arresting him for?  What has he done?  He's a good boy, what has he done?"  They said, they didn't say nothing to her.  They just dragged me right on out the door, got me in this touring car.  They had a touring car.  They didn't have the patrol wagon.  This is a big, a big limousine, something where the top could go down and come up again.  They put me in there, and in the back seat, one policeman on each side of me, and two policemen in the front.  And one, one of 'em was a black policemen named Harley Burton.  His name was Harley, Harley, H-A-R-L-E-Y, Harley Burton.  He was only one of the two black policemen they had on the police force.  He told me, he said, "Boy, if you don't tell the truth, said I'm a beat the hell outta you."  But he never touched me.  He never laid a hand on me.  And I was scared, yes, I was scared.  They drove on downtown to this three-story building, a house, residential house while they were building a new one in Marion [Indiana].  And I noticed that four or five people, black people standing on the corner, looking up at the windows of the [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana].  And when I got out of the car, they looked at me, and there wasn't any smiles on their faces or nothing like that.  They just standing there, curious, you know, what's going on?  They took me upstairs.  They read something from the police department, then they opened the door, and there was a sheriff sitting in that room at a desk.  He had a sun visor on and his sleeves rolled up.  It was hot that night.
Story_ID: 278332
Speaker 1: He told me, "Sit down in the chair."  I sat down in the chair.  He said, "Your name [HistoryMaker] James Cameron?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "How old are you?"  I told him sixteen.  He said, "You know Thomas Shipp and Abraham Smith [sic. Abraham Smith]?"  I said, "Yeah, I know 'em."  He said, "Were you with 'em tonight?"  I said, "Yeah, I was with 'em a little while."  Now, the way they found out who did the shooting, see, Tommy had a 1926 Ford Roadster, the kind with the rumble seat in the back.  And then one other colored boy had a 1926 Ford Roadster.  When those shots were fired, when those shots were fired, a farmer heard 'em out there, and he ran and he was sitting on the, sitting on the--standing on the cliffs out there, and the moon was shining brighter than daylight and you can see.  He said, he saw a '26 [1926] Ford Roadster with some colored people in it, drive away.  He said he threw a shot at 'em, but he couldn't find 'em.  So the police went around and felt this other colored boy's motor, and it was cold.  And they felt Thomas'--Tommy's motor, and it was hot.  So they arrested him, and then they got Abe, I guess, from there.  So he asked me, "What did you boys do there?"  The sheriff [Jacob Campbell] asked me, "What did you boys do together?"  And I told him exactly what had happened, how I took the gun and everything.  And they wouldn't let me outta the car to go home.  And while he was writing, the policemen come in there and wrote on the back of the chair where I was sitting.  And he- he had wrote about an hour or twenty minutes.  So I didn't know what he was writing down.  And so, now, he hand me a piece of paper and a pencil and told me to sign it.  Well, my mother [Vera Carter Burden] always told us children to read something before you sign it.  So I picked it up to look at it, and one of the policemen in the back of me hit me upside the head and seem like the Fourth of July was celebrating up there.  I saw all kind of stars and everything, and I hit the floor.  When I hit the floor, about three or four of the others around there started kicking me and stomping me, just as if I was some kind of snake or something.  So finally somebody grabbed and slammed me back in the chair where I was.  And they said--he said, "He asked you to sign it, not read it."  Well, I read it.  That's when they put me in the [Grant County] Jail [Marion, Indiana] over there with these twenty-one blacks.
Story_ID: 278333
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this, tell me something about Abe [Abraham Smith].  What was he like and--
Speaker 2: Abe, I found out later, he had been down to the Pendleton [Indiana State Reformatory; Pendleton Correctional Facility, Pendleton, Indiana] a couple of times.  I guess that's where he got educated.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a reformatory.
Speaker 2: Nah, it's just something like a, like a detention center.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.  All right.  And what was Abe's last name?
Speaker 2: Smith.
Speaker 1: Smith, okay, all right.  And how old was he?
Speaker 2: Nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tommy [Thomas Shipp] was eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Tommy's last name was--
Speaker 2: S-H-I-P-P.
Speaker 1: Shipp, okay.  Okay, eighteen.  Now, what were their personalities like?  What were there--were they good friends of yours?  Did you see 'em all the time?
Speaker 2: Tom, Tom was a good friend.  We went to school together, was schoolmates.  He's one of 'em I used to give the apples to.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: D. A. Payne School [Marion, Indiana].
Speaker 1: D. Payne--
Speaker 2: D. A. Payne, P-A-Y-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think the D stands for David.
Speaker 1: Payne School, okay.  And that was a black school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had two rooms.  First, second, third and fourth grades was in the right-hand room, and the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth grades was in the left-hand room.  And time you went up through the eighth grade, you knew well you knew what had happened all that time.
Story_ID: 278334
Speaker 1: When they filed all those charges against me, [Robert L.] Bailey and [Robert L.] Brokenburr from Indianapolis, Indiana, you've heard of them?  Well Brokenburr was the board, chairman of Madam [C.J.] Walker's cosmetics [Madam C.J. Walker Manufacturing Company, Indianapolis, Indiana].  He died about ten years ago.  But Robert Bailey, Robert Bailey died, oh, about thirty or forty years ago.  They were the two black attorneys at NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had applied for to defend me.  So they moved me from the, from the guardhouse down to- to a new jail in Anderson, Indiana.  Then they had the election in November, and a new sheriff was elected.  A new sheriff was elected, and in Anderson.  He was a World War II [WWII] veteran.
Speaker 2: World War I [WWI], right, World War I veteran.
Speaker 1: World War I, yes.  His name was Bernard Bradley, Bradley, B-R-A-D-L-E-Y.  When he took office, January the 1st, he came up to see me in my cell.  He said, "Jim [HistoryMaker James Cameron], I'm the new sheriff now, said, I don't believe all that stuff that they put out about you."  He said, "I'm gonna treat you right," said, "The mob say they coming over here to get you.  But if they come over here, I'll be ready for 'em.  Nobody gon' take any of my prisoners."  So he in Elwood, Indiana.  That's about eighteen miles from Anderson.  And when [Thomas Woodrow] Wilson ran for president, they had a sign up there said, "Nigger, don't let the sun shine down on you in this town."  That was in Elwood.  But when he ran for president, they took the sign down, but when he lost, they put it back up again, see.  So Bradley was a devout Catholic.  He lived in Elwood, Indiana, and since that was in Madison County [Indiana], he had a chance to run for sheriff, which included Elwood, Indiana.  So things go wrong, he has some of his buddies from the Elwood, some of his [U.S.] Army buddies--he belonged to The Forty & Eight Legion [La Societe des Quarante Hommes et Huit Chevaux].  He belonged to the Forty & Eighth Legionnaires.  He had his buddies to come over with rifles and pistols to surround the jail.  And he got word to the mob in Marion [Indiana] if they come, they're gon' kill every damn one of 'em.
Story_ID: 278335
Speaker 1: Tell us about Sheriff [Bernard] Bradley.
Speaker 2: Sheriff Bradley, he says, well after a couple of months, he let me out of the jail and made a trustee out of me--he made a trustee out of me.  There was another guy in the jail, his name was Pat Mitchum, M-I-T-C-H-U-M, Pat Mitchum, he was something like the talk of the town and everybody in town knew him, white and black.  He was black.  Now, he told Pat to take me around in Hazelwood [Anderson, Indiana], which is a neighborhood, which is a black neighborhood, and had Pat take me on down to those black neighborhoods.  And when they found out who I was, they--I didn't have to eat jail food anymore 'cause they took me out and around in the morning, see, first thing in the morning, I'd go around with a pencil and paper and see what the prisoners wanted, tobacco, cakes, chewing gum, shaving cream, handkerchiefs or whatever they wanted.  And then I'd bring it back and give it to 'em.  Then I had the rest of the day off.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what a trustee is, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You can work--okay.
Speaker 2: I had the day off.  I went uptown and (unclear) I bought all that stuff for 'em.  One time I saw the judge who I was gonna be tried before.  And he looked at me and shook his head and he called, he said, "Hi, son."  I said, "Hi, judge."  His name was Judge [Carl F.] Morrow, M-O-R-R-O-W [Carl F. Morrow].  And when I got back to the, to jail that afternoon--I had to be back at a certain time, and I never failed the- I never failed the sheriff.  I was always back there at the time he wanted me back there.  He said, "Judge Morrow called me up and told me I shouldn't be letting you walk around town like you're doing."  He said, "I told him, he run his courthouse the way he wanna run it, and I run my jail the way I wanna run it."  And then he stopped and slapped his knee, he got a kick out of that.  But I was in jail for nine months. When I went up for trial, Sheriff Bradley and his two kids, nah, scratch that.  Sheriff Bradley had two children, a boy and a girl.  I used to get out on the jail lawn and play with 'em, let 'em ride me like a horse because they were about four years old and about five years old.  They were kids.  They used to look at me and say, "How come Pat's hand was black and mine was white like theirs?"  And I told 'em how God had different gardeners and the flowers were growing in those gardens, and other people liked doing flowers, you know. And I said "That's the reason God made all kind of flowers.  He made all kind of people."  And that would satisfy them.
Story_ID: 278336
Speaker 1: Where was I?
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you were talking about, now you were waiting for trial, and you were in jail [Madison County Jail, Anderson, Indiana] for nine months, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  My trial lasted five days.  And the courtroom was like salt and pepper, white and black.  And Sheriff [Bernard] Bradley told me when I went over there, as we was walking from the jail over to the courthouse, I didn't have any handcuffs on or nothing like that.  I was just walking like everybody else.  And [Robert L.] Bailey and [Robert L.] Brokenburr was there.  One time they was late about getting there, and the Judge [Carl F.] Morrow had some state troopers to go out and look for 'em and see if the [Klu Klux] Klan [KKK] had got a hold of 'em.  So every time my trial on those five charges, every time my case would come up, Bailey and Brokenburr would have the charge squashed.  And then the next time I'm there for the court, squashed.  Next time I'm there for court, squashed, next time I'm there for court, squashed.  The only thing left was- an accessory before the fact, not to the fact.  An accessory before the fact to manslaughter.
Speaker 2: So you were convicted of becoming an accessory before the fact?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And the judge, the judge telling me two to twenty-one years in prison.
Speaker 2: How many years?
Speaker 1: Two to twenty-one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That meant they couldn't keep me no less than two years, no more than twenty-one.  With indeterminate sentences like that, you don't know when you're gonna get out.  You can do your two years, and they can keep you the rest of the twenty-one years if they want to.
Story_ID: 278337
Speaker 1: Anyway, in the prison [Madison County Jail, Anderson, Indiana], when they let me, when they put me in the general prison population, after quarantine, they- the prisoners, white and black, came up to me and said, "[HistoryMaker James] Cameron, we thought you was gon' beat the rap."  I said, "Nah, I didn't. I got two to twenty-one [years]."  They said, "We gon' see that you make it in here.  Ain't nobody gon' bother you."  They didn't say bother.  They used the vulgar word.
Speaker 2: I see, I see.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so then when the guys tried to make a punk outta me, I--all I had to do is just mention who it was, and they'd get out on the field, or before the ball game, before the game start, they all played around with each other and get in the games, you know.  Man, they grabbed that joker and beat the hell out of him.  They didn't fool with me.  The thing of it is, they said, "Cameron, you got a hell of a story," said, "Why don't you write it?"  So right then I started writing my story, how it all began, what happened and everything.  I'd be here all day telling you about it.  But anyhow, they put me in the shirt job, and then they told me, give me three weeks to learn how to run that sewing machine, put collars on the shirts and sew the sleeves on the shirts.  I had to get eighteen dozen a day out.  But it was, they didn't give me three weeks.  They gave me one week learning.  But as luck would have it, there was a white boy who was over the inmates, you know, something like a straw boss.  He coul- he could get on that machine and work on that machine like it was electricity, you know.  It was electricity, I mean like an automatic.  And he chewed tobacco.  But every Sunday, they gave you a plug of Brown Eagle tobacco and you know, a bag of Bull Durham tobacco-- either one you want.  You couldn't have both of 'em.  And every Sunday, the captain would come around-- give you one or the other.  Well, I didn't smoke or chew, and all I had to do was give my plug of tobacco to, to the straw boss, and he'd make out like my machine broke down and everything.  And therefore, I didn't have to make tasks that day, see.  And then that's how I never did get in that guardhouse while I was there, but sometimes guys that would go in the guardhouse and come out and look like skeletons.  I was sitting by people, a white fellow jumped up and looking pretty crazy.
Story_ID: 278338
Speaker 1: You know, but when I went--my eighteen months was up, I was gonna see if I could get a government pardon, a government parole.  They said, "Nah, you gon' have to do your two years."  So I did my two years, and I went up for investigation because of my parole.  They sent me back thirty days of investigation.  I did those thirty days, and they sent me back sixty days.  I did those sixty days, and they sent me back ninety days.  I did those ninety days, they sent me back six months.  I did those six months and they take me back a year.  So that was four and twenty months.  Next time I went up for parole after my year was up, I didn't press my clothes.  I didn't comb my hair.  I didn't give a damn how I looked, you know, 'cause I thought they gon' give me two years and then after that, give me four years, and after that give me eight years till over twenty-one years was up.  But one of 'em, the whole parole board that sent me back for investigation, one of 'em was from Marion, Indiana.  The new governor, Paul V. McNutt--Paul V. McNutt, he was a new governor, he got rid of 'em and put his own men on there.  And one of 'em, one of 'em happened to be one that was on the parole board all the time.  But my mother [Vera Carter Burden] was washing clothes for him and ironing for him.  So he just know.  So, the man was sitting there and then I was standing up there in front of him.  He said, "You think if we let you out of here, you'll get back in trouble again?"  I said, "Nah, you just let me out, you'll find out."  So they said, "Okay, we gon' give you a five-year parole," said, "Where you gonna go?"  I said, "I'll move to Detroit, Michigan, and stay with my Aunt Catherine Brown [ph.], my mother's sister."
Speaker 2: So what year was that when you were paroled?
Speaker 1: Thirty-five [1935].
Story_ID: 278339
Speaker 1: You went to Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes, sir, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I rode the New York Central [Railroad] from Indianapolis [Indiana] up to Detroit.  I didn't sleep a bit on the train.  All I could do is just hear the wheels rolling.  When I got up to Detroit, I got out, and I had a map how to get there.  I was walking down Hazel Street--was that Hazel Street?  Yeah, Hazel Street, that's the main drag in the black neighborhood. (Pause) And people, people fighting and drunk, laying out in the streets.  One guy was being beat out of a beer joint, and the guy told him, if you come back in here again, I'm a kill you.  I just kept on walking.  I didn't stop or nothing.  I just got in a cab and went to my, 6018 Beaubien Street, B-A-U-B-I-E-N [sic.], Baubien Street, 6018.  That's where Catherine [Brown (ph.)] was living.  She was shacking up with some joker.  He must have had a bad case of small pox.  His name was Edgar Brown [ph.].  And he looked awful, if you see him coming in the alley at nighttime, you'd probably run.  But she was shacking up with that joker.  And when I got to her house, she didn't wait until I could get settled or nothing.  There was a lot of people living in the back of the house, you know, like a alley- like a alley like.  She got me up on top of the garage, like you would--she lived upstairs.  And the people downstairs had a garage so she's walking me out on top of the garage and told the whole neighborhood, "Hey, he's here.  He's here.  My nephew is here."  And after I thought to myself, "She wasn't supposed to tell everybody that I was there."  And the people out there in the neighborhood, in the back there, about fifty or sixty of 'em living back there.  It was just jammed.  They're washing clothes, they're washing babies, babies hollering, everything, some of 'em all kinds of shapes, big, fat, skinny.  So I told Catherine that, she said, she said something like, "You do your diligence and don't nobody need to know anything about it."  That's what she said.
Story_ID: 278340
Speaker 1: So they used to make wine in his [Edgar Brown (ph.)] house.  She [Cameron's aunt, Catherine Brown (ph.)] had a-- she had a kitchen stove.  She'd go get a bushel of grapes, buy the whole bushel and bring 'em to-- back home-- and put 'em around a copper--
Speaker 2: Pot or something, a boiler.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And put yeast in there, potatoes and put it in a barrel and let it sit, and she put it in gallon jugs and put it up under the bed, call herself hiding it from Edgar.  Edgar would drink half the wine and put half of it in water.  When she found out about, she'd cuss him up a blue streak.  I thought she was gon' try to kill him, you know.  One time I went--after I'd been there a couple of weeks, had, almost had a nervous breakdown, 'cause they was fussing and fighting all the time, I went with him --he had a pretty car.  He went through the alley looking for junk, and when he'd come to garage door that was open and it was something in there that he could steal, he'd get it, put it in his car and there was the last time I went with him 'cause that was the one time I went with him, and it was the last time I went with him.  I went down to the parole office in Detroit [Michigan] where I was supposed to report to, and he was a young, white fellow, very nice white fellow.  And I told him the trouble I was having and how I didn't want the people to think I was stealing and have me back in the prison for a parole violation.  So I asked him could I be my own custodian.  He said, "Yes," said, "but you have to report to me every month."  I said, "That'll be all right.  I can do that in a minute."  So I go back on Hazel Street, and I go in a restaurant.  This big, fat, Aunt Jemima-type waitress sent me this bowl of oatmeal and some bread for a nickel.  I had about three or four dollars left in my pocket.  I asked her did she know where I could get a job.  She said, "Nah, jobs is as scarce as hen's teeth around here."  And she said, "I know where you can get a room to live."  She said, "My pastor rents rooms out to people."  So her pastor was the one attended church and the preacher would call on him and have a few words to say, and he'd get up and say a few words, and he called himself a preacher.  So I went to 525 Alexander Street-- 525 Alexander Street.  And he had an army cot in--he had an army cot in there, made out of canvass.  And I could fit my, I could fit my suitcase under there all right.  He charged me a dollar and a quarter a week.
Story_ID: 278341
Speaker 1: So I got up the next morning, was standing on Warren [Avenue] and Forest Avenues [Detroit, Michigan].  And here comes a horse-drawn milk truck, had rubber tires on it like an automobile and the horse was pulling it.  The horse knew just where to go, where to stop and everything.  I was standing on the corner there by myself.  And the man was driving, driving the thing, says, "Hey, come here."  So I looked around, and wasn't nobody standing there but me.  So I went over to see what he wanted to do.  And he told me he'd give me fifty cents a day if I'd be his milk boy, take a gallon and take a quart of milk up on the fifth floor, pound of butter on the sixteenth floor and eggs on the--another floor, have me running up and down the steps while he was doing the--he, I had to be there at seven o'clock in the morning and work till eleven o'clock in the daytime.  I got three dollars and a half a week.  I kept going to church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Detroit, Michigan].  Reverend [William H.] Peck was a preacher.  I kept going to church every Sunday, and I was sitting with a bunch of college graduates, pharmacists, lawyers, doctors and I had-- not much to say, but I was always going to, go to Sunday school, always participate in the discussions and things like that.  And Reverend Peck tried to get me a job at the Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan].  He gave me a letter, but I didn't get hired.  Now, they had already told me when I got my parole, don't tell anybody where you been.  So it was years before anybody found out I was an ex-convict 'cause I kept my mouth shut.  I never told 'em.  When they said you ever been in commission of a crime, I said, no, 'cause if they didn't check it, it's their fault.  It wasn't mine.  So one of these guys in the Sunday school class, his name was Daniel Hayes [ph.].  He was, he was a pharmacist, and he said, I know a drugstore that's looking for a soda jerk.  He said, it pay nine dollars a week.  He said, I'll tell him about you and maybe you'll get on and get you a job.  So this nine dollars a week, and that's $3.50 I'm making on the milk truck 'cause I didn't have to go to the drugstore and be a soda jerk until twelve to nine.  Now, that way I was able to have evenings, more.  I was able to make fifteen cent dinner to twenty-five cent dinners.  When you get the twenty-five cent dinner, man, they gave you everything, mashed potatoes, gravy, bread, dessert.  Then I could stand out on the corner in front of the restaurant with a toothpick in my mouth and make 'em think I been eating steak.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And sometimes I had been eating steak, sure.
Story_ID: 278342
Speaker 1: I got a job at Hood (unclear). (Pause) I worked at the Old Gov's, G-O-V, apostrophe S, Old Gov's Coffee Shop [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Now, where--is that on the east side of Detroit [Michigan] too?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Was that on the east side of Detroit, too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was all in that neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Old Gold, Pure Gold Cigarettes, I was a distributor, distributing for Old Gold Cigarettes.  I helped a guy build- this white guy named Charlie [ph.], hired me, and he paid me some good money too.  You know what I had to do?  I had to get these cement blocks, stack 'em up around where the pavement had been dug out so he could build it up so when the carpenters would come and build on top of it, see.  He was a contractor.  I had the mix the mortar.  I had to mix the mortar and carry it on my shoulder and keep him and mortar so he could keep going with those bricks.  Man, I was going around there like Popeye.  But I didn't mind it at all.  Oh, but so many other jobs I had, I've forgot about 'em.  I used to help this guy do plumbing work.  I had to climb up under the houses and take this stuff, wrap it around the water pipes so they wouldn't freeze up in the wintertime and we had put in new toilets.  I've forgotten a lot of that stuff now.  One time when I was delivering laundry, I was waiting for a streetcar on Winter Street, W-I-N-T-E-R.  I saw a, turned the corner, and I saw a couple little brown-skinned girls standing there on the corner.  And it was one I took a liking to right away.  I asked them, "Did they know where Winter Street is?"  They said, "Yeah, this is Winter Street."  I was so busy looking at her, I didn't pay any attention to the sign.  So I asked her her name and could I come around and see her.  And she said, "Yes."  She gave me her address and everything.  We went together for a year or so.  Finally, I asked her to marry me, and I had to tell her all about my troubles.  She said, "I don't care what you used to be. It's what you are now that counts."  So we got married at the old Baptist preacher's house.  He had to wait--he had a couple of weeks to get his money for marrying us.  I think he charged us two dollars.
Speaker 2: What was your wife's name?  What was her name?
Speaker 1: Virginia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her name was Virginia Hamilton.
Speaker 2: Virginia Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 278343
Speaker 1: --You married Virginia Hamilton in 1938.  And--
Speaker 2: May the 15th, 1938.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a sweet little chica too, boy.  Now, she's eighty-six years old now.  And I'm ninety-one.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were just telling us about Stroh Brewing Company [Stroh's Brewery Company] in Detroit [Michigan], and they wouldn't hire black people, right?  So there was a boycott?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a boycott.  They put a boycott on.  They come there with most of the beer there, they left with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they would bring the beer in, but nobody would buy it?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That was in '36 [1936].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1936.  So did you ever get the kind of job you wanted?
Speaker 2: I went to Wayne University [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] that whole semester.
Speaker 1: Okay, you went to school, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause these doctors and lawyers where I was in Sunday school with, I didn't want 'em to think I was a dummy.  So I wanted to learn more for myself.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you go to Wayne State?
Speaker 2: About '37 [1937].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1937.  Now, what was the name of the church?  It was an Episcopal church, you said, right?
Speaker 2: African Methodist Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: African American, a Baptist church you went to?
Speaker 2: No, African Methodist--
Speaker 1: Oh, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A.M.E.
Speaker 1: Well, was it Bethel A.M.E. [Church, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Bethel, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  I know where that is in Detroit.
Speaker 2: It's on Beaubien [Street] and St. Antione [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Bethel A.M.E.  Okay, so Bethel A.M.E., so you were going to church there, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, so you went to Wayne State--
Speaker 2: No, Wayne University.
Speaker 1: Wayne University, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took up typing and shorthand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did learn how to type but I didn't, I didn't keep up the shorthand.
Speaker 1: Okay, did that help you get a better job?
Speaker 2: No, the jobs wasn't open for--black people didn't have those kind of jobs then.  You had to be a superman to get one of those jobs.
Story_ID: 278344
Speaker 1: And I think Joe Louis was up there.  I went to see him and he won the title [world heavyweight champion] too.
Speaker 2: Oh, did you see the fight--
Speaker 1: I drove all the way up [sic. down] from Detroit [Michigan] to Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And when I left there, I was standing up against a pretty big fellow, and somebody come up to him and says, "You know who that is?"  I said, "Nah."  He said, "That's Oscar DePriest, the first black representative in modern [U.S.] Congress."  Of course, during the Civil War, we had all kind of blacks in the Congress.  But they got rid of 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard that Oscar DePriest was a tall man, tall.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a tall man, big, yeah.
Speaker 2: And he wore his hair in that pompadour--
Speaker 1: He had his hat on, and I didn't see it.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was something.
Speaker 2: So you're standing next to the congressman at the fight?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So who did Joe Louis beat to win the championship?
Speaker 1: Kenny Braddock [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: James, James [J.] Braddock.
Speaker 2: That's the one they made the movie about just recently, right, James Braddock?  They have a new movie out about him called, 'Cinderella Man.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they called him, the Cinderella Man.  The thing about it, they had a, all the heavyweight preliminary bouts, the four-round bout, the two--they would get in there.  You could see where they're missing each other.  Then the six-round bouts, eight-round bouts, and twelve-round bouts.  And then Louis and Braddock came on, and man, it was just like, just like two kids.  They know just when to duck, when to dodge and everything, you know.  And Joe Louis was pounding on him down there, and then when Braddock went down there, Louis would get him up there.  He was just a slim fellow.  He was like a machine, he was like a machine and just, pow pow, up and down.  I think it was the eighth round, I think he knocked him out.  Braddock, Braddock's legs just came out like this.  His legs just gave out on him, had rubber legs, they call 'em.  And Joe Louis' mother [Lillie Reese Barrow], I think Joe Louis bought a house for his mother.  See, I lived on McCullough Street [ph.].
Speaker 2: On McCullough Street?
Speaker 1: Yeah, now it's what they call Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan].  And I lived like on this block here, and right behind me on the next block, Joe Louis bought his mother a fine, beautiful home.  She lived in Black Bottom too.
Speaker 2: Did you ever meet Joe Louis?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I've been in the room where he was though.
Speaker 2: So did the people of Detroit have a big celebration when he won?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, when I got out of there and stood up along Oscar DePriest, I couldn't talk.  I was all hoarse.  I'd been screaming and hollering all the time.  And man, you should have seen the celebration that went on in Chicago [Illinois].  It was really something.  Then they come in with the white hope.  Louis would knock every one of 'em down.  He fought all of 'em, I think he defended his title thirty-seven times, thirty-seven times [sic. twenty-five times].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that's a record too.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: That's some kind of a record I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Didn't they have something called the "Bum of the Month Club"?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: "The Bum of the Month Club," they called it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they named a stadium [Joe Louis Arena, Detroit, Michigan] after him too in Detroit--
