Story_ID: 31528
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers' interview is being conducted with Dr. S. Allen Counter at University Hall, Harvard Yard at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  And the date is December 8th, the year 2005.  The interviewer is Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Mr. HistoryMaker, Dr. HistoryMaker (laughter), would you give me your full name and would you spell your full name for me.
Speaker 2: Well, the full name is Samuel Allen Counter, S-A-M-U-E-L, A-L-L-E-N, C-O-U-N-T-E-R, and Junior.  And it's for that reason that I'm called Allen because my father [Samuel Counter, Sr.] was called Samuel.  And that was one way to distinct (laughter).  Very few people prefer to be called junior, at least beyond age six or so.  So, it's for that reason.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So I'm called by all my colleagues and friends, I had been since I was a kid, Allen.  And I hope that answers your question.
Speaker 1: Good, Dr. Counter, your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Americas, Georgia, yeah, Americas, Georgia.  Have you heard of it?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Okay, Americas, Georgia, a small town not that far from Atlanta [Georgia] which is the major capital city, on July 8th, nineteen hundred and-blah, blah, blah (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: Nineteen hundred and-
Speaker 2: Ay, yah, yah (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Where did West Palm Beach [Florida] come from in your literature?
Speaker 2: I traveled there with my family, of course.  But I was just an infant, and I was reared in that area.  Actually, I grew up in, in a small area, at the time when the Everglades extended all the way up to Loxahatchee and the Boynton Beach area of Florida.  And it was primarily in Palm Beach County [Florida] that I grew up.  And from there, from Boynton up to West Palm Beach.  So that's why West Palm Beach is my background.  I attended school there and high school there.  Before leaving to go -
Speaker 1: How old were you when your family left Americas, Georgia to go up to Florida?
Speaker 2: I think I must have been around two years old.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah, around two years old.
Speaker 1: So just two years in Americas-
Speaker 2: Yes, in those days your parents looked for work in various places.  So my grandparents and parents were able to get some work while my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] was still studying.  And my father attended Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].  And so they were able to get work in Florida, and they traveled to Florida in search of work.
Story_ID: 31529
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your mother [Anne Johnson Counter] and your father [Samuel Counter, Sr.].  We wanna have some family background--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --as context for your life story.  Tell me about your mother.  What was her name?  When was she born and where?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ann Johnson Counter.  Her place of birth was also Americas, Georgia.  She was the daughter of Edie Pettis, P-E-T-T-I-S, forgive me, Edie Johnson, and forgive me again.  Her maiden name was Nelms, N-E-L-M-S, Edie Nelms, who married my mother's father, John Johnson.  And she--they were both from Georgia, and she later with him moved to Florida.  My mother was born in Georgia, and they moved to Florida.  And my mother and father--who went off to the military by the way, near the end of World War II and served in Germany and Belgium and France, I believe.  And I have one aspect of his medical, his--forgive me, military record, where he was commended by his Commander for the work that he did during the war [WWII].  And so while he was there, we were living in Florida.  And when he returned, as you can imagine, it was very difficult for African Americans to find work at that time, and my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] was studying.  He was studying.  He resumed his studies.  And he later became a business manager for a group and for a police force.  And my mother finished nursing school.  I was extremely close to my mother.  She--my father later died of a heart attack.  He had been wounded in the military.  And we're convinced that his wounds had something to do with his premature dying.  But my mother went on to finish her studies in nursing and to become a member of the Visiting Nurses' Association, the Public Health Nurses, and also she worked for a time in tuberculosis nursing because we had to stay with her on the grounds of this big center where she was working with patients who had tuberculosis.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Story_ID: 31530
Speaker 1: This was in Florida.  In Lantana, Florida.  And so the strength of that group came primarily from a strong grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] and grandfather [Hayward Jack Pettis] who helped to anchor the family very well in Florida.  My grandmother did domestic work.  She was hired out in Palm Beach [Florida] to the wealthy families.  She's a very intelligent woman.  She's still alive as we speak.  She's ninety-nine years old.
Speaker 2: Her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Edie, and she later, after my other grandfather died, she later married Jack Pettis, Hayward Jack Pettis.  And he died recently.  And she's the surviving member of the family.  Unfortunately, my mother passed on December 8th, 2004.  And this is the day of the anniversary of her passing.  But she was a real strong person who helped many people.  She--in fact, after she died, to her surprise--to our surprise, the 'Palm Beach Post' came out with an article about her, about a lady who had helped many, and we're very proud of that, that she had helped thousands in her lifetime as a healthcare giver, whether they were children of indigent parents or young girls trying to learn to take care of their babies that they had had early on in their lives as teenagers.  She was always there helping to train and develop young people and the elderly as well.  And so they wrote up this wonderful article about her which we were pleased to see.  She was a very unassuming person.  She looked for success in her children.
Story_ID: 31531
Speaker 1: I have a sister who lives and works in New Jersey, at a health center as well and a brother who's a military officer.  And he's presently in Germany as we speak.
Speaker 2: Your sister's name?
Speaker 1: My sister's name is Jean.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jean.  She's married now, Jean Counter Powell, yes.  And I have a brother, Timothy [Counter].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so the three of us-
Speaker 2: What is the order of your births?
Speaker 1: I'm the oldest.  My sister is next and my brother is a thirty-eight year old military man, a career person, following very much in the footsteps of my father [Samuel Counter, Sr.].
Story_ID: 31532
Speaker 1: Did you mother [Anne Johnson Counter] share with you stories about her growing up years either when you were a child or--
Speaker 2: Oh, she did, she did.  And it was the classical story of a young, African American woman growing up in the South, the struggle to hold on and maintain their dignity in a southern system that featured apartheid and segregation and indeed hate and hatred on the part of the larger white society.  She managed, as did most African Americans of that time, to develop herself, to go to college.  She managed to meet my father [Samuel Counter, Sr.] who was at Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and was doing the same, but he was dedicated to serving his country as a young man of, I think seventeen, going off to the military.  And in 1945, she always had some level of bitterness, I know, about the way she was treated, being as bright as she was and as capable as she was, but not given the greatest opportunity, but as we changed that world for her, that Civil Rights Movement that changed everything for all of us, she then was able to sort of fulfill some of her dreams in becoming a teacher, a teacher of nursing and a hands-on nurse serving the local community.  But she talked to me at length, in a way that was not deeply bitter about the struggles of her upbringing, as did my father.  And I think he had a lot more bitterness as did most African American men about the lack of opportunity for people who were educated or trained.  And my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] was probably the single, greatest philosopher in my life.  She was very careful to remind me when I came home and said, "Well, I think should have won that award or that speaking award" or something else.  But they obviously didn't give it to me because I was black."  And she would say, "No, son, it's not because you're black.  It was because they're white.  Your blackness had nothing to do with that."  And it would make me think.  And she would remind me that there was nothing wrong with me.  I was not discriminating against them.  I was not showing any evil.  It was because of who they were that they were acting the way they were, not--because there was nothing about me that made them act that way.  That was an empowering kind of concept.  It reminded me that I had potential and ability and my grandmother and mother would just say that to me all the time.  They had--it was not in their wildest dreams I'd ever appear in a place like Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a faculty member.  (Laughter) I mean that was as distant as perhaps my going to the moon.  They had simple aspirations for me.  After our Sunday school meetings and the regular church meetings which we all attended on a regular basis, year after year, Sunday after Sunday, they'd say, "I'd like for you to be a teacher.  If you'd like to be a doctor, we'd like to see you become a doctor, but being a teacher would be something very good.  That's a very noble profession."  They'd always remind me of that, and now I'm both (laughter).  So I love teaching and I love teaching medical science, but I credit them with all of that and my father's inspiration.  But I think primarily the two women who had more influence on me were my mother and grandmother, the two people who had more influence on me.  Of course, there were uncles and others, but, you know, typically, it's the people that you relate to most.  I was very protective of my mother and she of me, as well as my sister and brother.  But they were the inspiration.
Story_ID: 31533
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name and when he was born and where he was born and--
Speaker 2: Samuel Counter, Sr.  And he was born in Americas, Georgia, the son of a minister, a Methodist minister, the Reverend Charles Counter and the son of Mrs. Georgia Counter.  My children have names in some cases, or in most cases that reflect the family names.  But we've not gotten around to Georgia yet (laughter).  But we will.  I have three daughters.  And he was a very proud young man.  He was a very dedicated, loyal American who believed in this country and its ideals and wanted to help the country live up to those ideals.  He was active in Georgia in the civil rights effort.  He decided early on as a teenager he wanted to fight for his country and joined the military at an early age.  He sought to join at sixteen but he ended up joining at seventeen.  He went off in 1945 to Europe and acquitted himself very well according to the record that I've seen from the colonel who commanded the Colored troops as they were called or the negro officers, negro troops.  And he was very much disturbed about his return to America and the way that African Americans were not only treated, but discredited.  He was in that group of people who came back to America after having served valulently (ph.)--valiantly as well, I'm sorry, after having served valiantly, and he came back to America with the desire to become a real, sort of contributing member of society.  He was disappointed because even the average person who was white with no education or otherwise, could command his life so to speak.  And he decided he wanted to move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  He was determined to move to Philadelphia to get out of the South because of the way he was treated.  And I think it's important to remember that he represented a wide spectrum of African Americans who felt the same way, from the farmer to the professor, the proper respect was not shown to people who had contributed all of everything to their country.  Here was a man who had been wounded in Europe fighting for his nation and could not get a job when he returned or he could simply be arrested by the average local white deputy sheriff simply because he didn't, you know, like the way this black man looked.  And that, I think, made him carry some level of bitterness throughout his life, you know.  And the hardest thing for African Americans and for African American men, in particular, is to overcome that bitterness when you see on a daily basis, even the remnants or vestiges of that now, in some cases, quite prominent evidence of it.  And I think back on him when I run into that from time to time.
Story_ID: 31534
Speaker 1: What advice did he [father: Samuel Counter, Sr.] give to you?  I mean you shared with me what happened to him and how he felt, but did he give you advice about things that you were gonna face in the future?
Speaker 2: Oh, he did.  He reminded me that I would be challenged throughout my life by people who simply would judge you on the basis of their reactions to the way you look, their reactions to whom they thought you were but that I should simply try to step above that.  He always said, "Try to stay above all of this, and keep moving towards your goal.  Your aim in life is to achieve something and develop your family and achieve something for your family and your country.  And do that, in spite of the way they treat you.  Try to reach out and befriend everyone." and I think that's something that I've gained a great deal from, in terms of my parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Counter] and the things that they taught me.  What comes to mind most was their continual advice about reaching out to people of all backgrounds and looking for the best in people.  My grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] had a very funny habit of--even from the time I was playing with different kids, she would always say, "Play with kids who are going somewhere." (laughter) Well, I thought everybody was going somewhere, so it didn't matter, but she would always say, "I want you to be around people who are going somewhere and," you know, "overlook those who spite you, who are against you and try to reach out to people of all backgrounds."  And early on, she would often come looking for me, wondering where in the community she could find me.  And on any given day, I might be in the home of maybe Mexican immigrants who had come to the area of Florida to farm.  I just wanted to know about other people.  I'd never met Mexican immigrants before.  And I remember going to this home of a family.  They were very nice to me.  They sat me down and I sat with their children, and they prepared some juice for us and some food, and I remember the father saying something like, if you teach me English, I'll teach you Spanish.  I thought that was such a great idea (laughter).  I must have been about nine or ten years old.  And I remember my parents coming to the door saying, you know, is our son in there?  And they'd say, yes, and so he invited them in.  And they exchanged pleasantries, and my mother said, you know, it was time for me to go back home.  It was the evening, and she'd always say, "Son, you really like to meet other people, don't you?"  And I said, yes.
Story_ID: 31535
Speaker 1: And I don't know whether you've thought about this at all, but I'm listening to you and what you're describing to me, these experiences, probably in a way prepared you to be the director of this Harvard Foundation, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, you wonder about that.  I think about that a lot.  Yes, there is a connection.  I think you're absolutely right, I mean from a very early age--(laughter)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) person, (unclear)because of those experiences that you had, but you didn't realize how they would come together. I don't know.  Just a thought that I had.
Speaker 2: Well, I think you're absolutely correct.  I think my early exposure to a variety of people of all backgrounds and my desire to fulfill what they had advised me to think about and to do, that is, to reach out to good people of all backgrounds, made me a little less timid about the idea of reaching out and learning about other people.  And my first exposure, naturally came from the Native Americans that I grew up with because Florida has a number of Seminole Indians, and my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson], who is ninety-nine [years old], is part Seminole and African.  And my mother's father [John Johnson] was the son of the local white doctor, Johnson.  So, you bring a gene pool, first of all (laughter) like most African Americans that is African, Native American and European American.  And my parents made that clear to me early on.  But I can recall people coming into our segregated communities which was mostly Native American Seminoles and African Americans in South Florida.  The insurance man would come in who was obviously white.  And I can remember one day being on the baseball field, and I was batting cross-handed.  And I remember this white man with red hair came up to me, and it was a little bit intimidating for a moment, and he spoke to me.  And that's when you were taught to be afraid of strangers.  And he looked at me, and he said, "you're holding your bat wrong."  And, of course, I said, "Sir", as we were taught to say.  He said, "you're holding your bat wrong, young man.  Can I show you how to hold it?"  So still a little bit frightened, I said, "sure."  And he took the bat, and he showed me how to hold it properly (laughter).  And a little after that, I think I hit a home run or something.  I was really happy about him.  So every time I saw him after that, I'd stop and talk with him.  He was a very delightful man.  But we didn't have that kind of contact at the time with people of other races.  I mean it was--you were advised in some ways to be cautious, particularly when it came to white Americans who might at any moment harm you, and this was quite common in the South.  But I do recall that moment very vividly because we had had little contact with whites outside of our commun--our little segregated community, whereas the Native American Seminoles and African Americans, we were on a regular basis interacting with friendships and so forth.
Story_ID: 31536
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your paternal grandfather, the Reverend Counter?  He was a minister.  What do you know about his--
Speaker 2: He was in the very fine tradition of most of the African American ministers, the kind in the South that produced people like Dr. [Martin Luther] King.  And these were the most educated people in our communities.  Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], as you know, is a school that was developed by the religious community, as were most or many of the black colleges.  And the focus was on education, but also like the early Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], on Christian education.  And so he was a strong believer in education.  He wanted my father to go to a Methodist school, which was Morris Brown [College].  He was delighted when my mother decided that she wanted to go to college in Atlanta [Georgia].  And she later went to Virginia, because she decided she wanted to go to a nursing school.  And the colored nursing school at that time was Piedmont Colored Nursing School in Virginia.  But he was a man who believed very strongly in the traditional African American church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and he wanted his children and grandchildren to follow in that tradition.  It was as simple as that and not unlike other members of the religious community throughout the South.  I once sat in a room at Harvard [University] with about five or six black faculty members.  And we all started discussing our backgrounds.  And it turns out that probably as the sixth person in that room and the youngest, I was the grandson of a Methodist minister and all five of the others were the sons of Methodist minister (laughter), and I thought that rather curious, not Baptist, not Lutheran, but Methodist ministers.  So there must be something about education and the Methodist community.  And so I said, "This is remarkable."  We all had a great laugh about it (laughter).  So he was typical I think of men of his time, active in the Civil Rights Movement, active in the early thinking about the future of African Americans in post-World War II.
Story_ID: 31537
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your early years.  What is your earliest memory of growing up?  How far back can you recall your early life?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a very interesting question, Brother Hayden.  I mean I can remember way back in my lifetime.  I think you think of the things that were of great delight and pleasure to you.  And you think of some of the traumatic things.  I mean early on, I can remember as a very small child the areas that we played in, I think my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] being a nurse and having to live on the grounds of a center where the patients had tuberculosis.  And I remember they had a colored section and a white section.  And the colored kids played and stayed on the colored side, and the white kids lived, played on the white side of this complex in Lantana, Florida.  And I remember we had no bicycles at the time or I didn't, and there was a white kid with a bicycle, and actually, there were two of them.  And they were French.  Their father was a doctor from France.  And those kids would come over to play with us.  And I can recall early my first sort of racial experience--that stands out because it was so much fun to ride with this kid on his bicycle.  And my sister [Jean Counter Powell] would ride, and his sister would ride.  And we had a great time.  And I remember in the evenings, their mother would come and speak a language to them that I didn't understand at the time.  But the one word I could understand when she would say "come, come, come" (laughter), (unclear) understand to come home and go eat or whatever.  Or my mother would come out and do the same.  I think of that.  I think of that as an early pleasurable experience, you know, being with my mother and about my--I think of my father [Samuel Counter, Sr.] and his sort of very, a little bit more stern, but pleasurable educated approach to things.  Reading was important, reading good stories important.  Instead of that toy truck you wanted, you got a book (laughter).  And so I can recall that very well about him.  So there are lots of pleasurable things.  I can recall very early on getting, you know, the chicken pox or measles, and we lived in such a rural area that my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] had to pick me up and walk me for about three or four miles to a doctor's office.  And early on, I can recall listening to things that grownups didn't think children could understand (laughter) and having a capacity to at least sort of synthesize with some experience and put together thoughts about what people were saying.  We had to walk to a white doctor, I'll never forget, Dr. Weems was his name.  And that doctor would have us sit in the colored section in the back of his office and whites would sit on the other side.  And this was in the '50s [1950s] and so I recall just that there was something wrong about that.  I didn't understand what it was.  And I can recall my parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Coutner] talking about that and whether or not we were being seen last and so forth.  But at least we were being seen.  And there was something about the nature of that upbringing that will always sort of stick with you.  It's like going through a war, going through the difficulty of the segregation period.  How people reacted to that war is something you remember.  There were people, and lots of people that were driven crazy by it, I mean really destroyed by it, whether they went to alcohol or otherwise, men out of work, and you could recall seeing that but not really knowing in depth why this was happening to them.  But you had some understanding and you listened to your parents.  So I can recall that even as a young kid, a preschool kid.  I was put in school early, and I do know that.  I think for two reasons; partly because my parents had to work and school was good daycare perhaps (laughter).  But I was, you know, reading at a very early age, and I can recall my mother reminding me of that.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you started?
Speaker 2: I think four and a half, four, four and a half, going into school with kids who were six years old, and then continuing that pattern for a long time.
Story_ID: 31538
Speaker 1: Tell me about the school.  What was the name of the school and what was the school--what do you remember--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: It was called actually the Boynton Colored Elementary School [Boynton Beach, Florida].  And later it became--I remember we had to name it ourselves.  We had to select names.  We all wrote names and took 'em out of the hat.  And I think I was in about fifth grade when the school was given a real name.  And so the Boynton Colored Elementary School then became Poinciana Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Where did Boynton come from?  What was that?
Speaker 2: Boynton Beach, that's the name of the town.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Boynton Beach, Florida.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right near--at that time, as I said, the [Ever]glades, the Everglades came right up.  You have Belle Glade [Florida] and you have, toward the Atlantic [Ocean], you have Boynton [Florida], Delray [Florida], in those areas.  And you have a lot of farm areas right there.  So what was the Everglades became sort of a farm area.  You had people coming down to pick beans and other things in that area, migrant farm workers coming in.  And they started to develop that in the '50s [1950s] as a farm area.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Boynton, just--?
Speaker 2: B-O-Y-N-T-O-N, Boynton Beach, Florida.
Speaker 1: And so it got another name, and it became what?
Speaker 2: Poinciana Elementary School.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: P-O-I-N-C-I-A-N-A.  And I certainly didn't select the name.  I think I probably wanted to name it something else, but all the kids had an opportunity to put a name in a hat.  Another thing I remember that still sticks out with me was that we had a local teacher who was a very fine person in the community, really a wonderful person and a great influence on a lot of young people.  His name is Mr. Ezell Hester.  He had graduated from Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], and he was the local person in Boynton [Boynton Beach, Florida] who wrote for the newspaper, the county newspaper, called 'The Photo News'.  It was the black newspaper.  And he decided or he was called or whatever to go to the military.  So he went off to the military, and there was nobody to take over his column.  So I recall a very brilliant grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] saying to me, and I must have been about ten years old or something.  I'm pretty sure I was about ten.  "Why don't you take it over?"  And I basically said, "I can't do that."  She said, "yes, you can.  I've looked at your writing."  And I said, "but grandmother, mama, I can't do that."  And she said, "Yes, you can.  I'll even help you."  So I thought about it and had the courage to try it.  So if you go back and read 'The Photo News' (laughter) back in the late '50s [1950s], you'll see that the articles are basically, Mr. John Doe and his family came to visit Boynton this weekend and met with all of his relatives for a family reunion--
Speaker 1: Do you still have copies (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And a great time was had by all.  (Laughter)  Most of the articles ended that way, you know, but I had a chance to write a column.  I mean I was ten years old.
Speaker 1: And you still have copies?
Speaker 2: I still have copies of that.  And 'The Photo News', I think is still ongoing in Palm Beach County, Florida.  But it was the first black paper there, and I had a chance to write for it, and I wrote the little column for Boynton [Boynton Beach, Florida].  And that was a real--it's those little things that somehow your parents find a way to get you involved in, I think, that will lead to your ultimate kind of success, if you will, in life.  They tend to come together.
Story_ID: 31539
Speaker 1: You say you had a couple of other memories and anecdotes?
Speaker 2: Well I remember as a child in this area, I remember as a child in the area of Boynton Beach [Florida] going to that elementary school there, I tended to hang out with the big kids, the big boys I called them.  And the big boys were always doing the exciting things whether it was playing baseball or football or whatever, and I tried to hang out with them.  And they seemed to like that so they sort of carried me along.  But one of the things I remembered was that we could not swim in any of the beaches in Florida.  Black people were simply not allowed to swim.  Whites could go to the beaches and enjoy it, but blacks could not.  And on one day in the late '50s [1950s], I believe it was, Mr. Willie Miller, a local businessman in the segregated town of Boynton [Beach], the colored section as it was called, and the husband of our fourth grade teacher, who was Ms. Annie Mae Miller, a lovely couple.  Mr. Willie Miller was something of a civil rights leader.  And he decided that whites should not keep us away from the local beaches.  We had as much right to go there as did they.  And he decided to lead a group of big boys, I called them big boys, a group of young men young boys--most of them were in junior high or high school, over to the beach for a wade-in, not a sit-in, but a wade-in, just go in the water and swim and like anyone else.  And I recall wanting to go.  And I knew my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] would never let me go.  So I went anyway (laughter) without telling her.  And so we went over, we walked across the bridge.  We went over to the section where only whites were allowed to go, and then we walked to the beach just like any beach in the world.  And we, about ten of the big boys, Mr. Willie Miller and myself, they waded in--and we were frightened, no question about it.  And I was terribly frightened, but I was also determined to stick with the big boys there and to go into the water.  We all went into the water, and we started to swim.  Once, we got in, it was delightful, but what happened, was there were some two hundred or more whites on the beach or in the water.  And they all came running out as if they had seen sharks.  And I remember being so tiny that they were running toward me, and I was fearful that I was gonna get trampled.  And one of the big boys grabbed me and held so I wouldn't get trampled.  And we went into the water, and there we were swimming.  And we kind of stuck together in the area Mr. Miller was swimming.  And all of a sudden within about maybe fifteen minutes or so, white policemen came there and drew guns and the epithets they shouted and everything I can remember to this day.  They were vicious.  And they said they were gonna kill us, and, of course, we were frightened.  But we looked at Mr. Willie Miller, and he said, "Don't get out boys.  You don't have to get out.  You have the right as citizens of America to swim in this water, to be here at this beach.  You do not have to get out."  And they were saying, "well, if you don't get out, we're gonna kill you."  And I'll never forget one of them saying something that perhaps relaxed me, one of the white policemen, more than he could have imagined.  He said, "I've got"--these were his words, he said, "I've got a bomb here.  I'm gonna throw it in and blow you so and so's out of the water."  I'll never forget that as long as I live.  And what relaxed me is I realized he was a liar (laughter) because if you recall these old flashlight boxes, there was a red box under a flashlight.  And that's all it was.  And my grandfather had one just like it (laughter), so I knew it was not, I knew it was a flashlight with this big battery container under the bottom.  And I remember almost laughing, thinking, you know, who does he think we are? (laughter)  And that empowered me, the knowledge, again, knowledge empowers.  It empowered me to feel that maybe I was a lot more secure.  But it was frightening, and I'll never forget that.  And later, I think it was documented in the papers, yeah, because my mother read it later and talked about it.  But I recall that moment in history, and that time.  If you could see it in a movie, hundreds of people charging toward you.  You were no more than ten young black kids, boys and I being the youngest, trying to hang on there with the big boys.  And then now going in the water and seeing white policemen come and telling you to get out.  They didn't come in the water.  They stood at the edge and told us to get out and what they would do to us.  And that was frightening.  But Mr. Miller said we did not have to get out.
Speaker 1: Well, how did all this get resolved?
Speaker 2: Well, finally, after we stayed there, and he felt we made our point, we came out of the water, we followed Mr. Miller.  We came out, and we put on--our clothes had been laying there, so we managed to put on our shirts and everything.  And we came out.  We had bathing suits, I remember.  And as we came out of the water, we followed Mr. Miller back up to the, you know, through the shore, and I recall seeing the mayor of the town because he had on a white suit and a big white hat.  I'll never forget that. (laughter)  And he used a word that I'd never heard before.  He said, "you boys should not be following this rabble-rouser."  And even at about six years old at that time, six or seven, I went "rabble-rouser".  I'd never heard that word before.  You boys should not follow this rabble-rouser.  And I remember the policemen still wanted to harm us, but I recall looking up and about one hundred black citizens from our community had marched down right behind the policemen to where we were.  And I remember the security that I felt at that moment, seeing all of the black people from our community coming there to defend us, to be there with us.  And then we relaxed because the policemen knew, you know, at that time, that they could do nothing with much of the community coming there.  And I recall the same white mayor saying, "well, I want you to disperse, all of you and go back home, and don't follow this rabble-rouser any more."
Speaker 1: What did you mother say when she heard about--?
Speaker 2: Well, she was upset that I had gone, but she was very proud.  And she had a nice talk with me.  She said, "Now, I know what you did, and I'm happy that you had the courage to do that, but I don't want you doing that again unless you tell me about it (laughter) because I was looking for you, and I'd heard about the trouble, and I couldn't find you.  And I just knew that you would be there," she said (laughter).  And I remember asking her, "Mom, what does rabble-rouser mean"?  And she got out a dictionary, and we talked and we talked about rabble-rouser.  Then I realized I didn't like this mayor because I thought Mr. Willie Miller was a good man.  He was not a rabble-rouser (laughter).  So that was one of my strongest memories from my childhood, that traumatic event that made the paper.  So here I was as a child of about six or seven, participating in a civil rights effort.  So it started early.
Speaker 1: What year was this again, now?
Speaker 2: I'd have to go back.  I can tell you it was in the '50s [1950s], but I do recall my mother reading about it and saving the document from the '50s [1950s], so, yeah.
Story_ID: 31540
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about family and what you remember about special holidays, special events with your siblings and your parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Counter].  What kind of things did you do as a family?  You had church, of course, but--?
Speaker 2: Well, our life did center, as did most small communities, around the social and cultural aspects of our church.  We had two primary churches in our community and I attended both.  We--actually, there were three later.  Church was pretty much everything.  You met your friends there.  You know, we attended a local school.  Many of our teachers came in from other communities because it was such a small, rural community, but it was a good life.  We were not abysmally impoverished.  We were poor by standards.  Like most people, being poor was the standard so you didn't assume that you were any worse off than anybody else.  Our parents helped other families.  I recall my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] talking about families with many more children.  She found clothes for other kids.  She adopted them.  Working as a domestic, she would often get handouts from whites in the local community.  I remember in particular, though, she brought books to me quite a bit from the white families that she worked for.  We had a regular family life.  Between the church, between Sunday school, between regular school, our sports activities in the evenings, and we'd get together for holidays.  Our Thanksgivings were good and very family oriented with lots of good food.  So you always remembered those.  I remembered on Christmas though each year, it was fun for boys to get bicycles.  And I remember my Schwinn bicycles, and my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] always made sure that I had a great bicycle.  And so that was a lot of fun.  It was just a normal upbringing, and my sister--(off-camera voice).  My sister [Jean Counter Powell] had a good upbringing and dolls and lots of friends, and we followed the same and my younger brother [Timothy Counter].  It was just a typical African American family, parents who worked and who sought for ways through the local community and the local schools to find enrichment for their children.  There were plays at our school.  We had 'Anastasia'.  We had a variety of plays.  There were opportunities to speak.  We had our own world.  And when I wrote this book later about some aspects of African American culture, and particularly, the book about Matthew [Alexandar] Henson, I wrote that we had our own planet.  We were like two planets revolving about each other, a black planet and a white planet.  And our planet, we were doing quite well.  We had events where the head of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] would come to our community to speak, Dr. Benjamin E. Mays.  There's probably never been a more inspirational person than Dr. Benjamin E. Mays.  We had local entertainers to come by.  I remember Arthur Prysock, and I remember B.B. King, and I can remember all of the great artists coming through these little towns.  This was so meaningful to us.  We had Roland Hayes and these classical musical concerts. We learned of opera early.  We also had teachers who would come in called bible teachers to teach us about the bible.  So we had a spectrum of activities, and which made our upbringing, I think, reasonably normal.  There was nothing extraordinary about it, I don't believe, but we always had something to look forward to, growing up, going to college, going to Atlanta [Georgia], meeting someone like Dr. Benjamin [E.] Mays.  At that time, imagine Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had distinguished presidents, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] had distinguished presidents, and they were fine.  I had no particular interest in knowing them.  I wanted to know Dr. Benjamin E. Mays.  Now, it would have been fine to know the president of Harvard [University], perhaps a very fine person, but the symbols of excellence in our community were people such as the presidents of these colleges, you know, at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Morehouse [College].  These were the people that we looked up to, and these were our symbols.
Speaker 1: Yesterday, I interviewed Bob Winfrey and Bob wants to send his regards to you.
Speaker 2: Wonderful.
Speaker 1: In his interview, he talked about the influence of Roland Hayes on his life--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and [Dr.] Benjamin [E.] Mays.  As you know, Bob went to Morehouse [College] and [Dr.] Benjamin [E.] Mays was the president.  So, see how these names come through all these interviews.
Speaker 2: Well they do indeed, and they should because these were influential people who cared about the lives and direction of the next generation of African Americans.  And I think each of us is trying to pass that on now.  I travel to schools, high schools, elementary schools, both locally here in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and in Boston [Massachusetts], the greater metropolitan area and throughout the country, sharing these experiences, calling these names, keeping them going, reminding the young people that it is the passing of a baton to them, and they should reach out and accept it because these were the elders that advised us to the next level.  And I still give them great credit.
Story_ID: 31541
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells that remind you of your growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think whenever I'm near the Atlantic Ocean and I smell the salt from that water, that is a great part because I remember having so much fun as a kid going to what later became the colored beach, the colored beach. We'd get on the back of a truck and go there, and that was a great outing for me, whenever I smell salt water, I really think of that--I also think of the smells of the canals and the Everglades [Florida] water because there were, in those times, '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] they were really building canals in Florida and they'd often leave the boats there in the evenings.  And I was one of the kids who'd get a boat and get some old wood (laughter) if there was no oar nearby.  Often they hid the oars.  And my buddies and I would just--you know, after they were not in use, paddle out, and go down the streams and that sort of thing.  I was always interested in exploration, and I had buddies who were Seminole Indians and other African Americans, and we'd just go kind of exploring, and near the [Ever]glades area, through those swamps in Florida.  We'd see alligators, we'd see everything.  So I have fond memories of that.  And one of the bad habits that many people had who visited Florida from the North who would come down and stay for just the seasons, in those days you could buy pet alligators.  So only whites, to my knowledge, bought pet alligators.  Blacks didn't buy pet alligators (laughter).  They would buy them and they'd let them grow up in their yards and leave them there until they got too big to handle.  And then what did they do?  They would come and throw them back in the swamps, in the canals.  Well, blacks were not allowed to swim in swimming pools in Florida in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s].  That's hard for many people to believe.  So because of that in Boynton [Boynton Beach, Florida] and places such as that, Delray [Florida] and around that area, until they got a swimming pool, we swam in the canals; just as much fun diving off the bridges.  You know, we think back on the dangers we faced (laughter), you know.  I think we only had one drowning, one of our schoolmates in all that time.  And we look back, that many of us could have drowned.  I think he was caught in the lochs or something like that and couldn't get out.  But we'd swim around those lochs and only God protected us because we see the dangers now from those high dives and all those things.  And we would go down as deep as we could and bring up stuff from the bottom, and I remember seeing alligators on the side.  And the police would come out; the local white police would come out at a certain point when there got to be too many.  And they would stand on the trestle and shoot them cause there were too many and the colored couldn't swim any longer if you didn't shoot them.  So you didn't want the colored swimming in the swimming pool with the whites.  So you'd come out and kill the alligators.  That's what they would do, still to let the colored stay where they were.  I remember all those things very vividly.
Speaker 1: Elementary school, Boynton School.  What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I want you to ask me that question again.  (Unclear) I want to just tell you one more thing about the sights and sounds and smells I didn't tell you about.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Story_ID: 31542
Speaker 1: Well let me just tell you one other thing about the sights and sounds and smells.  In the area where I grew up, near my grandmother's [Edie Nelms Johnson] house, they built a little club for the colored people.  It was the Club Continental.  And that's where the local musicians would visit.  And I can remember late at night hearing B.B. King long after I was supposed to be asleep.  I remember those sounds, all the black groups that would come through.  And I can remember so vividly the musical sounds and, of course, the smell of good food.  There was a lady named Miss Hattie.  I don't remember her last night.  She rode a bicycle, and she had the best fish fries on Saturday nights.  And I remember Miss Hattie's fish that would smell so good.  And I remember the sweet potato pies.  And these were the kinds of things that I grew up on and those are the sights, sounds and smells that I remember most vividly, and indeed, the voice of the strong preacher in our local church and so forth.  Your next question.  I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 31543
Speaker 1: In elementary school, what kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: Probably average.  Like most kids, I'd rather be out playing than in school, particularly out hunting or exploring.  I enjoyed hunting with the local kids and particularly with the indigenous, the Seminole kids, hunting for birds, hunting for possums, hunting for anything that we could find.  That was fun.  School was kind of easy for me because I had parents who taught me very well at home.  I was bored, like a lot of kids.  I wasn't necessarily the best student.  I was probably average.  I remember we could get spankings, of course.  And I can remember a number of spankings, but one teacher in particular.  She would just spank me so brutally about not having my assignments ready and that sort of thing.  And it worked.  I finally started to get them together.  And I remember years later going back home because the little community honored me.  And she walked up to me, this one teacher, Miss (Goodman?) started crying.  And she looked at me.  I was wondering why is she crying.  And she said, "Do you hate me?" (laughter)  And I said, "No, I don't."  I think she could remember how often she spanked me and whipped my hand for not having an assignment, and just for being a bad kid in class, I'm sure.  I was like all of the little boys in that area, I guess, I--you know, I do recall often the difficulties that a lot of kids face in terms of getting in fights, the bullies, the kids who kind of beat you up and you'd have to either run home or fight back.  And I can remember coming home a couple times in school--or from school, being beaten up by a couple of the local bullies.  But one time in particular, my mother [Anne Johnson Counter], who is the most peaceful and sweet woman you'll ever meet, just decided that it had to end.  And she grabbed me by my arm, my collar, and she said, "come with me."  And she walked me back down to the park.  And she said, "Where are the boys that beat you up?"  And I pointed them out, over in the corner, and she said, "Come here."  And she got me and she threw me back in there and she said, "Now I want you to go in there and fight back."  And I looked at them (laughter), and I remember feeling so empowered that I jumped up and started beating the heck out of them (laughter).  And they were shocked, I think (laughter).  They could hardly fight back they were so shocked (laughter).  And from that day on, they never beat me up again.  You know, I remember my mother doing that, and then after that, she said, "You come with me."  Now, I don't know what repercussions she got from their parents, but she was determined to make me fight back.  And they never bothered me again.  I remember that very vividly.  We now know that some kids see you doing well in school or they think you might have some privilege they don't have and whatever else, and there're lots of reasons that young kids tend to fight each other.  Or they have their own problems at home.  Many of these kids, as I look back, did have some problems at home, perhaps with their parents and many were from broken households.  But I can recall my mother reminding me that I should continue to study and not be distracted.  And I was like most kids.  If the kids wanted to hang out that day or not study or slip away from school, I'd join them, you know, just to be one of the, you know, the boys or whatever.  And I was continually warned by my parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Counter] and grandparents that a good whipping was in store (laughter) if I--if they learned that I did that one more time.  And a couple times I got some good strappings for those things.  But I didn't see that as brutality.  I saw that as a clear reminder.  Nowadays, of course, we don't spank children.  We find all kinds of ways (laughter) to remind them of what they should do.  But I sometimes wonder if a good spanking wouldn't be better, you know (laughter) than all of this other psychological stuff we put them through.  It was quite clear to me after my parents whacked me a few times about doing something that I should not do that again or I should get my lesson and hand them in on time or suffer the consequences.
Story_ID: 31544
Speaker 1: So, but we had very good teachers, I'd like to say.  And our teachers were all black except the occasional visiting Bible school teacher.  And I remember sitting there as a kid, staring at the bible school teacher wondering why was this white woman coming out here to teach us, you know.  And why does she want us to learn more about the Bible?  We learn that in Sunday school, you know.  What was it?  And I now see that they were missionaries, and they had their vision of what we should be.  Well we were probably already that and more.  We had a good Christian, solid foundation and upbringing.  But this was part of some mission, I recall.  And I don't know whether our school accepted this because they had to, were being pressured to.  I don't know.  Or they thought too, our teachers and principal, that this would be good for us.  But I do recall, in particular, one woman who--and maybe I recall it because perhaps she was condescending and didn't mean to be.  Perhaps she was distant.  But she was a visitor who came into our world, our enclave to teach us things about Christ and others.  And I'm sitting there saying, I know that, I know that Bible verse; I know that story, you know.  And I couldn't figure out why a white person, a woman, had to come in and tell us more or feel that they were telling us more than our teachers had already taught us.  Those were the confusing things in an apartheid society.  We were not hostile.  We accepted it.  And I remember the other boys and I looking at this together.  I remember another thing, the most revolutionary thing I'd ever heard.  And I didn't even know what a revolution was at that time, but it was during the Civil Rights Movement.  We heard about what Dr. [Martin Luther] King was doing and so forth.  And there was a kid in my class.  He was a big kid, kind of a tough kid himself, kind of a bully.  And he was a little bit angrier than other kids, but he would really play with us.  He was much bigger than I.  And we would recite the Pledge of Allegiance every day.  "I pledge allegiance to the flag and the United States of America, the republic for which it stands.  One nation, under God, invisible, with liberty and justice for all white people" (laughter) he said.  And I turned to him and looked, and I remember I stared at him so long that my teacher said, "Allen, Allen", and I'm staring at him.  "Allen", and she finally came and just sort of sit-"will you sit down."  And I realized that was the first thing in a revolutionary way I'd ever heard (laughter).  It was so powerful, its impact on me because I thought about that, with liberty and justice for all white people.  And I was a mere kid.  I'd never heard that before, you know.  I've seen this man since.  He never went on to college.  He never lettered himself in any way, but what a profound man he was, as a child, to remind us of that.  I remember many of us thought about that in depth.  That was a very powerful statement.
Story_ID: 31545
Speaker 1: You said earlier that you liked to explore, that you went hunting, and you also just said that you and your planet, you had a vision of where you were going.  In elementary school, did you have any notions or ideas about what you wanted to be as an adult, what your career profession was going to be at that early age?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.  I mean you look at the people around you.  Most of the people around me were not professionals.  They were teachers, and they set the base for the professional standards.  Everything in our community, social or otherwise, would be conducted mainly by the teachers, principal and the minister.  Many of the women were married to working-class men who were construction workers, whatever positions they would permit African American men to have at that time.  A few of the men were teachers.  Some were military men.  There were very few role models beyond that.  Some have said that blacks were allowed to preach, teach, heal or bury.  Those were the professions, preachers, teachers, maybe one doctor for a whole county who had gone off to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [University] Medical School [Washington D.C.], one black doctor.  Bury, funeral home directors.  Those were the professions that were kind of offered to us.  I would never have thought of becoming a professor of biological science, not at that age, of course.
Speaker 1: Did you have an interest in science at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did, indeed.  I had every science kit you could get at that time.  I would always get very much interested in Cape Canaveral [Florida].  I remember with great excitement the Sputnik [Satellite, 1957] thing and my getting little rocket launchers to make, things like that, that sort of had you excited about the, sort of stages of science and the levels of science.  And I had good science teachers.  I remember one woman was, Miss Julia McQueen was her name, very inspirational woman.  She was a great science teacher and for some reason, she really encouraged me to study science, and probably because she was very pretty.  And I remember staring at her a lot as a little boy (laughter) thinking how pretty she was.  And she was so bright.  And she encouraged me to do science kits and biological sciences, and she'd bring speakers in.  I remember she brought a man in who talked to us about how airplanes lifted off the ground.  That fascinated me, about the air getting under the wing and being able to lift the plane.  And it was the flow of the air and I got so fascinated about this.  Then I recall taking a frog--I loved animals.  I was a collector of all animals.  I'd come home with a mouse in the pocket, typical little boy, and my mother [Anne Johnson Counter] would run out of the house and say, "Don't bring that thing in here" (laughter).  And she-"son, you can get a disease from that mouse." (laughter) and I'd say, oh, no, I have it in one hand.  But one time, I really got--my mother never spanked me, but a couple of times she took a few whacks.  I remember (laughter) that I brought a frog home, and I'd read this experiment that I thought I understood, where if you froze the frog for a certain period of time, then you could later melt the ice and restore the frog.  I didn't know they were talking about liquid nitrogen (laughter).  I had no access to liquid nitrogen, so I took the frog and put it into our little freezer, and I had it in there freezing (laughter), and my mother opened and it jumped out and jumped on her (laughter).  And my mother screamed.  And I'll never forget.  I ran into there when she was screaming, and she looked at me and oh, did she give me a little whack cause I ran back toward my room, saying, don't you ever do that.  I remember that very vividly because, you know, she later talked to me.  She said, "Now, you know, it's okay to do these experiments, but don't bring them in the house like this.  You go to your teacher and tell your teacher what you want to do," and so forth.  But I'd either seen that--there was a show, I forget the name of the show right now.  It was a science show on television.  And it was something like 'Mr. Science' or 'Mr. Wizard', I believe it was called, something like that.  And he would do these science programs, and we'd read these experiments.  I had an interest.  I didn't have a lot of talent in it, but I had an interest.  And I found science teachers who were willing to teach me things about it.  There were math teachers or others who would just try to develop your interest.  These were--
Speaker 1: These went on to stage was set for what you were going to become.
Story_ID: 31546
Speaker 1: Well, you assume they all came together in some way, but I never had any special, you know, knowledge of what I would be.  I just had these interests.  And people would try to help you in your community.  If they saw you had some skill or talent, they would try to help you develop it.  And the contests were not always science contests because we didn't have that much in the way of materials.  There was a white community with lots of books, with lots of materials going to the white schools, and there were the colored schools, okay.  And in the colored school, we just didn't have that much.  We'd get the second-hand books, okay, that were used in the white schools.  They were usually--I can remember the 'Jack and Jill' books or the various school books that they would send out to the colored schools.  They always had other kids' names in them.  And I would always just delight in reading those names, you know, John Bartolo or something.  There was no Bartolo in my community or the name might be Derrick Jablonski or something.  I mean these were interesting names to me because they were in our books.  And we knew someone else had owned these books, and that was okay.  We still had to read 'Down the River Road', I remember one of the books.  I saved that book, and I've let my daughters read it, you know, to show them what I read at that time.  And it was a different world.  But these were things that people nowadays want to overlook or perhaps forget.  In spite of all of that, most of the people around me achieve.  And I think--when I think about this, I don't think so much of myself as the people around me.  I remember there was a young woman down the street.  I would love to call her name, but the story may not permit me to do so.  I remember her having a need for clothes and my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] would get clothes for her to help out.  She had been adopted by her aunt and uncle.  I remember her having an illness.  A lot of the kids had worms at that time, which was a common thing in the South.  And I remember that because I recall my mother told me, you never laugh at people who do that.  I remember we had an outhouse, and--I'm being told we should cut it.
Story_ID: 31547
Speaker 1: You continued your passion for science right through high school--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I would assume.  And once you graduated from high school, what was the next step?  Where did you go to pursue your interest in science?
Speaker 2: Well, I had excellent high school science teachers, and they really prepared us very carefully, knowing that we'd go off to college to represent Roosevelt High School, and I was delighted to meet my first science teacher in Nashville when I went to Tennessee [Agricultural and Industrial State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and met a woman named Mrs. Exum.  And Mrs. Exum was an excellent and an inspiring science teacher.  She also had a great sense of humor and charm, and that, in particular, sort of stimulated me to really get interested in the biological sciences and then to look for special areas within the biological sciences to concentrate.  At the time, I became very much fascinated by the visual system and looking into the physiology of vision.  And I worked on a project in college on that.  And then I moved to other sensory systems because at that time, sensory physiology was very much of interest, olfaction, the sense of taste, just looking at the physiology of this, the sense of hearing, the sense of vision.  And so I became fascinated and Mrs. Exum was very inspirational with my class projects.  I spent a great deal of time with her.
Speaker 1: This is at Tennessee [A&I] State [University]?
Speaker 2: This is at Tennessee, yeah, Tennessee A&I.  And she more than anyone perhaps, shaped my interest in science, and I kept saying, well, maybe I'll go to medical school.  And she said, "No, you ought to go and get a PhD because we need more biological science teachers."  And I was saying, "But no the professions are clearly easier.  You don't have anybody over you, controlling you.  You have your own sort of decision-making voice."  She would say, "Well, but we also need more young people."  She would say, "In the future, a lot of these schools are going to integrate, and they're gonna need African American teachers in science as well."  So I thought, wow, that'll be great, you know, and so, sure, maybe I'll get a chance to do that.  Meantime, people are saying to me, you ought to study law because you like to get into debates and discussions and so (laughter) it became rather confusing, but I -- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Who were the people telling you that you should go into that?
Speaker 2: These were people that I knew, colleagues, who had planned to go to law school, friends who talked about my debate skills.  And, in fact, we had a debate team and coach there.  And this coach always said to me, "You'd make a great lawyer because you love to debate", and so I was saying, well--and as a young person, you're thinking, which would pay the most money as well.  But my parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Counter] had always said if you're a good teacher, that would be the most honorable profession, and they were right.  You can be a good teacher whether you're in elementary or high school, to me that's the most honorable profession.  But teaching college kids, you know, in thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth grades, if you will, (laughter) is a very honorable thing to do as well.  And I end up pursuing that line.
Story_ID: 31548
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from Tennessee State University or A&I?
Speaker 2: Right, there're the same (unclear) (simultaneous).  Let me just give you a little bit of information about that.  In the South, because of the apartheid system set up by European Americans or whites, there was a University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] that did not permit people of color to enter, especially African American people, no other reason except the whites didn't want them there.  There were many African Americans who were more qualified to enter than the whites who were there, and to teach there, in fact, but it was a race rule by white supremacists.  So they would create a Florida University for the Colored or for black.  And the way they did this was that it was so finely structured, they had to have something that would demote it slightly.  So if it were a school for blacks, it couldn't be the University of Florida Black, which is really what it was, sitting away from the University of Florida white, they had to give it a name, something that blacks could do, that they would be acceptable in doing, agricultural and mechanical.  And African Americans said, okay, we have to take what we can get.  You know, you give us this; we'll take it, and we'll create our own university and create students and graduates that are equal to or superior to yours.  We'll call it what you want.  That's okay.  You can't have a University of Florida because we are whites, that's the prestige one.  We'll give you Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  And in North Carolina, it's the same policy.  We give you North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University].
Speaker 1: How was it you went to the Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Because I have--had friends there.  I wanted--I was gonna go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I was looking at Florida, and I wanted to get as far away as my parents would let me (laughter).  I had even considered Yale [University, New Haven Connecticut].  But as long as you stay in the South, they said, that's important to us because of our traditions.  But anyway, I had colleagues and friends in Tennessee, and I'd heard about some of the teachers there and I ended up going there.  There's also Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee, but the point was, whether it was North Carolina A&T, Agricultural and Technical, Tennessee A&I, Agricultural and Industrial, all of the black schools, which produced top-notch people.  I mean right now I've got colleagues like Levi Watkins who's the chief of Cardiac surgery at Johns Hopkins, who was also there.  But the idea was to demote blacks a little bit.  But the opposite happened.  So that's (unclear)
Story_ID: 31549
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Tennessee [Agricultural and Industrial] State [University] with a degree in?
Speaker 2: Well, the general degree in the sciences, but I also focused on sensory audiology and--
Speaker 1: As an undergraduate?
Speaker 2: Yes, as an undergraduate.  I was interested in that, and I went over to take classes at Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and the local all white school and where they had those classes.  So I ended up going to take classes there as well in the evenings, but we got the credit back at A&I.
Speaker 1: So were you able to do some basic research as an undergraduate?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, indeed, indeed, with--in the biological labs, I was exposed early on to physiology work which fascinated me.  And  Mrs. Exum's lab, we were able to do fundamental physiological science using the same textbook, by the way, we had used that we--I later found out we used at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusets].  But under Mrs. Exum, I did basic physiology and it was exciting.  And she got me very much interested in that.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name, by the way, for the record?
Speaker 2: E-X-U-M, E-X-U-M.  But I was gonna say that later led to Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio] where I went there to do special studies.  And there I worked in electrophysiology and met professors.  One was a Dr. Sheppard, the other one was Dr. Secner (ph.).  And Dr. Secner taught me physiology and biophysics.  And he was an excellent teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, this was under PhD programs?
Speaker 2: Well, this was a graduate program that led into the PhD.
Speaker 1: I see.  So you went into a graduate program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that led into PhD.
Speaker 1: And that was immediately following Tennessee?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Well, it turns out that I did some extra studies around, before that until I finally decided what I wanted to do.  But I wanted to pursue this.  And I want to cite two people.  One is Lee Moore, professor of physiology and biophysics who was very inspirational, took me into his lab at I think age, maybe twenty, nineteen or twenty.  And he really taught me physiology and biophysics.  So did Dr. Ronald Secner.  And I was so proud to get top grades in their classes because there were no other African Americans in their classes, and they were very inspirational.  And I give them real credit for sort of sending me on to-- the higher levels and so forth.
Story_ID: 31550
Speaker 1: What was your PhD research topic area?
Speaker 2: It was neuro, a bio science project in neuroscience.  I looked at the nerve conduction capacity and the brain responses in insects, using the simple neural networks of an insect.  So it was called the neurophysiological responses in the brain and giant fibers of grillus domesticus (laughter) which basically boils down to studying the conduction of nerves and neurons in the brain and spinal cord essentially, if you will, the giant fibers of crickets (laughter).  And there I was able to study both the sensory physiology and the motor activity.
Speaker 1: This is fascinating to me because Dr. Charles Henry Turner, the Bio (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, worked on insects.  His PhD was insect behavior.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: But not at the molecular level (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I always--when I called my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] to tell her what my dissertation title was and explained it to her, she thought long and hard, and she said, "Son, you always did like to play with bugs." (laughter)
Speaker 1: When I tell people the Charles Henry Turner, who by the way was the grandfather of Chuck Turner, Boston City Council--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --that he (unclear) was working on the behavior of ants and behavior of bees and wasps.
Speaker 2: Oh, indeed, and that's something you start pretty early and get an interest in.  I talked to Leo Wilson, you know, who's one of our preeminent scientists, about his start in science.  We realized we had in common the fact we both liked to collect bugs and study ants when we were little.  You sort of grew up with that passion, and it's hard to let it go.  Now, I still enjoy walking through the forest and hearing the crickets chirp and the bugs, and I know how their nervous systems work.
Speaker 1: One of my most memorable courses when I was here at Harvard [University] as a fellow was Leo Wilson's course 'Animal Behavior'.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, fantastic. That was a great course.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) fantastic course, yes.  All right.  So you received your PhD from Case Western Reserve [University], what year was that?
Speaker 2: Don't remind me.  It was, must have been back in like seventy--what was it, four [1974], something like that.  When was that?  I don't remember stuff from the '70s [1970s].  I came to Harvard [University] to post doc--
Story_ID: 31551
Speaker 1: Post Doc (unclear) (simultaneous) right after that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I studied in the laboratory neurophysiology with two people, with John Dowling and Bert Shapiro and John Dowling was quite a mentor to me.  So was Bert [Shapiro].  Bert [Shapiro] was very helpful.  He welcomed me to his lab, and he was very inspirational as someone that could just do excellent science and share it with you.  He was very helpful to me in my early teaching.  But John Dowling as well, and he was extraordinarily supportive and encouraging and welcomed me right away into his laboratory.  And there I think I did some of my best work.
Speaker 1: Tell me the nature of your post doc work here with--what were you looking at?
Speaker 2: I worked in general neuroscience, again, continuing the basic single-cell nerve recordings because at that time, that was the focus, putting micro-electrodes into cells, looking at how these neurons interacted with each other in an excitatory and inhibitory way, how the brain had these different networks of neurosensory, neuromotor activity.  Then there were centers of nuclei where you could record different patterns or different types of responses from neurons.  And that was the nature of my work.  I did some work in vision, but I focused mostly on the one sense that was not being worked on here, which in this time was the auditory sense.  And I got involved with that and started to spend my summers at Woods Hole [Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, Massachusets] where I did studies there at the Marine Biological laboratories under John Dowling which was just tremendously helpful to me as a person, sort of strengthening my background in the neurosciences.
Story_ID: 31552
Speaker 1: And then from there, I was invited, as of a result of being at Woods Hole [Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, Massachusets], to Stockholm [Sweden].  And I met a professor from Sweden, Dr. Ake Flock.
Speaker 2: Would you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: F-L-O-C-K.  And A-K-E is his first name, Dr. Ake Flock, who liked my work.  He too worked in auditory neuroscience.  He was considered the world's top in that area.  And he invited me to Sweden to work with him in the laboratory, to study with him.  I took him up on it.  I spent the next twenty-four years--
Speaker 2: Twenty-four years.
Speaker 1: --going back and forth with him.
Speaker 2: Now, you were examining human auditory systems or other animals--
Speaker 1: A whole range of it, everything from animals to humans, you know, and I ended up doing some of my best work with a new device, an experimental magnetic resonance imaging unit.
Speaker 2: Would you explain what that is?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's a unit that--there's basic MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], the kind that we get after an accident or we were searching to examine whether there's any anomaly in the brain.  But this high field or high strength magnetic system is one that has a much stronger resolution.  In the day-to-day hospital work, we use a field strength of 1.5 tesla (ph.) which is about as much as the government allows people to be exposed to in this magnetic device.  But in this new device that I'm using, which is quite advanced, we are close to 5 tesla.  You can't use that on humans.  I've been able to study the uptake of medicines and the balance in hearing systems.  I've been able to study the structural and morphological changes as a result of trauma and other sorts of things with this device which is quite unique.  In other words, you could see right through the head, like a piece of glass.  Much of the work, of course, has to be done on animals because you can't expose humans (unclear) (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: That would be your basic research?
Speaker 1: That would be the basic research.
Story_ID: 31553
Speaker 1: Tell about some of the clinical work that you've done with the auditory?  Have you done any clinical work in the auditory field (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Well, I have, indeed,--
Speaker 1: --brain injury?  I guess I've read something about brain injury.
Speaker 2: I have, indeed, yes.  I've worked at the, in the neurophysiology unit that was run primarily by the Massachusetts General Hospital [Boston, Massachusets] at one of its affiliates which was the Shriver Center, looking at auditory responses in brain injured persons who couldn't express themselves or could not give behavioral responses or in infants or young kids who cannot, you know, suggest whether they are hearing or receiving any sound.  Many of the children were thought to be deaf or have some type of conduction loss.  And as a result of the work in our clinic, we're able to use the brainwaves to determine whether something is getting into the auditory system.  And I've spent years working on that.  Now, at the same time, I've had for ten years a project in South America where we looked at the children in the villages who are lead and mercury exposed and in doing that, we've looked at the auditory system which is often the key to central nervous system damage.  We see early on by these objective electro-physiological waves, coming pretty much like EEG [electroencephalography] waves, but computer analyzed, we can see whether there's a deficient in the auditory system.  I've been doing this--.
Speaker 1: This is in Ecuador?
Speaker 2: That's in Ecuador, where we've done most of our work, but I've worked with native Indians in Suriname and with other places.
Story_ID: 31554
Speaker 1: Well, your scientific explorations, were they initiated in addition to your basic research or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --or did the basic research come out of what you found when you did your explorations?  Let's take Ecuador, for example.
Speaker 2: Well, the two are kind of connected but disconnected.  I mean I enjoy laboratory work.  I mean being at the wet bench or working there in the lab is something I enjoy.  I still have a lab.  I've had one now all my career to do research in.  But you also want to get out in the field and do things too.  And I enjoy getting out in the field, exploring places, looking at some of the medical problems, seeing how we can help, bringing in teams with expertise to do solid medical, clinical work.  I've been doing that now for, you know, close to twenty years.  And it turns out that my work in Ecuador started as a result of going to a village where all the children had black teeth.  And the moment you see this, you know from your biomedical training, from my degree in medical science, I know that that's a sign of severe lead poisoning in children, not just lead poisoning, but severe lead poisoning.  This led me to try to find out if we could look at the deciduous teeth, to see the content of the lead.  More than that, you can take blood samples, and I brought in medical teams and worked closely with Ecuadorian authorities who were individuals from the medical school, I also worked with the dean of the local medical school, to go out to see these children who had never received medical care in many cases, to get blood samples to bring back to analyze here in America, Children's Hospital and other centers, for free, to help these children.  And we found that these children had some of the highest blood lead levels ever recorded.  The CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, near Atlanta, Georgia] says if you have ten micrograms per deciliter of lead in your blood, you're in the toxic range.  Some recent studies in the 'New England Journal of Medicine' suggests that even less than ten micrograms per deciliter of lead in the blood of children may cause neurocognitive impairment.  We found children way over one hundred micrograms per deciliter which, you know, are not even included pretty much in the standard medical textbook analysis.  And we were able to--I raised money personally from--or at least medication in exchange from companies like Sanofi-Synthelabo who gave me twenty thousand dollars' worth of chelation medication.  And with a group of doctors from Children's Hospital in Sweden, we were able to figure out a way to get this medicine dispensed to reduce the lead poisoning in these children.
Speaker 1: What was the source of the lead in the systems of these young children?  What's the source of the lead (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a very good question.  It turns out that in these villages, and there were a number of them in Ecuador, but they also exist in Mexico and Peru, the women of child-bearing age in many of these villages have as their major task, digging lead out of old car batteries that we discard and taking that lead and mixing it with water, grinding it into a slurry and glazing ceramics, particularly, roof tiles.  So some of these villages, such as the ones I worked in, in La Victoria and El (Unclear) down in Ecuador, they make many of the overlapping brick or ceramic tiles that you see on the Spanish homes.  And they cover them with lead for two reasons, primarily, it makes this clay more durable.  But secondly, it's cosmetically appealing.  And so a small group of people--the upper-class members of society don't do this.  It's left mostly to the poor.  And they don't really educate the poor about the dangers of this.  And many of them are indigenous Amerindians.  And that touched me deeply when I saw this sort of stratified society with discrimination.  I don't like discrimination anywhere that it occurs.  And I can tell you that this was seen in many areas of South America.  And so that's why I stayed there to help.  So I've spent ten years on that project, going back and forth taking medicines.  We've had educational sessions and the education of the community will help.  It lowers the level of blood lead.  We've tested before and afterwards.
Speaker 1: Now, is mercury also a problem in these populations?
Speaker 2: Mercury's an extensive problem there, mercury exposure, primarily because of the gold mines in South America.  Mercury is used in gold mining to separate the gold particles from alluvial sediment, from ore.  And then the mercury is burned.  And as a result of that, the villagers, particularly, the women with the babies on their backs, the indigenous women, will breathe the vapors and the babies will breathe the vapors as well.  And they can get exposed through elemental mercury vapors which are quite dangerous, can damage the lungs, the brain and kidneys, but also a lot of this residual mercury will leech off into the local tributaries and waterways and settle on the bottom.  And that mercury is broken down, we learned only recently, by microorganisms which are then eaten by higher organisms, and finally the fish and the larger fish, and then it sort of bio-magnifies up the chain.  And humans eat it.  And there again, you get methyl mercury poisoning because it methylates as a result of its position in the biota and in the water there with the microorganisms eating it.  And you get methyl mercury poisoning from eating the exposed fish or other animals, the chickens that have been exposed or otherwise.  And that's a very dangerous proposition.  So we found high exposure levels, unbelievably high in some of the children in Ecuador, for example, up in the gold mines.
Story_ID: 31555
Speaker 1: I first learned about your scientific explorations and your interests in being an explorer through a documentary film "I Shall Mold It Before I Shall Be Taken".
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: One of my favorite films.  I used to use it with my students.
Speaker 2: Oh is that right?  Well, thank you.
Speaker 1: Tell me the history behind that documentary.  You had a colleague, a very close colleague who worked with you.  But it was in Suriname.  Would you tell us about how you and David Evans, why you went to Suriname, and what you found there?  Tell us about that story.
Speaker 2: Well, here again, I mix science with my interests in exploration because I was down in South America and I looked up populations.  And like most Americans who've never been taught this--I mean historians know this, but we were not taught that there were large segments and populations of African-descended people in South America.  There were large enclaves.  There were some big populations.  We sort of knew about Brazil in general from seeing Pele [Brazilian football player] and other great African Americans, but very few people knew about Suriname or French Guiana or the history of these places.  Well, it turns out that I learned that Suriname had literally preserved more of the African tradition and culture than perhaps any other place in the Diaspora, much more than America where we've become assimilated and so forth.  And I set off on a mission to go back and forth down there.  And I asked a colleague at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusets], David Evans, one of my dear friends, if he would join me.  And I persuaded him that this would be a wonderful expedition to go on and so forth.  And David was very knowledgeable about culture and history, and it excited him.  And so he said, well, I'll join you and sure enough, we went back for a period of, I think, close to eight years, back and forth, as long as we could stay away from the university.
Speaker 1: Now, he wasn't working in science here, was he, although he was a trained electrical engineer?
Speaker 2: David was a trained electrical engineer.
Speaker 1: But he wasn't doing science (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He wasn't doing science then, but he had a general interest.  And he really understood.  He had an interest in culture, and we found a way to combine this.  And naturally, when you apply for grants, you focus on the science or the health, other aspects and we did, in fact, study that.  But equally, we were fascinated by the culture.  And particularly, what we found, here was a group of people whose ancestors had been forcibly brought to the Americas as had ours and yet they had held on to the African culture so much so that their language could still be recognized in West Africa.  That, I mean--there had been films made about the connection between America or the Americas and Africa many times after that, but nothing can match that.
Speaker 1: But you and David were drawn to a particular population in the interior, were you not?
Speaker 2: Well, we were, indeed because--
Speaker 1: How did you get to that particular population?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been, you know, going back and forth, down to South America to try to get some understanding about where the most--I hate to say the purest, but the most Africanized or African of the African-American people might exist.  And I learned they were in these tributaries, in the deep rain forest of Suriname.  So we had to get canoes or dug-outs to travel upriver to get into these areas.  I mean some of these areas had landing strips or little grassy landing strips that were in the interior, but most required dug-outs.  And we took dug-outs for several days up into the interior to the deepest part where these villagers would come out and take a look at us.  And I remember the first time I was there, in a canoe right ahead of us was a child.  And as I spotted the child at first standing on the riverbank, sort of shining anklets, the metal anklets on her leg.  And as I got closer, she spotted me and took off running in a canoe.  And I'd never seen anything like this before.  This maybe seven or eight year old kid was paddling this canoe around rapids.  And it was amazing to see, and she was, I mean, literally, pure African, in South America.  And when we got to the village, we had to walk under these things called Asampowells (ph.) that would cleanse you of any evil spirit.  It was like palm fronds hanging down.  And people were there on the shore waiting to greet me in a hostile fashion, not necessarily saying, "Welcome, brother".  They were like, who is this outsider (laughter).  And I managed to convince people--
Speaker 1: How did communicate with them in terms of the--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, you communicate as much as you can by hand and so forth, but I had fortunately made contact with a man who had gone into the interior to tap rubber trees for many years.  And Mr. Von Overon (ph.) who was an indigenous Suriname person, but not one of the interior people.  He was what they called a mixed race person, if you will, on the outside, looking like African Americans here, like ourselves.  But he had made contact with them, and he had given me some instructions and some words.  And he helped us.  And so over the years, we involved him quite a bit.  But it was through this that I first made contact with this community and literally just fell in love with this population of people.  I would go back and forth.  And the leader of this group in sort of a--they had their own chieftains.  They had Abontani (ph.), Angazon (ph.) and a few others, but the real spiritual leader was a man named Dabuwan (ph.).  And I always said if I had a son, I would name him Dabuwan, you know.  And I really wanted to keep--this man was a great medical leader.  He was a good doctor for the community.  He was an indigenous medicine man.  And I would go into the forest searching for plants with him and trying to categorize these plants according to the medicines that they used.  And he would show me the ones that were good for a stomachache.  He would show me the ones that were good for headaches.
Speaker 1: So this was your scientific research project?
Speaker 2: That was part of the scientific (unclear) (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: You were doing ethnography but at the same time, you had some scientific--
Speaker 2: I had real scientific interests, but that was a way to support my interests and support my work, to support my interests and my work in the expeditions.  And so I spent years going back and forth collecting these plants, wrapping them up, bringing them back to America.  And I was permitted to bring them in through customs to our biology department.
Speaker 1: Here [Harvard University]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And with the help of Professor Richard Shelters who was a specialist in plants, we were able to classify them and figure out what the common ingredients were that might be helpful to the people medicinally.  And I was always impressed with their knowledge of the environment, their milieu, the medicines that were available to them in a natural way.  It was incredible to see this.
Story_ID: 31556
Speaker 1: Now, one of your, I guess most famous explorations was to the North Pole.  What drew you to the North Pole?  Were you going there on a scientific expedition or you just wanted to go?  And how did you happen to go to the North Pole?  We're won't talk about what you found up there.  Why did you select the North Pole?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say this that I'm often motivated just by, again, interests, and I tied the science in every time.  I mean I did do a study with a doctor in northern Greenland, the northern-most villages on earth.  That scientific study is a way of supporting my interests in general, but more than that, I was sitting in a laboratory in Stockholm [Sweden], and I had been made aware of the fact that there were all of these interesting people up in northern Greenland who were called the Polar Eskimos because they lived closest to the North Pole.  And the Inuits there have an amazing tradition, but a special association with America, and that is because many of them are among the descendants of the Inuits who went to the North Pole in its discovery in 1909.  And I wanted to go to visit with them to learn more about, not only who the people were, who they are, but the fact that there's never been the truth told about these expeditions, the full truth.  That is, we know that Admiral Robert E. Peary, by all objective measure, discovered, was the first leader of an expedition to reach the North Pole in 1909.  There are people who try to say this fellow [Frederick] Cook did it and others, and his family is pushing this.  But those people are totally off the mark, misled.  It's kind of, a sort of historical, if you will, hustle, as far as I'm concerned.  If I thought Cook did that, I'd say right away.  Cook was a person who was very good to [Matthew] Henson and had him stay at his home in the 1800s.  He was in that way a fine person, but when it comes to his claim of discovering the North Pole, he's a charlatan, and there's no question about it.  And if you want to sell a good book tomorrow, pretend you made a new discovery where Cook discovered the North Pole (laughter).  People will buy it.
Story_ID: 31557
Speaker 1: Well, I was in Stockholm [Sweden] working in the laboratory, and I had a desire to travel to Greenland because I wanted to answer some of the questions that I'd had for many years about the expeditions.  I wanted to talk to the Inuit people themselves.  And I met a man one night at a dinner at my professor's home who had traveled to northwest Greenland.  And he began to talk about the Inuit people there, and I was determined at that point to go up to answer questions about the whole history of the expeditions to the North Pole because my grandmother [Edie Nelms Johnson] had always made a funny statement.  She'd always say, wherever you saw this (pointing to hand), this was also there helping, if not leading the way.  And I got her point, wherever you saw this, this was also there.  And she told me early on that Matthew Henson, an African American, had traveled to the North Pole with [Robert E.] Peary and that he had, in fact, discovered the North Pole.  And, of course, my grandmother would always give great credit to African Americans and sometimes, I always thought that maybe she was, you know, just for my own--our own pride, adding a little bit.  But she said that to me.  And I was determined to go up and find out more.  So I left the laboratory in Stockholm.  I bought all of my equipment to travel to the polar regions of Greenland to meet the Inuit people who had been associated.  I really wanted to write the story.  I again approached some scientists and doctors there to see if I can get some scientific basis for coming in.  They agreed and I ended up, as I said, writing a paper on the subject.  But when I got there--
Speaker 2: But more astounding, you found what?
Speaker 1: Well, when I got there, I was actually met by a translator of the military base at Thule [Greenland] which is the northern-most sort of airbase that we have, and the only way to get to that part of the world.  There were no, you know, regular airlines going up there.  And I was granted permission to get there and so it was no easy task even to get there.  And then to travel about a hundred and fifty or so kilometers north to the Inuit villages.  And the Thule Airbase is where America watched the Soviet Union across the Pole for over fifty years.  So there I went out into the villages, and I met translators who took me out, and I had the privilege of meeting Inuit people who were the descendants of Ouuta (ph.), the very man who traveled to the North Pole with [Matthew] Henson and [Robert E.] Peary who had actually saved both their lives by pulling them out of the water when they fell in.  And his grandson, his great grandson, gave me a whip, a dog whip.  I still have it today.  I was very proud of that, you know.  And I collect things like that.  And as I began to talk about the expeditions and through my translator who had come from Thule Airbase, I was asking about Henson, and they kept laughing at me and laughing.  And I was wondering, why were they laughing?  So (unclear) actually, so I went into these little villages.  And I asked if they knew more about Henson.  And they said, "If you come with us, we will take you to the house where you will meet some people.  And I got over to this house," and out comes a man with dark skin, curly hair, and he says, "I am the son of Monte Paoulut" (ph.) and bear with me (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And so when I went to this village and to this area, there was a little igloo there, and igloo is simply house.  They're not only made of ice.  They're also made of wood nowadays because the Danish government takes a certain amount of wood there for them to build little houses.  This man came out and looked at me with his dark skin and curly hair and started laughing uproariously.  And he said, "I am son of Monte Paolute (ph.)".  And I said, "Monte Paolute?"  And they explained to me that was what they called Matthew Henson.  Paolute is a kind person.  It was basically Matthew, the kind one.  And so right away, I started to know this man.  I followed him around to his seal traps.  He was still, in the traditional Inuit Eskimo way.  He was searching for seal traps or for seals.  I came to know him, and he said, you ought a meet my cousin.  I had no idea who he was talking about.  Turns out, he meant that there was another relative, and he called him cousin because he was the son of Admiral Robert [E.] Peary.
Speaker 1: Peary.
Speaker 2: And he had grown up with him.  They were adopted by two Inuit when Henson and Peary left.  And they were brothers so they called each other cousins.  And so I came to know both of these men--
Speaker 1: So these children, they were fathered somewhere in the first decade of 1900s?
Speaker 2: They were both fathered in 1906--
Speaker 1: '06 [1906], okay.
Speaker 2: --on Peary's ship.  They were both born on Peary's ship.  While I was there for an expedition to reach the North Pole.  And their mothers were Inuit and the son of Henson, the African America, was named Analkai (ph.) Henson and the son of Peary was Calique (ph.) Peary.
Story_ID: 31558
Speaker 1: Okay, and one of the most amazing culminations of this exploration and meeting these people was that you brought them to America.  Could you say quickly about bringing them to here, to America?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back and forth to Greenland on the military plane several times to see them.  And they said to me at one point that they were older men, and they knew they were gonna die soon.  And they asked if I could help them do something they'd dreamed of since they were abandoned by their fathers in Greenland.  They said, can you help us touch a relative?  And at first, I kind of didn't know what that meant, but they said all their lives they'd dreamed of simply meeting a relative in the land of their fathers and just touching them because they felt no continuity.  They really felt abandoned.  And I agreed to help them.  I didn't know how I was gonna do it, but I came back to the U.S. and I wrote the Secretary of Defense.  I wrote the President.  I asked for permission to take a plane to go up and bring these people back to visit the sites of significance in their father's lives including Arlington National Cemetery [Washington D.C.] where [Admiral Robert E.] Peary was buried.  In short, I was granted permission and given the support of the White House, at that time, President [Ronald] Reagan.  And I was permitted to go up and bring them to America.  And when we got to Washington, D.C., they were presented flags that had flown over the Capitol.  They were, they met with government officials.  Matthew Henson Day was proclaimed in the city of Washington.  I was able to take them around.  They visited the gravesites of their fathers, and it was then it became clear to me what the racial discrimination of that time, again, did to [Matthew] Henson.  Not only did history try to drop him out of any recognition for what he had done for his country in reaching the North Pole which had great significance militarily in terms of the pride of the nation.  They dropped him off.  And so Peary was celebrated by 'National Geographic [Magazine]'.  In fact, 'National Geographic [Magazine]' gave Peary and others on the expedition wonderful privileges, gave Peary a gold medal, the highest medal, gave Bob Bartlett, another member of the expedition, their gold medal, gave other members medals.  But they wouldn't even recognize Henson.  That was the nature of the racism and the supremacy felt by the people at 'National Geographic [Magazine]' at that time.  And I fought for years to get Henson recognition.  But finally I got from the President, when I realized that Henson was buried in a common grave in New York, I asked the President to permit me through a Presidential Order to disinter Henson at Arlington National Cemetery--disinter him in the common cemetery and common grave site in Woodlawn and reinter him with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetery for what he had done for his country.  I was granted permission to do that.
Speaker 1: It's a wonderful accomplishment.
Speaker 2: I brought the young people back.  I brought the family back from Greenland on a military jet.  And there I was able to let them take part in the ceremony.  And I was able to bring the old men to America to reach out and touch their relatives for the first time both on the Henson side and on the Peary side, which is a white family in America that initially rejected even this Inuit man who at age eighty-three only wanted to meet a relative.  But I finally persuaded them that the fair and decent thing to do would be to meet him and welcome him.  And he was finally welcomed into his brother's home in Augusta, Maine his first time.
Story_ID: 31559
Speaker 1: To continue to perpetuate the values that you held onto in your exploration and scientific work that you've just described and continuing to look at discrimination, you were the founding director of the Harvard Foundation, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, as the--
Speaker 1: And I've been directing that for--since about 1980, '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Tell us briefly what the Harvard Foundation is and what you've done as its leader?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you what it is and what we've done as a community.  The Harvard Foundation was established by President Derrick Bock in 1980, '81 [1981].  The president of the university saw that Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusets] was becoming a more diverse community with persons being represented from many different cultures but particularly, African Americans, who had been out in America and qualified to be at Harvard for many, many years.  They were simply ignored because of our history of racism and racial separation.  But now the university had a new mandate to go out and reach out, and after Dr. [Martin Luther] King's death, by the way, the university was motivated to reach out to bright African American students all over the country, and later to Latino students and Asian students and otherwise, to make Harvard a different place, based on qualified students.  Now, after about ten years of this, many of the minority students here said they felt in Harvard, but not of it.  And because of that, the president had this vision that he wanted to see a university in which all members felt equal.  And he created, along with Reverend Professor Peter Gomes, a new concept.  We didn't build race centers.  We didn't build an Asian Center or Hispanic center, an African American center, although for a while, in the early days of the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], they sort of attempted to see how that would work.  We decided that we wanted a philosophy that was uniquely Harvard that we could present to our students, and then hopefully, have the rest of the country adopt it.  And our philosophy and my philosophy, is that every building at Harvard, every building is a race relations center, is a race building.  Every building belongs to our black, our Latino, our white, our Asian, all of our students.  And so our students have equal ownership in them so we don't need to build a separate building.  And we want the university to respond in a way to make students feel, in Harvard and of Harvard.  And I was asked to head that effort.  I promised I would do this for three to five years.  I'm in my twenty-fifth year.  It has been a remarkable journey and I've had the help of the finest students you can imagine and many fine faculty.  So it's not been done singularly, and it's been done with the support and help of really fine deans and presidents and faculty members and a lot of great students who make this work.  So as of this morning, we had a meeting of approximately fifty students.  They ranged from the Black Students' Association to the Armenian Student Society, to the Scandinavian Society, to the Irish Cultural Society, to the Latino groups such as RAZA, Latinas Unidas and so forth and they all feel equally empowered and enabled to do their programs at Harvard and feel a part of this community.  That's what the foundation is about, and I've now represented the foundation as its director for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Story_ID: 31560
Speaker 1: Speaking of Scandinavia, there's another distinguished position that you hold and that is Counsel General of Sweden in Boston and New England.  Would you tell us, Dr. Counter, how you came to be the Counsel?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) in the surrogate sense--
Speaker 2: I'm honored--
Speaker 1: --very briefly.
Speaker 2: I'm honored to serve as Counsel of Sweden.  I was selected by the Ambassador of Sweden to the United States, the Honorable Mr. Jan Eliasson.  And Mr. Eliasson was very kind in selecting me and was aware of the fact that for many years, I've tried to create educational exchange between scientific faculty and biotech scientists and students from Sweden to the United States, particularly at Harvard, Harvard Medical School, Harvard College.  And I've been doing this for years, trying to create the kind of exchange that would enlighten both countries about each other.  And we all know of Sweden's history of objectivity and its peaceful initiatives and I take great pride in that.  So when I was asked by the Ambassador and appointed by King Carl Gustav, I was very proud of that.  And I'm happy to serve as Counsel of, not only Massachusetts and Boston, but Vermont, Maine, Rhode Island and New Hampshire.
Speaker 1: Is that a lifetime appointment or does it have-- (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, it has terms.  Often it's renewed if they feel that you have done a very good job of it, but it means a lot of interaction between Swedish scholars in particular and others from Sweden who wish to involve themselves with Americans and vice versa, Americans who'd like to spend time in Sweden, studying or learning about Sweden as a society, its government and so forth.  And I take great pride in representing the Swedes.
Story_ID: 31561
Speaker 1: There's another initiative that I understand you are working on, and that's a memorial to African American slaves.  Is that true, and if so, where are you in that process?
Speaker 2: Well, we have been working on this now for some time--
Speaker 1: Who is the "we"?
Speaker 2: Well, a group of African Americans who care about this issue.  I've gotten the support of a number of people, Debbie Allen, who is the noted dancer, actress and producer who has great support for this project.  Her mother, in fact, Mrs. Vivian Ayres, supports this project; a friend, Bob Nixon, a colleague in Washington, D.C. who heads a major initiative with young people in Washington involved in conservation and a group of people in general.  I've met with the mayor of Washington about this who actually support the idea and his wife, the first lady of Washington, D.C.  And so there are a number of people.  I started off meeting with Bruce Babbitt who was then secretary of the interior, who really supported the idea.  But as governments, as leaders were changed, we have to sort of regain the support that we've had for this initiative.  But there's a strong initiative to build a memorial to Martin Luther King in Washington, and I think that's fine.  But we already have a living memorial.  We have a day in his honor which is more than, you know, anyone, including presidents can claim.  And I think that's a great start.  We have nothing to represent the millions of Africans and African Americans who lived and died in the helotry of slavery as we know it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I'd like to see in my lifetime some monument, not hidden off in some corner, but on the Mall, to the contributions made to the advancement of this nation by people who were forced to work for nothing, who formed the free labor force, for people who have no other basis for owning them than they were white.
Story_ID: 31562
Speaker 1: Two wrap-up questions, Dr. Counter.  How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a tough question.  I feel that my life is quite similar to that of most Americans.  I grew up in a very small, stable community in Florida with good community leaders, church leaders, a good family, good values.  I did what most people with that kind of background will do.  I went to high school, followed the rules, played sports, played football, in fact; went on to college, participated in athletics.  So I think I was quite the average American, but I had a specific interest in science and society.  I pursued that.  I followed the advice given to me by my parents [Samuel Counter, Sr. and Anne Johnson Counter]; that you learn to speak the language of your nation and to perfect it.  You learn the techniques and the underlying sort of economic structure of the nation which means get some kind of trade or profession and that you pursue this with the idea of reaching perfection.  And I think I've done that.  I'm proud to be the father of three lovely children.  And I want to pass these values on to them, and it's as simple as that.  I never sought any special form of leadership.  I think that's given you by your colleagues who believe in you and what you do.  I simply wanna be as good as I can at what I do.  And the hardest thing to be often is a great parent, and that is the challenge.  I want to be a great parent, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's my simple legacy.
Speaker 1: Last question.  How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: These are all tough questions.  I--you don't think about until you get perhaps a certain age of being remembered (laughter).  But you know living the risky life that I live of climbing mountains and going in jungles and going into caves, that there might not be a longevity or whatever.  And I think of what my children will think about me.  And I want--and I still would like to be remembered, as a good person, a decent person who respected all other human beings regardless of their race, background or religion, a person who had the privilege of meeting and knowing and loving people of all races, cultures, backgrounds and religions.  And my legacy should be one who really spent much of his life trying to bring those individuals together as human beings and not as people who are different by race, culture, class, gender or otherwise, but to bring people together with mutual respect.  That's the legacy I hope to be left behind.
Speaker 1: Good, on time, thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you, sir.
