Story_ID: 5007
Speaker 1: My name is Frank Mitchell Clark F-R-A-N-K Mitchell  M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L Clark C-L-A-R-K.
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: Do you want me to start over again?
Speaker 2: No, no.  This is just slating for archival--.
Speaker 1: And I was born September 3rd, 1945.
Speaker 2: And I'd like to have today's date.
Speaker 1: And today's date is August 2nd, 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay, and can we get the location?
Speaker 1: And we're in the Chicago [Illinois] Loop, in the ComEd Corporate headquarters at 440 South LaSalle.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 1: My occupation is Executive Vice President for ComEd Energy Delivery.  And a Senior Vice President of Exelon Corporation, which is the parent company that owns both Commonwealth Edison in Chicago and PECO Electric in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Okay, we can call you a BusinessMaker though, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 5008
Speaker 1: Now there are five questions I ask of everyone.  And these are also just really archival.  And they're sort of People Magazinish.  But I ask them of everyone.  I just need short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation--vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hilton Head, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "In any case."
Speaker 1: Good! You did well.  I am so impressed with you.  I'm telling you my history makers they just go for it. [laughing].
Story_ID: 5009
Speaker 1: Sir, how I usually begin is really trying to understand person's background.  And so I'd like you to start by talk--giving me your mother's name and what you know about her background and her growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name is Silvella, which is an interesting spelling.  It's S-I-L-V-E-L-L-A last name James.  My mother grew up in Chicago [Illinois], born in Chicago.  Her parents both come from the South.  Her father came from Mississippi.  I forget the, exactly the town.  And her mother also came from the South.  I can't recall actually the state now.  But grew up in the Chicago area. And my mother is--. She has five sisters--four sisters and one brother.  And they are all alive.  She is by far the most dominant factor in my life.  She's a self-educated woman.  When she was married, she hadn't finished grammar--she'd just finished grammar school, no high school. And as an adult, like about 40 plus, she went back to school.  Finished college became a teacher.  And in her 70's is still teaching in the Chicago Public School system.  Taught her eight siblings--her eight children--my eight brothers and sisters,  one thing that has dominated my life.  You can achieve anything you really believe that you're capable of doing.  She always told us, "You can do it."  Those were her words, "You can do it."  And that has followed me my entire life.
Story_ID: 5010
Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up here?
Speaker 2: Well she did.  My mother [Silvella James], as I said, has four sisters and one brother.  One sister is deceased.  She was raised by her father, my grandfather [Samuel Hooker].  My grandmother and my grandfather split early in their lives.  And back in the 19--late 1920's, early 1930's, I didn't-- I wasn't aware of that many black families doing well.  And even less aware of that many black men raising their own children.  My grandfather raised all of his daughters, himself.  And I think that had a profound impression on my mother who modeled herself after my grandfather who was a Pullman [Rail Car Company] porter, which was a very good job for a black man in that day.  But he traveled a lot.  He was away a lot.  So they had to take care of themselves.  Although members of his family that were here helped out, the girls really had to depend upon one another.  My mother really was the second.  Wasn't the oldest.  But more, you know, the responsible one in some respects.  And although if mother heard me say that, she'd probably have a fit.  But the fact is, my mother was a take-charge person.  And she looked out after the rest of the family.  And basically what stories she would tell, have a lot to do with where they lived and how they lived.  Because they actually moved a lot.  And it's not clear to me why, but they moved... they moved a fair amount.  And they had to become very self-reliant.  They had to rely frequently on aunts, sisters of my grandfather who were here.  And they did really help out.  But they didn't live with other people.  They always lived in their own place.  My mother became a very proficient housekeeper at a very young age.  And she became very disciplined in how to get things done.  You know, grew up fast.  But in a nice way.  And, because there wasn't a mother in the house, and she kind of took that role with her other sisters, it just made her a different kind of person.  And it made her want to emulate my grandfather just almost to an obsessive point.  Very neat, very, very dependable.  A person that would die before they would break their word.  And these are traits that she passed on to all of us.  And even today looking back, there's never been a male, a black male that I've looked up to more than my grandfather.  Even though he's been dead for over forty years.  I remember him, even now, as my absolute hero.  Because he was such a dependable, strong, consistent, fair minded, even tempered human being.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Samuel.  And his last name was Hooker.  Samuel Hooker.
Speaker 1: So you seem to know your grandfather--. Did he ever talk to you about his growing up or anything?
Speaker 2: Very, very little.  When my grandfather died, I was ten.  What I remember most about my grandfather is taking walks with him.  He had cancer.  And when he was dying of cancer, you know we would take walks together when he could.  And he didn't talk a lot about his past life.  He talked a lot about what it took to be successful in life.  And it, you know, it made a profound impression on me.
Story_ID: 5011
Speaker 1: Now your father.  What about your father?  Your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is the same as mine is.  Frank M. Clark. Frank Mitchell Clark.  He was a senior.  I'm a junior.  I have a son, by the way, who very the proudly has the third in back of his name.  I've never actually personally used Junior.  But at any event, my father was in and out of my life.  A very intelligent, humorous man, not terrible stable.  And didn't play a bit role in raising any of my brothers and sisters.  But he was there.  You know, we would see him periodically.
Speaker 1: Now what--. Give me your siblings names and the order?
Speaker 2: The oldest is Frances. And Frances Jones, that's her married name.  She's the oldest. She's--. I'm fifty-five, then she'd be fifty-seven.  Then I'm next.  And then I have a younger sister, Patricia.  And Patricia would be fifty-four.  She lives in Chicago [Illinois] now.  But she just came back from spending fifteen years in the Bahamas on a little place called Long Island that had a population of five thousand people.  She married a Bahamian who since come back with her.  And he teaches school, and she's a dental hygienist.  Then I have a brother, Lloyd Clark.  And Lloyd would be fifty-two.  And he actually works for the State of Illinois now.  But for years he did social work.  And has a background in education.  He has an advanced degree in, I want to call it social science.  But it's just like psychology.  Then I have four more brothers and sisters from a second marriage.  And they're a much younger group.  The older--the two twins, Pamela and Paula.  Pamela is a Chicago Public School principal.  Paula works for the school system. And then I have a third sister Nanette James, who's a gynecologist, and a brother Rodney, who is a Chicago Public schoolteacher.
Story_ID: 5012
Speaker 1: Now share with us some of your earliest memories of growing up.
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is living in a very crowded apartment with my mother and the four of us.  And my mother [Silvella James] letting my--her sister come and live with us, and her four children.  And I'm sure it was no more than two rooms.  That's my earliest memory of anything.  It must have had a profound effect on me. It was very, very crowded.  And my mother and her sister were two different human beings.  My mother is meticulously neat.  My aunt, her older sister is less so.
Speaker 1: So there were discussions about that (laughing).
Speaker 2: We moved a few months later.  They were still there.
Speaker 1: And then you were the oldest boy.
Speaker 2: Oldest boy.
Speaker 1: Was there a role that you specifically played because of that.
Speaker 2: From the age that I could talk and walk, I've always worked and did something to bring money in.  And I was very much the man of the house.  My mother raised me that way.  So I've always had and always assumed leadership.
Speaker 1: And let's talk about your--. Now where were you living at the time before?  Do you remember some of your addresses?
Speaker 2: Yes. Mainly on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  Around 42nd [Street], 47th [Street] and King Drive, at one point.  Eventually into the Woodlawn areas, 66th [Street] and Minerva [Avenue], 67th and Kenwood [Avenue], Kimbark [Avenue].  In those areas.  That's where I grew up.  That would be--. That would have been in the 50's [1950s].
Speaker 1: Now what--? Where did you go for elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to the public school called Wadsworth, which is somewhere around 63rd [Street], 64th [Street] and Minerva.  And I went to a Catholic school at 6th grade. I'm sorry 3rd grade called St. Claire, which would be on 64th and, I believe 64th and Woodlawn [Avenue].
Story_ID: 5013
Speaker 1: Now I would like to--. I'd like to go back to you just sharing memories.  I mean are there--. I'd like maybe have two or three memories of growing up.  I don't, you know, care what they are, but things that--.
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  I've actually shared one, the crowded house.  Memories that just flow into my mind growing up are--is my mother [Silvella James] making ends meet really.  My mother, I remember once, one Christmas.  She always wanted to have a fantastic Christmases for us. And, you know, again at this stage in her life, she barely--she just had an 8th grade education.  And really, really struggled for an income.  And I remember my mother getting a credit card.  I don't know how she got one, but she did.  And unfortunately, it was over its limit.  And she was trying to go buy things for us for Christmas.  And she looked so heart broken when they wouldn't accept the card.  And I remember being there with her and sharing that moment with her.  And I also remember what she did,  'cause she eventually did go out and get some toys.  I mean she was just a very determined person.  I--Another memory is of all my four brothers and sisters sharing the same bed. You know, that sticks with you for a while.  And another memory, 'cause my mother is very disciplined, I never ever, none of us ever stayed out at night.  We were always in bed during the daylight.  And all the other kids were out there playing.  So, you know, we would always be looking out the window.  Because they could play and we had to come in.  'Cause my mother believed that we all should get eight hours of sleep.  And didn't believe that children should be out after dark.  And we never were.
Story_ID: 5014
Speaker 1: So Now what was the young Frank Clark like?  What kind of person was he?  Was he quiet, shy?  Was he, you know?
Speaker 2: I wasn't shy, but I was quiet.  I loved to read, and daydreamed all the time.  My wife [Vera Clark], who I met in 6th grade, remembers this about me.  And she's really right.  I would always sit up in class and stare out the window.  And my mind was always some place else.  A lot of daydreaming.
Speaker 1: So what were you daydreaming about?
Speaker 2: Future, my future.
Speaker 1: And what did you want for your future? What did you see?
Speaker 2: I was determined to be successful.  I always said even as early as nine or ten, which I can remember well.  I always pictured myself working in a big building, wearing a suit.  Which at that time in my life was quite an accomplishment.
Story_ID: 5015
Speaker 1: And let's go to school.  Were there people--teachers that influenced you, you know, during you know--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that stick out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Not so much in grammar school.  Even though the nuns, they were just different people.  A lot of discipline, and then I'm sure that was important.  Actually--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You weren't Catholic, were you?
Speaker 2: I was. Yes, we are.
Speaker 1: You're Catholic.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My first real, I think significant interaction was with an English teacher.  A woman by the name of Mrs. Caldwell.  I don't remember her first name.  She made it very clear to me that she thought I had some exceptional talents.  Now this would have been sophomore year.  So I would have been fourteen.  And other than my mother [Silvella James] who always told me, you know, that I just could do anything, I had not experienced it. I wasn't a good student.  I mean I had no real reason to assume that I'd be terribly successful. No matter what image I had of myself.  I really was not a good student. I didn't pay enough attention.  Anyway, I always loved to read.  And this was a literature class.  And in fact we were doing--we were interpreting poetry.  And I absolutely loved it.  And I couldn't wait to come to the school to class the next day to talk about the different interpretations.  And she thought they were so insightful.  So that was the first indication to me, other than--an affirmation--that maybe, you know, I had something unique that I could do.  How I thought.  And she told me one day, she said, "You know, if you really, really apply yourself, you could be somebody special."  But other than my mother, that's the first time I had ever heard that.  So that was good.  Another experience in high school that I always remember and whenever I give talks, I talk about, was my counselor.  This was a gentleman who was a nice fellow, meant me well.  Don't recall his name at all.  But when I finished high school, I really did not have good grades in school.  He in his counseling of me, his advice was, and I quote, he said, "Well, Frank, what you really want to do is get a job where you can work with your hands.  Because that's where you'll probably be able to earn a little money and have a decent life."  And I said, "Thank you."  That was my walking out of high school.  I didn't pay him a whole lot of attention, however, obviously.  Because I hated, and hate doing physically labor.  I'm not good at it.  And my heart's not in it.  It's a wonderful thing for people like, if they like to do it.  In fact, one of my sons loves it.  But it's not me.  I don't think he was being demeaning at the time.  I think he was giving me the best advice he thought he could.  But, if it were not for other people giving me other advice, I may have pursued a whole different life.
Story_ID: 5016
Speaker 1: I want to go back to the, you know, the--? Was it the poetry, you said of the reading?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What fascinated you about the poetry?  What did you like?  You know, what made you--cause you said, "I couldn't wait to get back that day."
Speaker 2: When I read poetry, even today, and virtually any kind. It's just trying to figure out what's really the meaning behind the words.  What is this person trying to convey.  And it provoked thought. You know, just thinking about life.  Thinking about what philosophy is being expounded.  Thinking about how you might want to apply it to yourself.  Thinking about what it meant for your place in the world.  Those kind of things have always been interesting to me.  And I saw so much of that in poetry.  So when I'm reading some profound thoughts or insights from a, some writer that wrote these ideas a hundred years ago, or two hundred years ago, or longer, it just always had an effect on me.  I wanted to understand. And I loved to talk about it.  Unfortunately, not a lot of people like to talk about poetry.
Speaker 1: No.  So did you, did you have a favorite poet then or now?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 5017
Speaker 1: Who else was forming you as a young person?  We know that your grandfather [Samuel Hooker] and your mother [Silvella James] are. Is it, was it pretty much nuclear that way.  But were there other people that were--?
Speaker 2: Well I met my wife [Vera Clark] in 6th grade and, at this Catholic school, St. Claire.  And a very pretty, very dark girl walked in with all this beautiful long hair.  And I was, you know. I was attracted to her, instantly attracted to her.  Her name was Vera Clark.  And she was just different.  Different in the sense that she was very upbeat, and very positive.  You meet so many people.  Unfortunately many African-Americans are very down trodden.  They just don't feel good about themselves and about life.  Even in our young kids, which I think is so sad.  And I'd like to think there's less of that.  But I experience a lot of that.  Didn't, didn't--.  They even talked about themselves in a negative way.  Vera, whose whole background is a whole different story, was raised however, and spent a lot of time in her early years, in the suburban areas.  LaGrange [Illinois], in particular.  And she sounded so different talking.  I used to tease her.  You know.  I told her she sounded like a white girl.  And she just didn't have all the slang.  But what she really was was just very positive about herself.  And just a wonderful influence on me and gave me something to aspire to.  But we hit it off real good, almost immediately.  And from the time I saw her standing in front of class, and introduced to the class of incidentally about fifteen people, very small.  To today we've never had, never been separated.
Speaker 1: That's an amazing story.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah so.  That goes back to 1956.
Speaker 2: So did you--? So she was your friend for a while.  It started as a friendship then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She was--. She became really fast friends with my sister.  But that was because she wanted to be friendly with me.  And so she stayed around all the time.  Vera used to come by the house all the time.  We used to walk to school.  And she's fond of saying, "We used to skip to school together."  And we did.
Story_ID: 5018
Speaker 1: Was there anyone else? Any adult person or anyone you looked up to? Or--?
Speaker 2: There have been a number of different adults at different stages in my life that have been impactful on me.  You know, I mentioned the high school teacher.  I remember the first job I ever had.  A Catholic bookstore.  And there was a fellow there that did the bookkeeping, the accounting.  And he too, thought he saw some special skills that I had.  So he personally worked with me and taught me the basics of accounting, bookkeeping, finance.  To this day, I think I still use the basic principles this man taught me.  I didn't learn it in school.  I learned just from an individual, who wanted to, who wanted to take time.  In fact, he and his brother ran this Catholic bookstore.  And I loved it there.  I didn't make much money, but loved it.  Plus I wore a shirt and a tie.  So I thought maybe I was fulfilling my dream earlier than I anticipated.  By this point, Vera [Clark] and I had gotten married.  And she absolutely thought that that was not the career path for me.  And among other traits that Vera has, she is tenacious when it comes to making me listen.  So she convinced me, her way, that I needed another job.  And almost forced me to quit that wonderful job and come to ComEd [energy company]. Which was, you know, something I never would have done.  I never would have left that place.  And my first job here was in the mailroom.  And I was very disappointed.  But I actually made more money in the mailroom here than I was making in the bookstore.  So Vera was perfectly right. For the first few years here, I pushed a mail cart to the post office down in the Loop to bring the companies mail back, that had all of the bills and correspondence for the company.  I absolutely hated that job.  But that started my career here.
Story_ID: 5019
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back. There's one thing that I'm curious about.  And that is you being raised as a black Catholic. You know, what do you think that had impact on you?  You know, I mean the teachings, or the exposure.  I'm just--.
Speaker 2: Well a couple of things in retrospect didn't impact me at the time.  At least if they did, I didn't realize it.  I thought that all black people were Catholics.  And was stunned to find that 95 percent of them were not.  They were Baptist, or a few Protestants.  And that most black people were astounded that anybody black was a Catholic, and not well received.  So that was, you know, one rude awakening.  I remember the very first time I ever went to a Baptist church.  I couldn't figure out why people were making all this noise.  I really was, I'm quite serious.  I was taken aback by it.  I couldn't figure out where the priest was in his robe.  And what was all this talking.  It was just so different.  And it took me a while to adapt to it and adjust to it and see the difference.  But here are some of the things that come out of the, I think the Catholic background.  It wasn't traditionally black in the sense of a traditionally black heritage.  It may have made it easier for me to integrate and simulate in a white society.  Which may be good or may be bad.  But I think that's, there're some transitional issues there that may have been easier.  Because that is a religion that's obviously predominately,  predominated by Caucasians.  It actually in some respects, for a large part of my young life, kept me apart from the heart of the black experience.  And that has its definite shortcomings.  But it also has avoided some of the plight. I was, I never, never recognized racism even though it was all around me.  It took Vera [Clark], to make me see racism.  And I remember exactly, I think she was getting fed up with my not seeing it.  And because I was raised by a woman who never, ever accepted it.  My mother never talked about racism.  Didn't believe in it.  She, you know, I mean if you ask her, she'll tell you it's real.  But it wasn't a part of how she saw life.  It was just something you had to get pass and get through.  So it wasn't a matter of a lot of discussion in our household.  Whereas I know in many black households, maybe in most, it is a major discussion.  It wasn't in my household.  I didn't feel that white people were depriving me.  Not at all.  But Vera helped me.  And she helped me by taking me to see the first demonstration of [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  'Cause I wouldn't have gone.  Yeah.  I just wouldn't have taken the time.  It was heart breaking to see people throw rocks at this man, and at children.  And that,  at this stage, I'm an adult.  I'm a young adult, but I'm an adult.  That was probably the first real awakening that people are prejudiced.  That there's a genuine racism even to the point that there's a, you know, that it creates hatred.  So that Catholic experience in some respects skirted that issue for many years for me.
Speaker 1: And you--so all your teachers were white growing up in Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 5020
Speaker 1: Okay you're not a good student.  You graduate from high school, you--. What is your--?  Is your first job in the Catholic bookstore? Or what is it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And when do you get, you and Vera [Clark] get married?
Speaker 2: Okay, the sequence is like this.  I finish high school in 1963.  And incidentally, I was not only in the fourth quartile, the fourth group, I was second from the bottom.  There was only one student out of four hundred that was a worse student than me.  And I probably didn't deserve to graduate.  But in those days they did.  And Vera and I got married in 1965.  And I started working in ComEd in 1966.  I worked at the Catholic bookstore from the time I graduated in 1963 to 1966.  In between, I spent a year, two years in the army though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I would like to talk about you--.
Speaker 2: Actually not in between.  After I started working at ComEd [energy company].
Speaker 1: Oh it's after.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about ComEd a little bit.  So you come here.  You're working in the mailroom.  You're making more money.  But you're like--. What,  I mean you're saying, "This is not the job for you."
Speaker 2: Well it was humiliating work to me.  One thing I got from my grandma, father [Frank M Clark Sr.] and very much my mother [Silvella James] the high sense of pride and self worth.  And here I am pushing this mail cart.  I mean it's a wooden cart; you push down the street to go get the mail.  I just thought it was a humiliating job.  But I also recognize that I had benefits I never had before.  And I actually was making more money.  And I had confidence that in time, I would be able to move up.  But it was still a humiliating job for me and my sense of pride.
Speaker 1: Now what--.  Did you ever talk to your wife about why she insisted that you take that job?  Was it because, was it apparent at that time, because it was more money. And she felt that, that was, you know, a good thing?  Or what made her--.
Speaker 2: Oh I talked to her many times about it.  And she reminds me now that you wouldn't be where you are if it wasn't for me.  So, and she's absolutely right. Frankly my wife is very practical.  It was money.  She saw what I had at the bookstore.  And she saw I loved it but it was absolutely no future in it.  And I'd be doing the same thing.  You know, wearing a nice tie for years.  But I was making no money.  And she wanted to have a family.  And she wanted to, to move on in life.  So it was the monetary motivation.  And she would point out to me, "You could do better."  So it's also a demonstration of her confidence in me.  And she knew that I would be probably reluctant to make that move.  Because I was quite content.
Story_ID: 5021
Speaker 1: You worked here you say for two years before you go to the service?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you working in the mailroom?
Speaker 2: Working in the mailroom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the service. Was that a voluntary thing?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  I had no desire whatsoever to go to the military.  Never seen or--even though I grew up in Chicago [Illinois]--never seen a gun in my life.  And didn't think I was going to be drafted.  I had always had weak eyes.  And I remember the first time they called me down.  They didn't need people as badly apparently.  And I would have gotten an exemption for my sight.  But when things got really bad in the late '66 [1966], going into early '67 [1967], they really needed people.  So I was called back in to take the examination.  And the problem with my eye, according to the government had completely reversed itself.  And I became 20-20 vision. I was not. Not even close.  But that's what they said.  So I was drafted almost immediately thereafter.  The interesting part, now Vera [Clark] and I had been married about a year and a half.  So I was drafted in March of 1967.  That I do remember.  And Vera was probably two or three months pregnant with our first child, Frank III. But we didn't know it at the time.  So she couldn't--. And then had we known, we could have probably gotten an exemption.  When we found out, I was in basic training.  And we tried to get one then.  But once they have you, they have you.  So I went through basic training.  And was shipped off afterwards to Vietnam, where I spent an excruciating year.  But, you know, life is funny.  And while I would not advocate wartime military experience for any sane human being, the fact is, it taught me some things about myself.  It taught me that under pressure, I react very well.  It taught me that I really am a leader, and people will follow me.  Because of things that occurred when I was in Vietnam.  It also taught me that life is precious.  And you better do something with what you got.  I remember after being over there a few weeks, we had our first real mortar attack.  And I'm in a tin shower with this cold, muddy dirty water supposedly cleaning my body.  And you hear all these little sounds.  Ping, pang and dirt blowing up.  And I'm telling you.  I didn't know what it was for a few seconds.  Your mind couldn't process it.  Of course, you know, you see people running and screaming.  You realize it's a serious attack.  And then you hear this, something that sounds like buzzing, psst, psst.  People were shooting at you.  In my entire life, nobody ever shot at me.  So it just takes time for this to process.  But I'll tell you what.  Once it hit me what was going on, I was out of that shower. I'm a modest person, but I was out of that shower in a flash and didn't need anything to cover me.  I slipped in the mud too by the way.  But all I was doing was trying to get into that bunker, where you'd have some protection.  And there were numerous episodes like that.  The--occasionally taking your turn and going on those patrols.  And you'd go through these villages and see how horribly these people were living.  And in many cases, how horrible we treated them.  And you just begin to value what you have and the kind of life that awaits you if you can get back to it.  And keeping your sense of balance during that type of experience helps you to grow up.  Probably the most profound sequence of events that I can recall about Vietnam, well there're really two.  One when I landed, they brought us in a helicopter.  And the first thing I saw getting off the helicopter, were these body bags that they were bring back on.  So welcome to Vietnam.  That was so paralyzing and terrifying, that I almost can't really remember the scene.  I just remember what happened.  I mean just pure terror.  And once, we were on a patrol.  I was always chosen to walk point.  Because I could read maps and compasses and follow a compass better than anybody in my little group.  I was proud of that at first.  But then I realized I was always the one been chosen to walk the point.  That's the fellow or maybe a group of people that walk away from the main column.  And your job is to detect hostility first.  Not a place you really want to be.  Well one time, we were in an area I'd never been and we just got lost.  We lost the main column.  And for three hours we were completely isolated.  Me and two other fellows, from the main column.  And that was probably the most defining time in my life.  One, I made an instant decision, that we would take our ammunition out of our guns.  Because I was afraid if someone came on us--cause we were scared out of our minds--that we'd shoot somebody, our own people.  And that proved to be a very wise decision when they finally found us. And two, you sit there for three hours and thinking you really, really are lost. Picturing yourself in one of these little cages, when the enemy catches you.  And maybe never seeing your family again.  It just does something to you.  It certainly did something to me.  But fortunately several hours later, they found us.  And we were able to rejoin the column.  But I never ever forgot that experience.  And that's what I remember very well.  'Cause you were just literally by yourself.  I tell people all the time, the jungle is not at all like the Tarzan movies, which are ridiculous.  It's pitch black, wet and full of mosquitoes.  In midday, you cannot see, because the vegetation is so tight.  It's nothing like television.  It's a horrible place to be.  But in any event, I was able to get out of that.  I got out of the service successfully.  Although, when Vera said she saw me, I looked like a walking skeleton, is how she described me.  And I think I slept for about two weeks.  I got out of the service because Loop Junior College [later Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois] sent a letter to the military saying that, you know.  That I had signed up for some--to finish my education.  You can get an exemption to get our of the army early if you had a college right.  And to this day, I don't know who was nice enough to do that for me.  So I actually got out a couple months early.  Considering where I was at, that was life saving.
Story_ID: 5022
Speaker 1: I want to ask a couple of questions.  One, where did you do basic training at?
Speaker 2: Fort Knox and Fort Gordon.  Mostly before I went to Vietnam, I was in Fort Gordon.  Which, Fort Knox is in Kentucky.  Fort Gordon is in Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And when you go--. 'Cause these both--. Had you traveled much before then?
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a whole, I mean not only are you--.
Speaker 2: The first plane I ever was on was in was when I flew in the military, over to Vietnam.  I'd never been on a plane prior to that.  No, that's not true.  I started flying when I was in Fort Gordon coming back home.  I take that back. Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how did you react to being--I mean besides this whole thing of being a wartime country--a foreign country like that.  You know, with all the different smells and sounds that are...
Speaker 2: Well you can start with the smells.  When I first got off the plane at Cam Ranh Bay, the heat and the smell were so overwhelming.  You honestly, it was like you could not believe that this was real.  And that's how I felt for a day and a half.  You could, apparently, you can get accustomed to anything.  Because after a while, you couldn't smell the difference.  But it was absolutely overwhelming.  If you can think about going someplace where there is a lot of rotten meat and rotten vegetation at about 100 degrees and damp.  That's how Vietnam smelled and hit me when I first got off the plane.  But you get accustomed to it.  And did you--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) And some parts were actually quite pretty.
Speaker 2: --and where were you in Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Mainly, I was in a place called the Central Highlands.  And they have a main base there called An Khe.  But we moved around a bit.
Speaker 2: Were you on the front lines or not?
Speaker 1: There are no front, There're no front. There really aren't front lines in Vietnam.  You have big bases.  You have small camps, and you have small groups that move around.  We were--. The Central Highlands would be considered a hostile area.  A hot area.
Story_ID: 5023
Speaker 1: Did you find a difference between how white soldiers were treated and how black soldiers were treated at that point?
Speaker 2: Well here's what I saw.  The answer to the question is obviously yes, in this sense.  I have many white counterparts who are my age.  Not one went to Vietnam that I know.  Now obviously there are a whole lot of white fellows in Vietnam so. But they tended to be poor and from the South.  Middle class, educated white fellows avoided Vietnam.  I don't begrudge them that, you know.  They did.  So the treatment was in the recruiting.  There was a lot of racism in one aspects in the military.  But I also saw a particularly in a combat situation, I saw race completely put aside.  My unit had thirty people in it.  And I think there was seven black fellows.  And, we actually--. You know you work easiest and you--. It's easiest to be with people who are like you.  So we all bonded together and spent quite a bit of our time together.  But one of my best buddies was a white fellow from Kenosha, Wisconsin.  And when we were coming back from some excursion some place, we rode in these open car/trucks.  And I was standing up when I should have been sitting down.  And all of a sudden, this hand reaches up.  And this fellow grabs me and just yanks me down.  As this little wire strung across the road takes the top of my hat off.  Now how badly would I have been injured?  I have no idea.  Badly enough to take, you know.  It took my hat off.  So what it would have done to any other part of my body, I don't really know.  We were moving probably thirty miles an hour.  I would have been hurt.  I don't know how he saw it.  He said he saw the reflection.  And his instinct. This is a white fellow.  His instinct was to protect me.  Had you know, yet I'm sure about the day after I got out of the army, if I went to his house, there may have been some discomfort.  Yet his instinct was to protect me.  So I don't know how you read that.  When you're thrust into a difficult situation, all together, you can become very close friends.  Outside of that environment it's a different story.
Speaker 1: Now the other question I have for you. You had said earlier that you saw in some instances how badly we were treating the Vietnamese.  And I'm wondering what, you know. What you meant by that.
Speaker 2: We treated them like animals.  We were afraid of them.  The ones that we couldn't figure out who was your friend, who was your enemy.  So we treated them real bad, period.
Story_ID: 5024
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of people got really messed up because of the Vietnam experience.  You were, you were, I mean I was surprised that you had gotten out so, you know, so early.  You didn't do your full two years.
Speaker 2: Ten months.
Speaker 1: Ten months!  You didn't even do a year.
Speaker 2: Oh no, over in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. I spent twenty-two months in the army.
Speaker 1: Now a lot of people got messed up from the Vietnam experience.  I mean for the rest of their lives.  It doesn't appear that happened with you. And I'm wondering why.
Speaker 2: You'd have to ask my wife.  She (chuckling) may not share that opinion. It was the worst experience personally that I think I've ever had on one hand.  But, you know, you spend an awful lot of time by yourself.  You go out on guard duty.  It's pitch black there.  You can't see anybody.  If you're lucky you're in a foxhole with somebody else.  But you might be by yourself doing guard duty.  But you're there all night. Eight hours in the dark by yourself.  If you're a thinker at all, imagine all the thoughts that run through your mind.  You learn a lot about yourself.  And you reflect a lot on your past, your present.  And you think a whole lot about the future you want to have.  I found that part of military life, that part of being in that kind of environment, maturing.  It helped me to grow up.  It helped me to want to do something.  It helped me to want to apply myself.  And when I got out of the service, and went back to Loop Junior College, which is now Harold Washington College [Chicago, Illinois].  In order to get into DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause they wouldn't accept me.  They told me that my grades were just that poor.  I was a poor student.  That I needed to have all As for two semesters.  And then they would put me in as a probationary student.  Cause they actually wanted to help me.  But they, you know. They set a goal that was based on every--my performance up to that point--would have been impossible.  So this is 1968.  The end of 1968, '69 [1969].  Well I did.  The first time in my academic life, I got all 'A's'.  Because I really wanted to.  And I ended up graduating from DePaul University, because they did accept me, with honors.  That's when I realized how smart I was.  A smart fellow.  That, that teacher was right.  And my mother always was right.  And Vera [Clark] was right.  And I can simply say that I only applied myself--and I'm in my twenties now, I didn't only--I not only applied myself at school, I began to apply myself on the job.  You asked about earlier, about people who influenced you on the job.  There was a white fellow named Bob Paulice, who's since deceased.  Who was a supervisor in the purchasing area, when I was a purchasing clerk.  And eventually when I finished school, and was able to write for and get a management position, I worked for Bob Paulice. He was another one of these methodical, very, very precise, orderly person.  Very organized.  And he said, "Frank, one of the things I notice about you is that you take off from work every now and then."  He said, "I've been working at this company for--", at that time I think he told me eighteen years.  He says, "And I've never missed a day."  He says, "I never take off."  He says, "and when I'm sick, I take a personal day.  I take a vacation day.  So my record is perfect."  He says, "you want to think about that.  Because, you know, I can see that you're ambitious."  I says, "So you need to be--you need to have a good work record."  Now that was in 19--that had to be maybe 1971.  Well this is 2001.  I haven't had a day off since then.  Just like that (snapping fingers).  He influenced me that much.  Now I've been sick like anybody else.  But it's never on the company's time.  And I'm proud of that.  And I tell that to people all the time when they're asking me, "Well how can I improve myself?  How can I position myself to advance in the company?" I say, "well the first thing you do, you have to make an investment in yourself.  You got to get yourself educated.  The second thing you got to do is frankly, you need to be willing to work pretty hard and show people that you are.  One of the ways you do that, come to work."
Story_ID: 5025
Speaker 1: I want to go back to when you come, you know, when you're coming back from Vietnam just for a bit.  And you know you're back on home ground.  Does Chicago [Illinois] look and feel differently to you?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Totally.  It's another surreal world.  Coming from that plane, I mean you're in Vietnam.  I mean when you leave Vietnam, they put you on a helicopter.  And they fly you to a main base.  Of course, you're terrified the helicopter is going to go down, 'cause you're thinking all these terrible things are gonna happen to you.  And then they put you on a commercial airline.  And they fly you back.  In this case, it was to Seattle, Washington.  So you leave Vietnam.  You stop over I think in Tokyo [Japan].  And you come all the way to Seattle, Washington.  Your mind can't adjust.  I mean when I landed in Seattle, Washington, probably a week earlier, I was on patrol.  It was, you know, it's unreal.  And I remember going through the processing.  You know, that's another interesting story.  When they want you to leave, they want you to leave.  They spend a few hours with you.  They want you out of there.  Fortunately, you know, I worked for a company that had a good medical program.  So when I actually came back to ComEd [energy company], you know, I got thoroughly checked out.  And I was in pretty decent shape, except I had lost tons of weight.  But, I mean the examination is so perfunctory.  By the way, they told me I needed glasses (laughing).  So, it was still--. They found that my eyes weren't what they should be.  One doctor said, "boy, how'd you get in?"  You needed people at the time, obviously.  But in any case, no.  It was--I couldn't sleep.  A tremendous adjustment period and non communicative.  Not anti-social.  I was glad to be back.  But you just, it just didn't feel wake up and you know.  And when you fell asleep, you wake up, not knowing where you're at.  And I'm sure that's common.  And for months it was the sense of dread that this wasn't real.  But it was.
Story_ID: 5026
Speaker 1: So your son.  Was he born by then?
Speaker 2: My oldest son was born by then, yes.
Speaker 1: And so you come back.  Are you still working in ComEd [energy company]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm
Speaker 1: --when you're working?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Still in the mailroom.  Still in the mailroom.
Speaker 1: So were you on a leave?  Was that how they did it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, military leave.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And they guaranteed you'd come back to the same job.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Actually it is.  I mean, it was, at that time, I hate to do this, but it's reality.  If I were comparing what I was earning with other average black males, even though it was the mailroom job, it was pretty decent.  But, far below what the average white person would be making, I would think.
Speaker 1: Was it less than what you were making in the service?
Speaker 2: No. Oh no.  No.  I think I was making, geez, I don't remember. I think about 85 dollars a month. No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Now so you come back.  You're all motivated, you know.  And attending Loop Junior College [later Harold Washington College, Chicago, Illinois].  You've got a, you know, you've got a son now.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, you've got responsibilities.  And so what--. So how long are you in the mailroom job before you moved? You know, into the--.
Speaker 2: A total of three and a half years.  Twenty-two months of which, I was in the military.  When I came back to the mailroom, I was only there for a few months.  Because this is how things work out for you.  One of the managers that was responsible for the treasury department, which was also responsible for the mail service, was a World War II veteran.  Respected veterans and you know, made it his special task to look out for people who were military background.  And he called me in to talk to me.  And inquired how I was doing.  He was pleased that I was back in school.  Arranged for me to talk to some of the human resource people.  We called them IR, the industrial relations in those days.  And I got special attention and a special opportunity to get out of the mailroom into another job.  That was in Stickney, Illinois.  And if you're not from this area it won't mean anything.  But for me, to go to Stickney, Illinois, in the 1960's would be like someone going to the deepest, most rural part of the South.  And that was an experience in and of itself.  But it was short-lived.  I mean a short experience.
Speaker 1: Were you commuting there or did you move then?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I drove.  I drove.
Speaker 1: You drove.  Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I drove.  Just the environment, the place I worked, people I worked with.
Story_ID: 5027
Speaker 1: Can I ask also, what was ComEd [energy company] like at that time?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well--.
Speaker 1: I mean how many black--? You know what kind of--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) At that time, when I started with the company in 1966, there would have been no African-American or Hispanic or females executives.  Not to mention officers.  I mean executives.  And when I finished the service in 1970, when I was back at the company in the early '70s [1970s], there were still no African-American male or female executives.  There may have, at that time, been one female executive if I'm recalling correctly.  The first African-American that became an executive, and then an officer, of this company is Cordell Reed.  And he was followed by John Vierra.  And he was followed by Bill Dunbar.  Cordell Reed at one point ran the Commonwealth Edison [Company] Nuclear Fleet.  Which is the largest nuclear organization in this country.  And Cordell became a senior vice-president of Commonwealth Edison.  At that time, the highest rank any African-American had ever achieved.  Cordell has since retired.  Most of my early career here, there were no blacks in senior positions.  It just didn't exist.  There were whole departments that had no black people in them.  And even today, and I've been here thirty-five years now.  I can go places, in the territory service areas and you'll go into an office that's still all white.  Although, if you look at numbers, there are--blacks probably make up less than-- (speaking to someone off camera) do you know this? I want to say probably 20 percent to 25 percent of the work force.  And there's a conscientious effort to be more focused on recruiting Blacks, Hispanics and definitely females.
Speaker 1: Now you said your Stickney experience was an interesting experience.  And I'm wondering because this is--you know, you're a person who has, you know been--had a lot of exposure to whites already.  So I'm just wondering what was interesting about it?
Speaker 2: Well the, my having exposure to whites and being comfortable with whites helped a great deal.  But these were, I worked with union employees that had never worked with a black person.  That had no comprehension of how you talk to black people.  I mean really, it's silly little stuff.  And well not basically unfriendly, just uncomfortable.  You were just an odd thing to them.  Fortunately, you know, because of my background, they found me much easier to accept.  And probably didn't believe I was really black anyway.  I mean that kind of as a joke.  But I don't mean it totally as a joke.  I was much--. Because of how I was raised, I was easier for them to deal with.  It was probably the first time in the company I realized how acute some of these attitudes are towards anyone different.  Not necessarily just black people.  It would have been the same for an Hispanic.  But, you know, this is a very old, traditional, conservative company.  And most of the people working here, working here in those days, back in the '60's [1960s] and the '70's [1970s] worked here because their fathers worked here, or their uncles worked here.  And these people were all white, heavily Irish.  And they really did not have a lot of interaction or exchange with black people.
Speaker 1: Now at the time you were at Stickney [Illinois], are you in the purchasing--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's part of the purchasing area.  But they called it the general warehouse.  And their real responsibility was controlling the inventory. It also--the interesting part, it was not just the people. It was that there was no real work.  It was a union environment, where they were all protecting their jobs.  But no real work.  So the biggest difficulty was how to spend your eight-hour day and not go crazy.  They would spend the first two hours reading the newspaper.  And it's--. I found that extremely challenging.  I love to be busy.  I cannot stand not to work. They would take me aside, very nicely at first, and tell me, "Frank, you're messing up for everybody.  Because you know, you're working.  You know, they're gonna expect us to work." I mean literally.  They had the chief steward come talk to me one day.  And that was an eye opener, 'cause I was still in the union at that time.  Fortunately for me a job downtown opened up.  And I was able to transfer down there.  'Cause none of them wanted it.  'Cause if they came downtown, the job would require them to do a little work.  Whereas they could go out there and sit all day.  And they were quite happy with it.
Story_ID: 5028
Speaker 1: So the job that opened downtown was what?
Speaker 2: A purchasing clerk.
Speaker 1: Purchasing. Okay.  So you went into it. Okay.  Right.
Speaker 2: And are you--?  Can I--?  This is what year?
Speaker 1: This would be 1970 or '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then what year is Cordell Reed hired,  I mean become a--?
Speaker 1: I'd have to look that up for you.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Would that be in the '80's [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  He probably became an actual officer sometime '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  I guess we'll--.  Now--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Now they did--. They had black executives finally.  Not officers, there's a distinction.  And officers elected by the board.  An executive is promoted by other senior officers.  They did have--. Cordell probably was an executive going back as early as maybe the late '70s [1970s].  And John Vierra would have followed soon thereafter.  Now when you--.  What is, is anything happening?  Because you know, we have, we're in the sort of the end, well, not the end.  But you know, the end of the Civil Rights Movement.  You know, I mean, so is anything affecting this utility here initially?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Tom Ayers, who has since retired, was the chairman and CEO [chief executive officer] of ComEd in the late '60's [1960s] and all through the '70s [1970s].  He was a very, very insightful man, who genuinely believed in racial equality.  And wanted to change not only this company,  but he also wanted to change the environment in the Chicago [Illinois] area.  It's interesting too, because in his own family, one of his sons, I believe, was a member of the, like the Weathermen. Very radical.  And he was a very traditional, conservative man in his own right.  But he had a high sense of fundamental fairness towards people.  His background was all personnel and HR [human resources].  And that may have something to do with it.  But in any event, Tom became for a period of maybe five or six years, the most dominant force for change, racial change, in the Chicago area in the late '70s [1970s].  And is the person single most responsible for the development of the Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois] area.  Because it was intended to be an area for that, with middle class and upper class people would come to an integrated environment.  That was his dream.  And it would not come about, but for his intervention.  Tom Ayers took an interest in me.  And that was through an intermediary, but he took an interest in me.  And gave me some opportunities.  Began to advance through the company.  And they liked my work ethic, 'cause by that time it was clear that I was, you know, I was really giving it my all.  And I remember he gave me an opportunity to make a presentation on minority purchasing to the board of directors.  Which was a very big thing in the early '70s [1970s].  And I remember that I followed Don Peckus.  And I was told by my, the vice president of purchasing at the time, a man named Glen Beamington, that my presentation was a lot better than Don Peckus.  But for many years, Don Peckus was my boss.  So that show you how those things work.  But in any case, I got some real face time in front of prominent people in the company.  And partly because of the commitment that this individual, Tom Ayers, made.  He also was making big time changes inside the company.  It's through Tom Ayers that Cordell Reed and John Vierra became officers.  It's through Tom Ayers that we actually developed a lower level cadre of directors and managers of African-American men and women.  Tom Ayers was active in every major association or organization.  Particularly the Urban League.  And got Jim O'Connor active in the Urban League.  And I think to this day, that we're the primary reason the Urban League got a new building.  He had a true social conscience.  And he tried to change a corporation that was remarkably conservative and actually made some inroads.
Story_ID: 5029
Speaker 1: You talked about the Urban League. And I'm wondering what outside forces--. Was the Urban League, you know, I'm just trying to get a sense of Chicago [Illinois] at that time.
Speaker 2: From my perspective, in the areas that I was, you know, interacting with, familiar with. You know, the '70s [1970s] civil rights, [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], of course had been killed in '68 [1968]. But civil rights was still a very big issue. Racial equality was a very big issue. And primary business leaders including Tom Ayers [Chairman and CEO, Commonwealth Edison Company] made this a focal point in the company. It was not by accident that I for example became the Head of the Minority Purchasing Activities in the company. I finished school and that was my first real big job. Well the organizations that were most prominent, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Chicago Urban League. And [Edwin] Bill Berry [Executive Director, Chicago Urban League] and I'm reaching back in memory to recall names. Before Jim Compton [James W. Compton].  Bill Berry was probably as close to Tom Ayers as a brother. And again, it tells you something about the man, himself. This is very real for him. And through Bill Berry, Tom Ayers was in virtually every major initiative in the early '70s [1970s], mid '70s [1970s] involving racial equality. Involving the development of economic development for minority businesses. Around developing feeders, so you can have more minority people in positions to raise or to rise through the ranks of corporations. And he was touching all these. But the institutions that he worked closest with really was the Urban League. And to a lesser extent the NAACP.
Speaker 1: What do you think was done right? You know. From that standpoint? And how many people were starting to come into the organization? I'm talking about, you know, blacks or other minorities? You know, 'cause, did it happen in the '70s [1970s]? Did it happen? You know. Was it the mid '70s [1970s]? Was it the early '80s [1980s]? When did you start seeing this change?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you what I think was done right. I think you had the number one man in this corporation in ComEd [energy company], who personally believed in his own personal sense of values that he needed to personally balance the scale. That what he had seen with his own eyes told him that minority people, particularly African Americans were disadvantaged and had less opportunity. And to the extent that he could influence it, he was going to try. So you had this as a principle in a person. Well, you know, he's the Chairman of the Board. So, you know, all, everyone reflects their own expression called, "The Shadow of the Leader." That's really quite true in the corporate world. You will put yourself in a position to be aligned with where you think the senior manager is going. So all of his officers whether they believed it or not wanted to echo and conduct themselves in the same way that Tom Ayres did. So there was a lot of attention paid to Commonwealth Edison [Company] and what it did in the Chicago community.  Particularly what it did in providing opportunities to develop new minority businesses. You know we had programs that we actually gave some minority business cash up front.  Because they didn't have startup cash to just get their businesses going. Tom Ayers met personally with the, a group of black men and women inside the company just to stay in tune with their issues. At that time we had less of an Hispanic population. So frankly they did not get the attention that the African-Americans were getting. The sense of doing something good starting with Tom and then the other officers and the black American. In this case they were all males that were beginning to get opportunities. Cordell Reed and John Viera were both engineers. This is a technical company. And I mean, they just got a lot of opportunities that otherwise may have been very slow in coming. At one point we probably had seven or eight males. Black males that were either executives or on the road to be executives. And at that point in time, that was outstanding. Very few companies could even come close to it. And, you know, that was something to be proud of. You know, today I can't say that. Today the numbers are far less. Although in all candor I will give John Rowe [Chairman, President, and CEO, Exelon Corporation] credit. He has the same passion and belief as Tom Ayers. And I'm personally very close to him. And I'm beginning to see that we are getting some things done, particularly creating the feeder process. So you know they'll be more coming up through the ranks. But I won't be satisfied until I see frankly real results.
Story_ID: 5030
Speaker 1: Now, you were, you went from purchasing clerk to what?
Speaker 2: I went from purchasing clerk to a supervisor. The purchasing department.
Speaker 1: And was that when you worked on the minority business?
Speaker 2: That was right before it.
Speaker 1: Right before it.
Speaker 2: There's a small interesting story there. I was a supervisor in purchasing which was an all white department. And then when I first went to purchasing just like the place out in Stickney [Illinois], they had, never ever had a black. And this is in the '70s [1970s]. So, I just say, interesting that we are a traditional, conservative company that only hired relatives for the most part for years. They did change that policy. In any event, when I promoted out of the bargaining unit into the management department after I finished my degree at DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois], I was, I became the first African-American supervisor in the purchasing department. And Bob Paulice, who was my boss got,  became--he had some personal issues--he became ill and his mother became ill. And for the first time in his career he had to actually take off. But what he did was took a leave of absence. I mean he really wanted to keep his record intact. But that's an aside. The fact is he wasn't there and I was. And I was the lead supervisor all of a sudden. And for a period of about seven months, we hired seven, six black women in to purchasing and clerical positions. They just happened to all--and one black fellow. The jobs were typing jobs for the most part. In those days you only had women interested in doing that. Had never had any other black people in. Now a gentleman that was in HR [human resources], who's since retired, swears that I was moved into my next position, which was a promotion because there was some anxiety about what I was doing as a supervisor. I don't know. But actually it was a position I loved. And some of those young women, who I hired into the purchasing area, a few of them are still in the company. And I still talk to them from time to time. But since then it's changed real dramatically.  And we have black people in most places, although not all. But in any event, I became the Minority Purchasing Coordinator after the job as a purchasing supervisor. Where I had the opportunity to hire other black people into the company. Which is one of the reasons you want to have black people or now, you know, Hispanics or women in these jobs.  Because you will tend to hire other people like you, as opposed to not. And after I was the Minority Purchasing Coordinator for about three years. One of the most rewarding things I've ever done.  Because I was able to really work hand and glove with developing businesses. And looking back the only regret I have is that the programs that we initiated were not in and of themselves able sustain these businesses. It takes so much more then one company. And very few of the businesses that I worked with, today with one exception, are around. And that's a problem. And that's a problem yet to be addressed. Individual companies with individual efforts could only do so much. It has to be much more coordinated, much broader.  And frankly the commitment has to be more than one CEO [chief executive officer].
Speaker 1: That's interesting. That's an interesting concept. You know what I--? But this is, the time that you become Minority Purchasing Coordinator, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's a time when there's a focus on this.
Speaker 2: Huge focus.
Speaker 1: And so this is sort of, you're the kid on the block sort of?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: You know that, the go-to person in many ways.
Speaker 2: Organizations like Chicago United were being created.  Where CEO's got together to focus just on minority issues.
Speaker 1: And you had your degree for how long at that time?
Speaker 2: A couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 5031
Speaker 1: Now, I just want to go back. When you got your degree, how did that day feel?
Speaker 2: I was the first. I'm thinking. Yes, I was. I was person in my family to get a college degree. Now since then there have been many.  But I was the first. And my family, my mother [Silvella James], all my sisters, my brothers, everybody.  My aunts.  It was a big, big event. I still got all the pictures. It was a defining moment. It was my personal pride. But the family pride was awesome. And I think it inspired many more. Because, I mean, they came fast and furious after that. It wasn't too long after that, that our mother got back in school. You know, I never made the connection until we're talking now. But there may have been some catalyst effect there. I don't know. And in fact my wife [Vera Clark] went back to school.  'Cause she's a smart lady but she had stopped.  She had, after high school she went to junior college for a while and stopped. But she went back to school. And by the way, she is now the recipient of four different degrees. One of the most educated people I know. My older sister finished college and then got a Masters. My brother finished college.  My younger brother and he got his Masters. One sister became a doctor, who'd have become a doctor regardless, Nanette. Another sister has gotten her undergrad, Masters and PhD. And she's the one that's the principal in one of the Chicago [Illinois] schools. But I was the first. And I do think that, that you know.  It was like if one can do it, we can all do it. And they did.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful. Now you talk about feeder network (chuckling).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're an example.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The pride my family had in me getting that degree was tremendous.
Story_ID: 5032
Speaker 1: So you do, how long are you the purchasing coordinator then?
Speaker 2: About three years.
Speaker 1: Three years. And then what happens after that?
Speaker 2: I became what I thought was the greatest job at the company.  An actual buyer. Again, the company had never had an African-American buyer up to that time. And I was responsible for buying the corporate fleet building materials, other transportation equipment and construction equipment,  like the big poles we put up. I was wined and dined by all the vendors. I was treated like a absolute king. It was a wonderful job. And never, ever aspired to do more than that. I mean I thought I had--and I was probably thirty at the time--I thought I had hit (pause) heaven in terms of the professional world. You know. I was making a good salary. And I was in a great company. And I was a buyer. Everyone sought my time.
Speaker 1: And did that, as a buyer, you had line item responsibility?
Speaker 2: Nope. It was really a support function. And I bought the products the company used for those areas that I was responsible for. But, you know, even at this time my eyes were not completely open to how expansive this company really is.  And all the other opportunities. And again, this is still in the '70s [1970s]. This was a time when schools were very aggressively seeking minority students.  Particularly African-American men and women.  Particularly African-American males as I can determine. And DePaul University [Chicago, Illinois] wanted to progressively pursue increasing African-American enrollment in their advance educational programs.  And law school was one. At that time, I was actually in their undergrad school there. So without ever listening to anybody.  I was actually asked. I took the Law School Admittance Test [LSAT]. All that reading I had done, all my life and reading poetry apparently worked out well. I did very well on the test. And was admitted into the law school. They had a special minority program.  But those were for people who they felt struggled and didn't get the scores that they thought they needed. So I didn't go through that program. Which also made me a bit of an outcast with some of the other African-Americans for a short period. Then we all bonded. But, I got into law school. I enjoyed it. I enjoyed the reading. But I never really had a serious interest in practicing law. I finished law school at night, four years. My wonderful wife [Vera Clark] would come down and get me three nights a week at 10:00 at night.  When I got out of school and with the kids in the car asleep.  And we'd go back home. And she literally did that for four years. And she had started back to school during that time. So she was having a real long day. It never dawned on me at that time, I hate to say this. But that was an extraordinary effort on her part.  It's only on reflecting that I realize how extraordinary it was. And she doesn't have to remind me. I mean I tell her all the time. It really is an extraordinary effort.  If I had been riding the el every night, I don't know. In any event we, I finished law school. I wasn't going to take the Bar Exam because I was never interested in practicing law. And the General Counsel for the corporation, who's also since then deceased. A gentleman by the name of Hubert Nixon said, "well, Frank, no matter what you should take the Bar.  You should take the Bar Exam." I think he was curious to see if I could pass it. We all have skills. Things that we do, you know, good for whatever reason? I take test well. No idea why. I just do. I have a real great short-term memory.  I took the Bar Exam never studied for it. Didn't go through all the anxiety of Bar review courses.  Because I had no pressure on me. I wasn't indifferent.  But I really didn't, you know, it wasn't,  I didn't care about practicing law. So, I didn't have, I didn't have a job depending on me passing the Bar Exam. So I passed it. And I, to this day I attribute that to not having a lot of pressure and being very discipline on how I took the exam. So now I'm licensed. Well the company really started paying attention to me then. In fact they called me in. When I'd mentioned to my boss at the time that I'd taken the Bar Exam and I had passed. 'Cause I actually had taken two vacation days to take the exam.  'Cause it's a two-day exam. And when I got the letter that I passed, I told a couple of my people that work with me. And they mentioned it to my boss, who then called me in to confirm that I'd passed. He told his boss, who called to see me. And you know, it was this fellow, Glenn Leahman. He said, "You passed the Bar Exam?" I said, "yeah." He said, "When were you off?" I said, "I wasn't." He says, "Do you mind bringing it in?" (Chuckling) They didn't quite believe me. Because they send you a letter. Which is fine. I did. I'm sure they called whoever you can call to confirmed that. And the attention I got--and this had to be the late, this been--let's see, I took the Bar in '76 [1976].  So going into 1977. I just began to get tons of attention from the company. Because it was something that they could use to capitalize on a bit. And I demonstrated that perhaps I had above average intelligence. I was given just a slew of different special assignments. Both of a legal nature.  And ultimately in,  by 1982, I ended up in a brand new area called Governmental Affairs. And life is funny.  Because all the things I thought I wanted to or didn't want to do, that's where I hit my niche. And I had responsibility for the company's rate cases. Well I'm gonna tell you right now, raising rates is what utilities are all about (chuckling). Of course, those rates are justified to cover their cost. That's my commercial. For a series of about four or five years when we were being, we're in the '80s [1980s] now. Where we were real, we were well thought of in the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], and '70s [1970s].  'Cause our rates were so low and we were very reliable. Well we become a little tainted by the '80s [1980s] with the nuclear program and prices going up. We were different, we were perceived differently. During that time, I successfully got four rate increases for the company. That, well you can be proud of it on one hand.  It caused a big problem later on when we moved to this competitive marketplace. It's a whole different story. But at that time, it was highly regarded. And the then Chairman [and CEO James] Jim O'Connor [Commonwealth Edison Company] took a big notice in me. And again, a slew of special assignments, great opportunities to show what I could do. Meanwhile, the real superstars, African-Americans in the company were Cordell Reed [Assistant Vice President, Commonwealth Edison Company], John Viera [Vice President, Commonwealth Edison Company] and [William] Bill Dunbar [Vice President, Commonwealth Edison Company]. Not me at all. But I was continuously able to deliver on some very difficult and complicated assignments. All of which had financial impacts on the company. I remember--. And that lead to my leadership of the Deregulation Law. The law that changed how we conduct our business in the state. And while I was in the process of negotiating the restructuring law with the people in Springfield [Illinois], I get a call from Jim O'Connor. And he normally would have asked me to come back and be in the boardroom for this call. But because of the nature of what I was doing and the importance of the survival of the company he allowed me to stay in Springfield for the call. And I'm running in a building to meet some legislators. To have, to get something done that I had a very short time frame. And the call from Jim says, "Frank, I just want you to know the board has just elected you an officer and a vice-president." I said, "Thanks. I'm just overwhelmed.  But I gotta go." And that's exactly what I said to him. 'Cause he teased me about it for a long time afterwards. So unlike the other fellows, all of which were engineers, I was the first African-American non-engineer to become an officer. And it was through a different route all together. It was all of these special assignments. It was the regulatory/political world. Eventually, I rose to my current position in the company.  Which is Senior Vice President of Exelon Corporation.  The holding company that owns both Commonwealth Edison and Philadelphia Electric [Company, PECO]. And Executive Vice President of Commonwealth Edison Company.  Which I'm proud to say is the highest rank that any African-American has achieved in the history of the company, of Commonwealth Edison. I say that with pride. But I also say that with a bit of regret. Because, you know, the company is one hundred and ten years old. And I like the title Executive Vice President. But it's not President. And it's not CEO [Chief Executive Officer]. And it's not Chairman. So we still have a ways to go. But nevertheless I'm pleased. That's sort of my Commonwealth Edison narrative.
Story_ID: 5033
Speaker 1: I have some questions to ask you about that, you know, experience. And you know, I'd like to know what you learned in the governmental affairs area, in lobbying? Because that's a whole, that's an area that blacks haven't worked in much either.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not at all.
Speaker 1: Springfield [Illinois] is--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Deep South.
Speaker 1: Right (chuckling). I mean even though you have your black legislators down there, you know, I'm just saying that's, they weren't necessarily always in leadership either.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: And so I'm just wondering what that whole thing, you know, opened up for you? 'Cause it's much different than what you had been doing up to that point.
Speaker 2: Yes. First, I have to step back. And, you know, you had asked me about people, who've impacted me and influenced me. John Hooker is a name you may or may not know. But John Hooker is also a--. There are two African Americans that are officers in ComEd [energy company]. One is me, the other is John Hooker [Senior Vice President, ComEd]. At that time back in the '80s [1980s], John was a lobbyist for the company in Springfield [Illinois]. Although he has some interesting history. Because when he first entered (unclear) they wouldn't even register him as a lobbyist. And the people that he worked with even from the company did not want to recognize him as a lobbyist. It just was very interesting. When I was given the governmental area, I was given the regulatory piece, as well as the Springfield piece. And I remember sitting down with John. And John and I interacted on a number of things prior to that. And you know, we had a pact. And that was that we would always work together. He would never undermined me to advance himself and vice versa. And we have lived and breathed that pact for many, many years. John extended himself like a brother to help me to be successful. And I think he would say the same thing. I'm giving you this because you asked me what it was like in Springfield. Well if John hadn't been there to pave the way for me and introduce me to the right people, I'd have kept running around those rails forever, I guess. John is the most charismatic human being I've personally ever met. Therefore he is very acceptable by almost anyone. And the white leadership in Springfield really like John Hooker. And that's how I met most of them. And I remember when John introduced me to Emil Jones [Illinois Senator Emil Jones Jr.]. Emil did take a very, I think, profound and true interest in me and liking of me. And spent many hours talking to me when he had the time. Emil, who I think often, does not come across on the television as confident and as capable as he really is, is a master, master at strategy.  Absolutely a master. He's the only person I know, other than myself that read all these books on the Art of War. These Japanese Books.  Because they tell you there's a philosophy there. It's not just, It's a how to win philosophy. A very insightful. We would spend hours discussing things like that. And he understood strategy.  But he also understood that I understood strategy.  Therefore he spent a lot of time with me. And that helped, helped quite a bit. We became very, very close with Pate Phillips [Illinois Senator James "Pate" Phillips]. A person that's generally viewed in this state as a bigoted. And it's funny how individuals respond. Maybe my Catholic upbringing and John's charisma made it easier for us to interact with Pate. But he took an instant liking to us in respect and vice versa. And sense he is a very powerful man in the Senate, many of the things that we try to do that may not have been achievable were achieved, because he was willing to work with us. Mike Madigan [Illinois House Speaker Michael Madigan] and Lee Daniels are very different human beings. It's hard to get close to Mike.  But we developed a good relationship with Lee Daniels [Illinois State Representative] also. There is, Maybe some of the most acute racism I've ever seen is in Springfield. You see it in the [Illinois] General Assembly. You certainly see it around the areas and the local bars. But it is interesting how people decide to accept or not accept individuals. John and I were always accepted by people, who were otherwise just incredibly racist. In part I think again, John's charisma was extraordinary.  But it was more than that. We were very successful in Springfield, very successful. Our Springfield lobbying team was by far the best of the utilities.  But among the most powerful there of all the organizations down there. That got respect. And because our legislation and things that we were attempting to do were almost always successful, we got a nice reputation and a great deal of respect. And that pushed away some of these barriers. Now I know, and I still see today the gap that exists between the black legislators and the white legislators. And even to some extent the Hispanic legislators. But where the, where the lobbying core, where the leadership chooses to treat all people equal, they pick and choose as they see fit. We were always able almost from the beginning to be people that they chose to be agreeable with.
Story_ID: 5034
Speaker 1: During that time wasn't it--? You got the plants. What was that project called? The Nuclear pro--? Your pla--? There was a lot of focus and you got a lot money (chuckling).  You got a lot of rate--your rate increases went for that.
Speaker 2: Well I had two back-to-back home runs for the company that I'm sure have something to do with why I am an Executive Vice President, instead of a Senior Vice President in ComEd [energy company]. And that's because after we were successful in negotiating the Restructuring Law [legislation passed in 1997 that restructured charges for electricity in Illinois], we had to make an adjustment and change the law, to modify the law. To accommodate some issues by nuclear power plants.  It's very complicated and not all that useful to go into. And it's very, very controversial. We got a lot of support from the Black Caucus. And we got a ton of support from the leadership in both chambers [Illinois State Legislature]. And were up, including the Governor's office.  And were able to successfully negotiate a change in the law that obviously was beneficial for the company but I think protected our consumers also. And that--. But it was very controversial.  It was in the newspapers every other day.  But in the end, it got passed and signed by the Governor.
Story_ID: 5035
Speaker 1: How do you feel about your position right now? Are you happy with it? And your, you know, when you look back over your career, are you happy with your career? Or? I have other questions.
Speaker 2: I'm certainly happy with where I'm at in my career as a whole. I started out in the mailroom and I'm an executive vice president. So yes. On the other hand, I'm not the president. That leads to an interesting story. Again, we've merged now. So Commonwealth Edison Company is a part of a bigger entity Exelon Corporation. I say this with great dismay. I'm the only African-American that's on the senior team of Exelon Corporation. I think that's a travesty. And I've raised that issue by the way. So that's not a sense of pride.  That's a sense of how far we've got to go. On the Commonwealth Edison side, we actually have no president of ComEd anymore. It's a long story there too. And Commonwealth Edison is divided between two executive vice presidents, myself and a fellow named David Helwig. So the areas that David has are all the field operations.  The crews, the linemen, and he has the operation areas, engineering and projects. I have all of the non-operating areas.  Which do include the commercial operations of the sales force, the marketing team, the customer operations. So all of the customer service organizations, the field services, the people that come out and restore your power or cut, or disconnect you unfortunately.  As well as communications, as well as the philanthropic piece reports to me. And HR, labor and Human Resources and Rates Regulatory Legislation. So anything that's not a field operation, the construction crews and engineering, reports to me. So we split the company. I'm very pleased with that. And we report to the president of Exelon Energy Delivery. That's the person that's in charge of PECO [an arm of the Exelon Corporation], and Chicago [Illinois]. There's a president of PECO. There is no president of ComEd, two executive vice presidents. So in that sense, I've got a major piece of the responsibility. And I've achieved a great deal. And I'm very proud of that. I'm also able to point to a number of other men and women in the company that I've been able to help advance their careers. And I'm also proud to say that many of these men and women are black. They're also Hispanic, two are Asian, and no small number are white. And I'm proud of the diversity there. And I'm particularly proud that I can point a finger to people who otherwise would not have gotten an opportunity. And there are a number of black men and women who I can say that about.
Story_ID: 5036
Speaker 1: You're on the board of also Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The president had told me to talk to you.
Speaker 2: Ted [Gross]. Good guy.
Speaker 1: He really likes our project. (pause) So you were talking about, you know, you said you were wanting to break this barrier. Just go back to what you--.
Speaker 2: Well the premise is that it's very clear to me that in 2001, 21st century there are fewer African-American male and female executives, managers than there were ten years ago.  There are a lot of reasons for that.  But it really doesn't matter.  It's an extremely unacceptable trend.  And we are, in fact, an endangered species in corporate America.  The rationales for that are not,  none are valid.  But I'll give you some.  That we don't have the technical degrees in technical companies that we need.  Don't necessarily have the commitment to give all of our time.  If you want to be a corporate executive in a Fortune 500 or Fortune 100 company they own you.  That's a fact of life.  You're on call seven days a week, and you are.  You come back from vacations 'cause unexpected things happen.  You disrupt your family life and you pay far more attention to the corporation and its needs versus any other aspect of your life.  Otherwise you just cannot add value at the right time.  Notwithstanding those issues, it has been my experience that black people, black men, black women are just as competitive, are just as ambitious as anybody else,  given a real opportunity to succeed.  And they just have to be in the position where they are getting the attention and getting the career opportunities to advance themselves.  One of the things I mentioned to you earlier is people gave me career opportunities.  No one can do it on their own.  You don't become an officer in a Fortune 500 company because you're good.  There are hundreds of good people in these companies.  I'm not, I'm sure I'm not the best.  You get here because someone thought you were good enough.  And you demonstrated skills to sustain yourself and you were successful.  And they wanted you to succeed.  That's how you get here.  You know.  There's a luck aspect, but you do work very hard.  And you do have to give them, you know, your body and in some cases a little bit of your soul.  And that's a reality if you want to rise high enough.  You can't be president of a Fortune 500 company if that's not the number one priority in your life.  You just simply can't be.  It can't run any other way effectively.  But if you're willing to make that career sacrifice, that family and personal sacrifice, then you can do it.  Then you need someone willing to help you get there.  You need a mentor.  You need people who look at you and say, "I really want this person to succeed."  'Cause it's not good enough--I emphasize that--it's not good enough just to be good.  And that's where the problem in for African-Americans.  There are not enough people looking at us saying, "I want you.  I want you to be the next vice president.  I want you to be a vice president.  I want you to be a senior vice president.  I want you to be in line to at least fight to be president." Because that's a whole different career path, a whole different set of assignments, a whole different set of expectations.  And most importantly a whole different way of being evaluated.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So you sound like the eternal optimist.  You sound like you--. If a young black person would say, "Why should I do this?"  Or "Is there a career for me?"  You would say yeah.
Speaker 2: I would say resoundingly yes.  Because you take yourself out of the game if you refuse to play.  You take yourself out of the opportunities to achieve if you tell yourself, "It doesn't matter."  The one lesson I learned from my mother, the one lesson I relearned when I was in the army, the one lesson I learned throughout my life.  Is the first time you sell yourself short, the first time you say, "I can't" you really won't.
Story_ID: 5037
Speaker 1: Do you have concerns and hopes?  You know, you're someone who, you know, came through the Civil Rights Movement like a lot of us.  But when you look at the black community now, what hopes and/or concerns do you have?
Speaker 2: Well I have tons of concerns.  But I do have eternal hope.
Speaker 1: (interviewer speaks with camera man)
Speaker 2: Yeah I talk with my hands.  I have tons of concerns and I have more than tons of hope.  Let me just point to some of the concerns.  All you have to do is, you know, if you want to start with corporate life. But I really want to get into a part of perspective.  Look at corporate America and there are fewer opportunities, not more.  So that's a concern.  I look at black men and women.  Let's talk about black men.  Cook County Jail [Chicago, Illinois] was out of power for a short time today because of the flooding.  Do you know how many black men in Cook County Jail?  I can't tell you the number.  But I will tell you that it's probably 90 percent of the population there is black.  And they're you know, men.  When I look at the people I grew up with it's stunning.  The black men--now I'm fifty-five, soon to be fifty-six--  it's stunning.  The black men that I was in grammar school and high school with that I still can follow how many of them are not alive.  How many of them have had their life just fall apart alcohol, drugs and other instabilities.  Issues with, you know, their mental state that probably is compounded by alcohol and drugs.  Terrible family lives, you know, broken lives.  It's a staggering number.  Is it half?  I don't know.  It's a staggering number.  So that's a huge concern.  What's happening to people to make them in some respects kind of give up on life.  The dropout rate of black men and women in school.  The pregnancy rate when you have every modern reason not to get pregnant unless you just want to.  And I know it's a value judgment.  But I have an issue with that.  You're not giving yourself a chance to start in life.  Hell, this is the 21st century and you really don't have to have children at fourteen and fifteen years old. But that's still a problem. Drugs.  For all the warnings.  I mean you've got all these warnings for cigarettes and that's apparently paid off a bit. I don't know what we're going to do to keep drugs out of the hands of these young people. And the frightening part about it is while it was always bad for men, it's getting bad for women. Education? We live in a society that, if you want it. If you want it you can have just a wonderful education. It varies from state to state but in Illinois you can go to junior college.  It doesn't cost you to--next to nothing. If you don't have financial support, you can get a grant. So many grants go unused. You can go to the military and Uncle Sam will help pay for your education. Most companies give you tuition refund. You can get an education. And yet I don't see hoards and hoards of our kids in school taking advantage of these things. What I see is a lot of attitude, a lot of disenchantment. A lot of, you know, "It doesn't make a difference." And, of course, it does. Those are my concerns. And I'm not sure of all the things that are driving it. I see families more broken today than they were when I grew up. I did not grow up with a father in the house but I sure grew up with a dedicated mother [Silvella Clark]. The lady was uneducated.  The lady had virtually no life experience but she raised 4 kids and never let us out of her sight. And now she's an educated accomplished woman. There's a will that she had and a heart and a belief. That is not as prevalent today as I would like to see. I think that, you know, this is obvious.  But the family structure is suffering. I don't know if there are fewer men and women are staying together and taking care of their children. I don't really know the answer to that. But since my mother succeeded by herself, as much as I like the idea of family, as long as you got a caring person there, I think you can be alright. So something--. There's a breakdown there. Too many grandmothers raising their daughters and sons children. And asking more of them than they can give. You know the family is suffering badly. But that's happening because there's something inside.  You know, a lack of will, a lack of belief. I think America is the greatest country in the world. But there's something fundamentally wrong when all of the people in this great country don't believe they own it. Flag Day. It's amazing. But I've done this. You can drive through communities and some have flags all over the place. But, you know, others don't have any flags at all. Where do you think those places are that always have no flags? Hell! There's a message there. And this is--. And none of these statements, these are just rhetorical questions.  They don't really have answers.  But yeah.  Those were my concerns. Here's my hope. I truly believe in people. You can overcome any circumstance. I can think of people who grew up in the hardest part of the worst projects that are very successful people today. They may be the exception. The fact is they exist. I can think of my own background and my own upbringing and I'm an exception. I look at my children and I believe that our two sons, they are night and day. One is a complete carbon copy of me and one is much more carefree.  He doesn't, wouldn't work in corporate America if his life depended upon it. But he's taking good care of himself. And I'm optimistic because people can be different and still be successful. I believe that people truly care about people. I believe families whether they're strained or not, in the end begin to care about each other. My family is closer now than we ever were as younger people. That's age and maturity and that's gonna benefit our children and our grandchildren. So I think we'll be a stronger unit. And we'll do more for our kids, who'll do more for other people. I believe that black people in particular, need to all look in the mirror and look at themselves and say, "I hold that person responsible first." I know there are a lot of other issues, and a lot of people make things hard for us. But we all gotta do that. I hold that person in the mirror responsible first. And I think people are capable of doing that. So I think people in the end will pull themselves up, pull themselves out of the funk that they may be in. And see this for the great country it is. And see all the things they can do to make it greater. That's what I believe.
Story_ID: 5038
Speaker 1: I have 3 questions left. One is when you look back and see yourself in high school as a student who was a non-performing student, what do you see? You know, are you surprised at--? I mean, do you think that student could have envisioned the Frank Clark, today?
Speaker 2: No. Not the Frank Clark today.  But I'm not exaggerating.  All of my life I had this perception of myself. Didn't do anything to fulfill the perception for a long time.  But it was there. And truly when I sat in grammar school and looked out the window, and when I was in high school doing whatever I was doing, which wasn't much, except English. I always pictured myself, not sitting here with a camera, I mean, but you know, wearing a suit and tie to work.  And doing something important.  That's how I always characterized it. 'Cause I didn't know what it was doing something important.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather, what year was it when he died?
Speaker 2: He died in 1956. He was fifty-six. He was born in 1900.
Speaker 1: Oh my God! What if he could see this young grandson?
Speaker 2: He'd see himself, just educated.
Speaker 1: And one last question.  And that is: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well it's two-fold. I have a personal legacy with my family. And I have one for my company. I'll give you the latter. For Commonwealth Edison Company I want to walk out the door and in a while and be able to look back and see black officers, black managers, black decision makers. People who are positioned to not just work here but direct the future of not only ComEd [energy company] but Exelon [Corporation]. Then I know that my being there has made a difference. And I know that's also the best way to build a stream of hope in black people as a whole when they see the successes. My legacy will be people. And I'm working very hard to achieve that. My personal legacy by far the most important to me is you do sacrifice a lot when you give yourself to corporate America. I have a lot of time to make up. Not that you can really totally make it up. But I got a lot of time that I need to make up with my family as best I can. And I've got four grandchildren.  And I'm gonna spend as much time with them. They're all crazy about me.  And I'm almost surprised but very pleased about that. And I'm gonna dedicate myself to that.
Speaker 1: That's it. Thank you.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 5039
Speaker 1: Brother Lloyd Clark, Frank Clark, sisters Patricia and Frances.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark and his siblings, 1951; (L. to R.): Lloyd Clark, Frank Clark, Patricia Clark and Frances Clark.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5040
Speaker 1: This is the picture I love the most. People said I haven't changed at all. That's a stretch. This would be about 1952. I believe that I would have been about 7 years old then. And I'm sure this picture may have been taken something associated with Wadsworth Elementary School.
Speaker 2: (interviewer speaks to someone off camera)
Speaker 1: Public school or Catholic?
Speaker 2: Public
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: I went to a public school for three years.
Speaker 1: And then you changed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you went to a Catholic university.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I have a strong Catholic background, what can I say?
Speaker 1: [Frank Clark in his school photo at Wadsworth Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, 1952.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5041
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1967 right after I was drafted into the army, it was in Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark's Army photo from Fort Knox, Kentucky, 1967. From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5042
Speaker 1: This picture would be about 1972. And that's Vera my wife and myself when I had a whole lot more hair, and my son Frank III. Looks like we were coming from church.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark, his wife, Vera Clark and son, Frank Clark, III, 1972. From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5043
Speaker 1: This picture would have been taken in late 1967 and I'm on my way back to Fort Gordon. Right before I was on my way to Vietnam.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark on his way to Fort Gordon, Georgia, September 1967. From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5044
Speaker 1: This is in 1968. If I have to guess, I would say this would be early--probably January or February of 1968. And I'm standing in a field some place outside of An Khe. (pause) In Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Your Vietnam stories--. Have you seen any of those Vietnam films and things?
Speaker 1: Umhmm.
Speaker 2: We're you impressed with any of them?
Speaker 1: Platoon. The rest of them, not really. (pause) Platoon caught the real fear factor. Nobody's brave when people are shooting at you. No human being is brave in front of a bullet. You have other thoughts altogether. In fact we were so terrified that we never stuck our head up. We'd always hold our rifles above our heads. You never know what you shot. (laughter) You never wanted to know either.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark in the Army at An Khe, Vietnam, 1968.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5045
Speaker 1: This would be--it should have a date on it, in the corner there. I would think that it's in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]  I had just returned from the service and I had started speaking.  That's my mother.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's your mother?
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Silvella, my son Frankie and me.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark with his mother, Silvella James Clark and his son Frank Clark, III, ca. 1969-1970.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5046
Speaker 1: This picture was taken October 1987. And I'm sure it looks like, I'm almost positive this is a Sunday, and undoubtedly we had just come from church.  This is our home in Calumet Park [Illinois] on Loomis.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark in his home, Calumet Park, Illinois, October, 1987.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5047
Speaker 1: This is a vacation we took in September of 1980.  We took our kids for the first time to Washington D.C., and we're standing on the steps, I think it might be the Smithsonian [Institution]. And that's Steven who I have my right hand on and then Frankie and Vera in the background.  And I had a lot of hair.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark vacationing with his wife, Vera Clark and sons, Steven Clark (left) and Frank Clark, III, Washington, D.C., September, 1980.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5048
Speaker 1: This is an interesting picture because it was an indication of the future.  This would have been taken in 1973, and it's taken out in Hazel Crest, Illinois. Where--it's this particular company who the man in the middle worked for.  Forklifts, I used to buy that material for the company.  The fellow on the outside with the dark jacket is Chris Gleason who died right after this picture suddenly.  And there I am, with a lot of hair and I'm a buyer.  He's teaching me to be a buyer.  I took his job.  He's teaching me to be a buyer. It's interesting because I live in Hazel Crest now and I go by that place all the time.  At that time very few blacks lived in Hazel Crest.  But I was out there.
Speaker 2: So this was when you were--. This was the end all and be all--.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I loved it. I loved this job. Everybody treated you like a king.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark with coworkers at a forklift company, Hazel Crest, Illinois, 1973.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5049
Speaker 1: We're celebrating Steven's, let's see--'85 [1985]--Steven's 13th birthday.  And that's the one with the face all crunched up.  And then my oldest son Frankie and me.
Speaker 2: Now who's most like you? Is it Frankie--?
Speaker 1: Frankie. Frankie is exactly like me. If I weren't sitting here, he could sit here and you wouldn't know the difference.  He just looks a little younger.
Speaker 2: So where's he working now?
Speaker 1: He works for R.R. Donnelly [publishing company].
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark (center) celebrating the birthday of his son, Steven Clark (left), July 2, 1985.  His other son, Frank Clark, III, is also in attendance. From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5050
Speaker 1: This is our 18th anniversary, December 4, 1983 and we're having a toast.  And I see a balloon in the background.  And I'm trying to see if she's [wife Vera Clark] wearing something I bought her, but I can't see right from that picture. We were very happy.
Speaker 2: [Frank and Vera Clark toasting their 18th wedding anniversary, December 4, 1983.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5051
Speaker 1: That's this year. This picture would have been taken in January of this year.  I was at an event for Exelon Corporation, celebrating all the money we collected from our employees for our PAC, (Public Action Committee).  Seeing this picture reminds me, I remember when I was finishing college and first got into management. One of the things you end up doing is public speaking from time to time. I'd never, ever done any public speaking. And what you find out very quickly the first time you step out in front of a real, live audience, with people, it can be a very scarey experience. I remember being terrified, probably being physically sick the first time I ever gave a talk. But that was ten thousand talks ago. It goes easier now.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark speaking at an Exelon Corporation event, January, 2001.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5052
Speaker 1: This was a picture taken about 1995 or '96 [1996].  The gentleman sitting down next to me is Don Peckus. And he always teased me about playing golf. I told you the story about the board of directors presentation, he was the fellow who proceeded me. The gentleman standing behind me, I just can't remember who he is.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark with colleagues playing golf, ca. 1995-1996.  From the collection of Frank Clark.]
Story_ID: 5053
Speaker 1: This is at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  And we had just given a grant to them for their computer lab in their new building on North Michigan  Avenue.  So this would have been about October 2000.  And we're celebrating the opening of the new computer lab at Roosevelt University.  And ComEd was a major contributor. In fact, it's called the ComEd [energy company] Computer Lab.  And there I am with dark glasses--actually these--getting ready to cut the ribbon.  Ted Gross, and Ron Champaign to his right, and--.
Speaker 2: Can you start, go (unclear)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) I really don't know them all.
Speaker 2: But you at least know Ron Champaign--.
Speaker 1: Ron Champaign, Ted Gross, the gentleman who is cutting the ribbon I can't remember his name, it just went blank.  He was Chairman of the Board at the time.  And gentleman next to him Mostavitch, but I can't remember his first name. And there I am.
Speaker 2: [Frank Clark and others at the ribbon-cutting ceremony opening the Commonwealth Edison Computer Lab at Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois, October, 2000; (L. to R.): Ron Champaign, Ted Gross, two unidentified men, Frank Clark and an unidentified man. From the collection of Frank Clark.]
