Story_ID: 202079
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey and we don't have any observers for the interview.  We just want to begin the discussion today with some slating and so there's some factual information that I need to gather from you.  First I'd like to ask you to state your name and spell the first, middle and last name and then we'll get started.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Reverend E. Theophilus Caviness.  I pronounce that E., capital T-H-E-O-P-H-I-L-U-S, capital C-A-V as in Victor, I-N-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And would you please state your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: May 23rd, 1928, in Marshall, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date please?
Speaker 2: Today's date, what is it?  June the 16th, 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview with the address?
Speaker 2: The Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, 1161 East 105th Street at Tacoma Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I'm a minister, pastor and leader in this community.
Story_ID: 202080
Speaker 1: I have some other questions that I'd like to ask right now.  We describe these as People magazine-ish type questions.  The first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food period!  (Laughter).  I'm not sure I have a particular favorite.  I like vegetables, squash I like and greens, those kinds of things.  No particular favorite, just vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is really about the spring, the spring something around March and that kind of thing, moving into May and a little bit of June, then going back over to the fall, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I--pink is my favorite color.  Sometimes I feel pink and sometimes I feel bluish, so those are they.
Speaker 1: Okay, and a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles, California usually because I have so many relatives there, so many friends there so I usually like to vacate their.  Sometimes in Honolulu, Hawaii, I have some cousins there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying?  I suppose it would be something like, "Do you understand me?" "Do you read me real well?" That kind of thing.
Story_ID: 202081
Speaker 1: Now again, in this section we'd like to focus on your family background.  And I'd like to begin by asking if you could tell us something about your mother, her name and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lula Page Caviness.  She was born in Redwater, Texas outside of Texarkana around the Louisiana, Texas border.  And my father was Will Stone Caviness.  He was born in Harrison County, Texas outside of Marshall, Texas.  And we kind of grew up in Northeast Texas and that's around Texarkana, Ark--Texas and Arkansas and Shreveport, Louisiana and Marshall, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother ever tell you any special stories about her growing up in Texas?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  She was more interested in our getting an education and doing the things that would be appropriate for young men to do because we had six boys in our family.  One girl had passed away very early but we had six siblings.  I have six siblings and so she was more interested in keeping us on the right path and doing the right thing and ministering to us and admonishing us during the process.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know your maternal grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: Maternal grandparents not--kind of vaguely but not too much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't remember their names?
Speaker 2: I don't remember them, right.
Speaker 1: No.  Was your mother a native of Texas?
Speaker 2: She was a native of Texas, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Redwater, Texas outside of Texarkana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 202082
Speaker 1: On my father's side, paternal side was Haile Caviness [ph.] and that was--he was born somewhere in Harrison County [Texas] outside of Gilmer, Texas and so I was aware of him, but the other side I was not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And do you remember your grandmother on your father's side?
Speaker 1: No I don't remember.  I just, I know that her name was Hallie [ph.], that's all I know.
Story_ID: 202083
Speaker 1: Now you had started to say just a little while ago that there were six sons--
Speaker 2: Yes, six sons--
Speaker 1: --in your immediate family?
Speaker 2: Right, and beginning with Willie James Caviness, Joe Ree Caviness [ph.], Thomas Jefferson Caviness [ph.], Gerald Wadell Caviness, Vernon--Vernon Gus Caviness and myself E. Theophilus Caviness.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know that's a long list but--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, all boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If you remember their birth years--
Speaker 2: I don't remember their birth years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that would escape me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure you get the statistical information.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: But I can't just articulate it.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll check the questionnaire for that.
Speaker 2: Okay, um-hm.
Story_ID: 202084
Speaker 1: All right.  How would you describe your mother [Lula Page Caviness]?  I know you said she really encouraged her six sons.
Speaker 2: Oh God yeah, she was a gracious person.  More concerned about the kids than she was herself, self-sacrificing, selfless, wanting to make sure those kids developed to their fullest potent of their possibility, potentiality, just a marvelous and magnificent person.  Went home to heaven much too early at about fifty-four or five [fifty-five] something like that and that's just much too early.  But she was an influence on all of our lives and really indelibly impacted each of us in terms of dignity and decency and trying to be the kind of young men that she wanted.
Speaker 1: Now you said she really emphasized the importance of education.
Speaker 2: And absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did she reinforce that with you?
Speaker 2: By making absolutely sure that we studied, by making absolutely sure that we went to school and reinforcing that, telling us the pitfalls of other people who fail to do those kinds of things and just really inspiring us.  She was not able to get that much education and she knew the value of it and by not being able to get it herself, she was determined that her kids would get it and so that's what we strove to do.
Story_ID: 202085
Speaker 1: Was your father [Will Stone Caviness] as concerned about education?
Speaker 2: He wasn't necessarily that concerned about it.  He was concerned about being a decent individual, being a dignified individual, respectful individual.  But he did not--he was always there for us, did--not making too much money but whatever he had, he was availing that to us.  I remember one time when I was in college and had to make a payment and every dime that he had in his pocket he pulled out and gave it to the registrar and I just thought that just made a terrible impact on him.  He had nothing left and I thought that was tremendous for a person who did not get an education himself to be so concerned about his kids and so self-effacing and selfless to do--to give what he had in the process.
Story_ID: 202086
Speaker 1: Now was that a farming community [Marshall, Texas] that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: About eighteen thousand people, it wasn't necessarily a farming community but it was described during that time as a small agricultural community.  The environs of that particular eighteen thousand population was mostly farming and the like but we were kind of what we thought was city wise and little more than a farm community.  We thought we were something else 'cause we had about three colleges [East Texas Baptist University, Bishop College and Wiley College, Marshall, Texas] there so we thought that was a little bit of city life, really wasn't but that was the gist of it.
Story_ID: 202087
Speaker 1: What was the nature of your--the work that your father [Will Stone Caviness] was involved in?
Speaker 2: He did janitorial work at the First [United] Methodist Church [Marshall, Texas] and he worked at the T & P Foundry [ph.] and that was his activity.  He was kind of a barber and that's--what we call a jackleg-barber that did hair and the like but never really trained to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it sounds like he's working three jobs to support six children.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trying to make sure yeah, trying to make sure those kids were all right.
Story_ID: 202088
Speaker 1: I wonder, did the family stay in that same community until all of the children were grown up?
Speaker 2: Oh no, they moved away because it was--the job opportunities were not that great so the oldest son moved up to Dallas, Texas, that got a little more opportunity.  And little by little they began to migrate and move out to California and ultimately all of them landed in California.  I'm the only one that really stayed at home and went to school right there in Marshall [Texas], Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] that closed down after about a hundred and something years, great tragedy.  I think it's Paul Quinn College [Dallas, Texas] now but I stayed and got the education there before I moved on to St. Louis, Missouri and Webster Groves, Missouri to Eden Theological Seminary.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as children were all six sons in the public schools of that community? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: All six were in the public schools, Dunbar Elementary School [Marshall, Texas], Hillside Elementary School [ph.] and Pemberton High School [Marshall, Texas], Central High School [Marshall, Texas], those little schools.
Story_ID: 202089
Speaker 1: So you started at Dunbar [Elementary School, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I started at--Dunbar was the newest.  I started at Hillside [Elementary School, Marshall, Texas] and ultimately landed--because they built a new school then and that was Dunbar and then I moved on to Central High [School, Marshall, Texas] that later became Pemberton High [School, Marshall, Texas, later Marshall High School, Marshall, Texas] named after an African American principal, and it became Pemberton High, and then after that Bishop College [Marshall, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  As a student do you have any special memories of your school days in Texas?
Speaker 2: Those were some glorious memories because I remember dean of the college Dean Melvin J. Banks was a great inspiration to me, always assisted and helped me in every way.  And he and his dear wife [Dorothy Beatrice Goodspeed] were just tutors and instructors and mentors of mine and availed the opportunity there at the school for me to almost work my way through because I did janitorial activity and taking care of our building.  And so when I graduated they owed me money because I was ordered and industrious around the school there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you close enough to home to commute?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was across town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bishop was located in what we call the Baptist Hill area [Marshall, Texas] and I lived in Sunny South [Marshall, Texas] it was about three or four miles so I moved back and forth until one year I lived in the dormitory.
Story_ID: 202090
Speaker 1: Now did you say you were the youngest of the six brothers?
Speaker 2: Yes I was the youngest of six, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered too, other than the one individual you've mentioned already were there other teachers who were really influential at that point in your life?
Speaker 2: All of these--this was--that's on the college level.  On the elementary level a young, I mean a lady by the name of Mrs. McGee [ph.], I never shall forget it, she taught us how to write in first grade [Dunbar Elementary School, Marshall, Texas].  And just throughout my elementary school education, high school education there were just innumerable, a great number of people who took an interest who were just fantastic in trying to motivate you and keep you going.
Story_ID: 202091
Speaker 1: Besides those individuals that you mentioned, I wonder if there are any special sights and sounds or smells that remind you of home [Marshall, Texas] in the American South?
Speaker 2: Really that's been a rather a long time and the things have changed.  Cotton back in our time was king.  That has long since evaporated and really isn't too much.  We had the T&P Shop [ph.] that built the railroad cars for the Texas and Pacific Railroad.  That's the kind of smell that you would get.  The dark coal where they made certain kinds of products, I can't remember, was a smell that you would always remember.  The basket factory, they made baskets down at the Marshall Basket Factory [ph.] so those are the kinds of smells that kind of go with you.  I don't know of anything that's around now that really is comparable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about holidays in the Caviness family household?  Were those special occasions?
Speaker 2: They were special occasions.  They were mostly holidays, holly, H-O-L-L-Y, because we didn't have that much.  We were kind of a poor struggling family and to the best of our ability we strove to stay together, to sing together, to mix and to mingle and do the kinds of things that made the family the kind of family that people would happen and so--would be happy.  So, that we didn't have that much.  We were kind of--money was scarce, food was scarce and all--we just took it and did the best that we could.  And as one of the kids would get older, he would move out, go to another city and he would replenish, send things back to help us and so I was the beneficiary of all of those guys getting out there and doing it.  Only about three of us went to college.  The other, others did not make it.  But all of them were kind of selfless again and willing to aid and assist especially their younger brother so I was able to get farther than either of them.
Speaker 1: Okay and you said the family did some singing together?
Speaker 2: Oh, we always sang together on holidays, funeral occasions, we were quite interested in church.  We were always indigenous to the church.  We were always affiliating with Galilee Baptist Church [Marshall, Texas].  Each of us grew up in that kind of setting and we were dedicated to that church and dedicated to the things that church espoused.
Speaker 1: So were you baptized in Galilee Baptist--?
Speaker 2: Baptized in Galilee when I was six years old and at that time you had an outdoor baptistery.  It wasn't indoor like we have here at our church here [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Texas], you had to go outside and go down in the water and the water was really cold.  And--but it was an outside kind of baptistery.  And I remember those days as if they were yesterday because we would line up in white robes and the like and go down into that pool.  It was frightening but you got over it.
Speaker 1: Okay, at the age of six?
Speaker 2: Right, the age of six.
Story_ID: 202092
Speaker 1: Are there other special moments of transition that you associate with your childhood in that region, besides the baptism?
Speaker 2: The baptism--
Speaker 1: Other special rituals?
Speaker 2: The beginning, the--preaching my first sermon in 1946.  We were there at Galilee Baptist Church [Marshall, Texas] on a Wednesday night, preaching from the theme of "Be ye also ready, for you know not the hour, the son of man cometh" [Matthew 24:44].  And I recall so vividly that I mentioned to that large audience that I was frightened to death but not so much frightened to be intimidated by seeing them and all like that but with the awesome task that I was embracing, that that's the thing that really frightened me and I was fearful.  I wanted to do the very best job for the Lord that I could do and I was going to do--put all of what into it in order to get that done because I never knew how long life would last and you never knew when the Lord would call you home. So that was my real initiation and thrust for the ministry, doing the things that the ministry would call.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said that was in 1946?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: First sermon.
Speaker 2: I think it was about November something, 1946.
Story_ID: 202093
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from [Pemberton] High School [later Marshall High School, Marshall, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Graduated from high school, I think it was about May of '45 [1945], I think it was, May of '45 [1945].  And then I--three and a half years later I graduated from college [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas], three and half years later I graduated from seminary [Eden Theological Seminary, Webster Groves, Missouri] and then did other little courses and the like.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But I stayed the course.  In fact I was called to a little church out in southeast Texas--Southwest Texas--Pickton, Texas, I kind of rode the bus for miles and miles to get out there to a little country church that gave me my first baptism on ministry.  Later on I was called to Texarkana, Eleventh Street Baptist Church [Texarkana, Arkansas].  I did not stay there because I wanted to get the higher education.  So I interimed there for the summer and then left and came to East St. Louis [Illinois], came to St. Louis, Missouri and then went to Webster Groves, Missouri at Eden Theological Seminary.  About a year I was broke, did not have any money.  I was going to try to move to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] down in North Carolina and get another year there and just picking and choosing.  But just so happened that a church [Mount Nebo Missionary Baptist Church] in Madison, Illinois asked me to come and preach for them and I preached for them and I went over there and started pasturing.  So I kind of moved back and forth from Madison, Illinois to Webster Groves, Missouri and I got the education done there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so that's the Bachelor's [degree]?
Speaker 2: That was the Bachelor's of Divinity [degree].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Bachelor of Arts was at Bishop College in Marshall, Texas.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the dates for those two?
Speaker 2: I just remember the years kind of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the high school, I said 1945, about three and half years later with the college degree, three and half years later with the Bachelor of Divinity degree because you had to do three years in order to get the Bachelor's of Divinity.  And it was tantamount to a master's [degree] but you had to matriculate those years in order to get it, so those were the times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 202094
Speaker 1: --And so officially Illinois is the first northern state that you're living and studying in?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: As Missouri is still pretty much south.
Speaker 2: Missouri is a border state really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Missouri is a border state, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you find that that was a big difference between life in Texas and life in Illinois?
Speaker 2: Major difference because in--you know back at that time African Americans could not vote in Texas.  We had to fight for the right to vote.  We had to fight for the right to mix in the theatres and what-have-you, so it was kind of egregious for you to struggle through that kind of situation.  And to come then from Texas--Arkansas was pretty much the same so you didn't get any difference there.  And then Missouri was rather segregated.  It had a lot of vestiges of racism and segregation and discrimination and then to move into Illinois was a much more enlightened community and that was my first taste of being able to vote and do the things that free men usually do.
Speaker 1: I know East St. Louis, Illinois has a--
Speaker 2: I went to Madison, Illinois from Webster Groves, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I went to Madison, Illinois which is a little town near Granite City, Illinois.  It was an all-white town.  We were right outside of that.  And then East St. Louis is a little bit toward the Mississippi River and I ended up leaving Madison, Illinois and going to East St. Louis and pastoring there six years and six months.  So I really pastored in Madison, Illinois for six years and six months, moved to East St. Louis, Illinois and pastored there for six years and six months and then I came here and I've been here for forty-three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And here again is Cleveland, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Absolutely--
Story_ID: 202095
Speaker 1: Okay.  I--we sort of rushed ahead to 1961.  That's when you started pastoring in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: July of '61 [1961], I came to this church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but there are some other things that happened in the '50s [1950s] that I'd like to talk about too, including your marriage to your wife.
Speaker 2: My marriage was to a vivacious and beautiful, very talented woman, James Pitts Caviness.  Her mother and father thought she was going to be a boy so they named him James--her James.  She ultimately started using Jimmy Pitts Caviness but she was a contralto.  She was--she graduated from Bishop College [Marshall, Texas].  She left and went to Westminster Choir College [later Westminster Choir College of Rider University, Princeton, New Jersey], graduated from there and then she--we married and then she became the minister of music everywhere we went.  And with--that lasted about forty--I mean that last about forty to forty-two years.  And you understand that she went home in my arms.  She had a massive heart attack.  Her father did too.  Her father had a heart attack and so that they went similarly in the same way.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet her in college?
Speaker 2: Met her the two weeks before I graduated from Bishop College and we left and she went to Westminster.  I came to Eden Theological Seminary [Webster Groves, Missouri] and meeting two weeks and then later on when my mother [Lula Page Caviness] passed she wrote me a letter about two years later and at that point we began to communicate again and it resulted in marriage.
Story_ID: 202096
Speaker 1: Now how soon after your marriage [with James Pitts Caviness] did you start your family?
Speaker 2: She wanted to go back to get her master's [degree].  Her mother always said that she did not want her children to be--to not have high education.  And so she--when I proposed to her, her mother intervened and said, "Look, my kids must be educated," and I told her I was with that and I did not oppose that.  And so when she graduated from college, Westminster [Choir College, later Westminster Choir College of Rider University, Princeton, New Jersey], we got married and we got married back in Big Spring, Texas near Pathos, Texas [ph.] down where [President] George [Walker] Bush and his family are.  And so she wanted to immediately start a family and the like and I just told her you, your mother--I made a promise to your mother that you would get your education and so instead of starting a family then she went back to Westminster to get her Master's degree and after which we came and began our family and ended up with just two kids, one son and one daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And would you state their names for us please?
Speaker 2: The son is Theophilus James Caviness.  We named him Theophilus as my own and James was hers.  Later she called herself Jimmy, and so Theophilus James Caviness and my daughter is Theodosia Jacqueline Caviness [Tucker], the T.J. in either case.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We had a lovely little godchild that stayed with us by the name of Mary Turner [ph.].  My wife taught her in Venice, Illinois and she came to be with us.  She came here and got her education from Bishop College [Marshall, Texas], came here and taught.  She passed away shortly after we got here but that was just a glorious kind of blessing that the Lord had blessed us with.
Story_ID: 202097
Speaker 1: Now [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Theophilus] Caviness, I noticed one of the things that you mentioned about your move north to Illinois, was the fact that they were a little bit more enlightened politically than some of the folks down in Texas. (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Right. Right.
Speaker 1: But I wonder at that point in your life were you already a political activist in Illinois?
Speaker 2: No more just--I wanted to study history.  I was a history buff.  I wanted to study history and I delved a lot into history.  And so I think the history concern kind of made me feel that the political area was those things that really were lifted up.  And I think by having a keen interest in history, then American history, and in African American history kind of caused me to understand that the best way to affect that kind of destiny is through collective social activity and it was at that point that I really became interested in governmental affairs and how it affects the totality of the community.
Speaker 1: So as a student--
Speaker 2: As a student.
Speaker 1: --you had that interest?
Speaker 2: As a student.
Speaker 1: Did you vote for the first time in Illinois?
Speaker 2: Voted for the first time in Madison, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the year?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year.  It must have been about 19--oh it was about 1955, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But people could not understand, here was a--almost a university guy having come and take--they didn't understand that I didn't know what voting was all about because we were prevented from voting in Texas.  The democratic apparatus there did not allow African Americans to vote.  They systematically excluded you from it and it was a glorious experience to be able to vote for the first time in Madison, Illinois.
Story_ID: 202098
Speaker 1: We're coming to the end of this first section but there are a couple of other things I'd like to ask you about.  I know that the ministry was important in your early adult years because your call to the ministry came right after graduation--
Speaker 2: My call to--
Speaker 1: --from high school.
Speaker 2: My call to the ministry was really I suppose when I was about six years old.  I always had that inclination and admonition.  I mean inclination and proclivity to preach the gospel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and, cause I had been--I had seen ministers in our own home church [Galilee Baptist Church, Marshall, Texas], in our own home town [Marshall, Texas] who were so effective, how they molded lives and made impacts into families.  And so I--that--I was hit with that, caught with that in my early years, from six years of age, seven years of age.  It was when I became--got--went to college [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] at seventeen that I really began to think more seriously about the ministry as a profession, as a calling, as a vocation.  And it was at that point that I began my ministry at seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: So that's when you preached your first public sermon?
Speaker 2: Right, when I preached my first sermon at Galilee Baptist Church--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Marshall, Texas.
Speaker 1: Thank you, all right.  And so that was your dream, that was your inspiration--
Speaker 2: That was my dream.
Speaker 1: --to be a minister?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, from the first grade--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --approximately, at six years old?
Speaker 2: Right, about six years old and I had a dear friend, and he and I kind of together, he's passed away, pastored in Oakland, California.  But we started out together with Ms. McGee [ph.] as our teacher.  We sang together, we had little duet.  I was a little tall and he was short so they said the tall one and the short one so we went through life with that kind of inspiration.
Speaker 1: And what was his name please?
Speaker 2: Reverend R. T. George, Robert Thomas George.  We lived in the same community.  He played the piano and we sang together and we had glorious times together.
Speaker 1: Okay and you said he was a pastor in California, what part?
Speaker 2: He pastored in Oakland, California when he--he pastored in Carthage, Texas then he moved out to Oakland, California.  He stayed there and he passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, so would you say he was another important influence on you or--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you influencing each other?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 202099
Speaker 1: Did you have time for extra-curricular activities?
Speaker 2: Never had too much time for extra-curricular activities.  That really wasn't--our interest was developing, singing, studying those kinds of things.  And it wasn't too much you could do in a little small town [Marshall, Texas] with 18,000 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went to school and that was about it and we didn't have too much else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we're coming to the end of this first section but I did want to ask about those years, the early 1950s, as you're preparing you know, to start a family and to really establish yourself in the ministry.  It's also a pretty heady time for those people who are interested in history and politics and civil rights.  Were you active at that point in your life in any organizations?
Speaker 2: Not too much because there again, you were not afforded the opportunity in Texas.  It was a segregated community.  African Americans kind of affiliated with African Americans and you were just together trying to do things.  And of course our leaders were fighting for the right to vote.  They were fighting for the right to go to a university.  In fact, I so well remember the president of my college fighting to get the first African American student at the University of Texas and during those years we were able to get that--the University of Texas integrated. And we were able to get some other movements and some other successes going but there wasn't too much for you to do because it was a rigid, a rigorously segregated society.  In fact, what really struck me as young man when I went to City Hall to see a murial [mural] that depicted a bar in the middle with blacks on one side and whites on another and that was the vogue of that particular time and it was indelibly impacted into all of the whites and the blacks and it was just a terrible time.  In fact, the schools were segregated.  You only got left over books.  You got hand-me-down books.  You did not have--were not afforded the--everything came from Caucasian people and what they left over and that's what they gave to you, so you had to really be concerned about achievement and going forward regardless of what was happening and so many of them succeeded.
Story_ID: 202100
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Theophilus] Caviness in this part of the interview, I'd like to talk about the role of the Baptist church in your life, in your adult life because I've noticed the only non-Baptist church that you mentioned was the Methodist one-- [First United Methodist Church, Marshall, Texas]
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where your father [Will Stone Caviness] worked.
Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION).
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you tell us about the various Baptist churches that you worked at?
Speaker 2: Well in Texas, we had the African Methodist [Episcopal, A.M.E.] Church, the Methodist United Church [United Methodist Church].  Baptist churches were all over the town.  The Episcopal Church, Roman Catholic Church, we had all the major church affiliations in, in Marshall [Texas].  As I moved out of that, mine has always been a Baptist background, Baptistic in covenant and those kinds of things.  But I've always wanted to work ecumenically with other churches and, and other faiths.  So I mentioned that my father [Will Stone Caviness] worked at the [First United] Methodist Church in Marshall, Texas because jobs were not that available so where, what he, where he worked was in Marshall, Texas, the First Methodist Church.  As for the Baptist church--you have to be very careful when you start talking about the Baptist church because the Baptist church is not so much a conference of churches, and not so much an Episcopal body or Presbyterian body, it is a body of individual churches.  So when you say the Baptist church it's kind of a misnomer.  You're talking about Baptist churches as located--we take that understanding out of Revelations and the Bible itself, the church at Ephesus, the church at Thyatira, the church at Permegus [Pergamum] and the church at Philippia [Philippi], those kinds of things.  So, Baptist churches, instead of being a large conference of churches under the egis of a Presbytery or an Episcopal body is just a number of autonomous local bodies that are at particular places.  So when you start talking about the Baptist church you're talking about an individual Baptist church.  And the Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio] is a local, autonomous body that is not governed by any super body so Baptists don't use that phrase the Baptist church, the Baptist covenant, but the Baptist churches.  So the--a church could be at a particular place but it is different from the Methodist conference.  The United Methodist conference would comprise a number of Methodist Churches but they're all the Methodist Church.  The Presbyterian Church would have a great number of Presbyterian churches.  They would all be under the auspices and the aegis of the Presbyterian.  The Episcopal would be the same kind of constitutional set up and the Baptist church is an individual, local, autonomous body and they act independent of overlords and over--super bodies so that's really the difference.
Story_ID: 202101
Speaker 1: Can you help us understand please what the National Baptist Convention then represents in that whole structure of Baptist churches?
Speaker 2: All right.  So the National Baptist Convention is a convocation, it is a convening of churches around the country.  The, the National Baptist affiliation that we have is the National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Incorporated [Nashville, Tennessee].  Since that began some years ago they have split, they have multiplied by division and as a consequence I can tell you right now of six bodies where we used to have one or two.  It started out the National Baptist Convention, then it went out to National Baptist Convention of America [Inc. (NBCA), Dallas, Texas], split off, the Missionary Convention, National Missionary Convention [National Missionary Baptist Convention of America (NMBCA), Dallas, Texas] split off, the Progressive Convention National [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc. (PNBC), Washington, D.C.] split off so that we have about six or seven now, America, Missionary, Progressive.  You have the Primitive Baptists and you have just a whole amalgamation of, of various kinds of Baptist affiliates.  But they all do convening sessions so that when I go to the National Baptist Convention, I don't go as a delegate because I can't delegate authority from a local autonomy.  I have to have--I have what we call a convening session.  I go to a convention, get information, bring it back to our church.  We have to adopt it.  We have to take it from where we are, so that that's the difference.  In a national body where you're governed by super bishops and what have you, we have local pastors who really control their autonomous congregations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you said there is a covenant that guides all of these churches, so there is some agreement?
Speaker 2: There's some agreement in terms of a covenant.  We have a what we call a covenant, Baptist covenant that governs your conduct, behavior, what you should do when you leave this church and go to another, how you respect--that congregation is over against yourself.  So they are Baptistic in terms of their covenant, in terms of their agreements to do certain things in, in a Baptistic kind of way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I ask these questions about the Baptist church because I think of a--some of the comments made by people like [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, who isn't necessarily a religious leader--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but recognized that there are millions of people, I think she said at one point eight to ten million in the Baptist church alone.
Speaker 2: Right, eight to ten million in the National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Incorporated.  Progressive probably has a little less.  But what, what--when you say National Baptist convention you're talking about a great number of Baptist churches across the country who kind of count their numbers.  So then our church here where you have a couple of thousand members then when you put it in that larger body, a convening session, it becomes seven to eight million people.
Story_ID: 202102
Speaker 1: And that's the organization [National Baptist Convention U.S.A., Inc., Nashville, Tennessee] with the headquarters--
Speaker 2: That's the organization--
Speaker 1: --in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: No, the headquarters for the National Baptist Convention [U.S.A., Inc.] is really--the president [Dr. William J. Shaw] is a boyhood friend of mine.  He went to the same high school [Pemberton High School, Marshall, Texas] that I went to.  He went to the same college [Bishop College, Marshall, Texas] I went to.  He went to Union Theological Seminary in New York [New York].  I went to Eden [Theological] Seminary [Webster Groves, Missouri] here.  He's about four or five years, he's about six years younger than I am, Dr. William J. Shaw.  He, he went to Newtown [Elementary] School in Marshall, Texas.  I went to Sunny South [sic, Dunbar Elementary School and Hillside Elementary School, Marshall, Texas].  And we had a little rivalry there, don't you come over here and we don't go over there.  But that guy is the president and he came from Harrison County in Marshall, Texas but he, he leads about eight million of us.  And it's ironic because at this particular time in African American History, that young man, W. J. Shaw who grew in Marshall, Texas, is the president of the National Baptist Convention.  A number of the presidents came out of Louisiana and Texas.  The first one I knew was Dr. Joseph Harrison Jackson was a Mississippian who went to Chicago [Illinois] and pastored the Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years.  But I was trying to say that presently all of the national bodies, the Progressive Convention is lead by a former Bishopite, the national Baptist Convention is led by Dr. Shaw, a Bishopite, the--
Speaker 1: As in Bishop College?
Speaker 2: Bishop College who was in Marshall, Texas has gone down.  It was a 101 or two years old and folded for I don't know what reason, what went on.  But the Missionary Convention is now presidented by an ex-Bishopite, Reverend [Dr. Melvin V.] Wade.  He's in Los Angeles, California.  So we--the, the five bodies, the Progressive Convention by a young man who is married to a young woman [Jacquie Gantt Wade], who came to our church here, he's pastor--I mean he's president of the Progressive Convention.  He's down in Oklahoma I think.  It's Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] or Tulsa [Oklahoma], one of the two.  But it's ironic that all of these national bodies in the African American culture, in the African American covenant idea, all of them went to Bishop College and right now, they're presidented by them.
Story_ID: 202103
Speaker 1: Well you know it's interesting, at least for me to note that with all of the various divisions and the multiplying--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --by dividing what you've described.  And--
Speaker 2: Multiplied by division.
Speaker 1: And I remember a big scandal hit the papers a little while back with the Reverend Lyons [Henry J. Lyons] and the National Baptist Convention [U.S.A., Inc. Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: One of the greatest embarrassments and the great tragedies, the great disappointments that I have because I thought so much of this young man.  I thought he was a provocative leader, very brilliant man, talented, multi-talented that allowed greed and allowed money and those kind of things to really rob him of the greatness that he possessed as a young man.
Speaker 1: But my surprise, or what I think is noteworthy, is that he survived all that, including the prison time and the convention survived.  So to what do you attribute that, that the convention still stands as one of the largest--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and most influential bodies--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in black America?
Speaker 2: Absolutely because you have--Dr. [William J.] Shaw is a man of great integrity, great character that did not stand on this man's mistakes but assessed it as it were and said, "We've got to go on, we've got to do the right thing."  And he was that.  He ran against--he ran at the same time Reverend Lyons ran.  And obviously Lyons did not have the integrity and the kind of character that we thought he did.  By winning he was very--he was outgoing, he was a gregarious guy.  He could get around and mix and mingle.  He could have fun with people.  And so that just plummeted him to the head of the convention but he didn't last long because you know real, authentic commitment is tested in the fiery waters of trial and he did not stand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that kind of strength and endurance that you associate with the Convention today, was that also evident when you started pastoring Baptist churches--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in Illinois?
Speaker 2: We had a stalwart giant as the President of the National Baptist Convention when I began my rise in that (unclear).  Joseph Harrison Jackson, he pastored Olivet Baptist Church in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 202104
Speaker 1: I was historiographer of the National Baptist Convention [U.S.A., Inc.] for thirteen years under Dr. [Joseph Harrison] Jackson.  I worked my way up to one of the thirteen people who led it.  Right now, Dr. [William J.] Shaw is the leader and I'm one of the thirty-two people that really kind of--executive handle the convention as it is now.  So in my latter years I've tried to back off but yet to give admonition and support to the younger guys who are coming on who need it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So although you're living and working in different communities in the north, I'll call Illinois the north and Missouri too sort of since it's in the middle, border state--
Speaker 1: Well my greatest contribution I guess has been in Ohio because I've been here forty-three years.  And I came here, became a moderator, that means a district moderator handling conventional activity, conventional molded situations, became a vice president of the state convention, another convening session, then president for four years, then I became vice president again.  So I've contributed on the district level, the state level and the national level.
Story_ID: 202105
Speaker 1: Can we talk for a little while about your decision to come to Cleveland [Ohio]?  What prompted that?
Speaker 2: Well in our tradition, when you are pastoring or preaching in a community and you hear of another community needing a leader, you submit what we call a resume and I sent it to this church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  And in the process, you come in, you do the trial--they brought me back twice and I became the pastor.  It was ironic because I was situated in East St. Louis, Illinois.  My wife [James Pitts Caviness] and I had just begun that effort.  We built us a brand new brick home and I'd never been in a brand new brick home.  We built a brand new brick home for $33,000.00 and we were just situated.  We were enjoying ourselves because the church that I was pastoring was the St. Paul Baptist Church [East St. Louis, Illinois] and it only had three pastors.  Reverend [John] DeShields stayed there fifty years, Reverend, I forget his name, stayed there about three or four years and I came and I was going--determined to stay there fifty years like Reverend DeShields.  Vincent [ph.] was the other guy.  And I was just situated.  So my brother happened to have been pastoring in Milwaukee, Illinois--in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  He was at--he began his ministry in Marshall, Texas.  He came back from Honolulu, Hawaii, went to Marshall, Texas a Rev--and pastored our old home church [Galilee Baptist Church, Marshall, Texas].  Then when he began to visit out he was coming around and I went from Illinois to preach a revival for him and I sat down and I told him, I said, "You're much too big to be in this small town.  You need to get out of here."  He said, "Well I'm going to seminary."  Well he was about forty years old.  I said, "It's much late for that.  You have talent.  You're a brilliant young man so you really need to just throw yourself, kind of publicize yourself."  We sat down in that room and I gave him some pointers.  He--and we wrote a letter and he write--he put that letter around.  He--after or subsequently it was called to First Baptist Church in St. Louis, Missouri, he was called to Mount Zion Baptist Church in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  And eventually well he was called to Milwaukee, Wisconsin to the Mount Zion Baptist Church.  He came back through Illinois after he visited and he said, "There's a church in Cleveland that does not have a pastor now.  And I--one person mentioned it to me and wanted me to come and preach."  He said, "Why don't you go and preach?"  I said, "Oh, I'm not interested in that.  I, I'm, I have what I want.  I'm going to enjoy this."  He said, "Well it doesn't hurt you to get out and just go up and see."  And from that conversation we submitted the letter and they called.  They really wanted him to come and preach but I preached for him.  And as a result, history began right there.  I came here and I got called here.  He was in Milwaukee.  So we worked it out like that.
Story_ID: 202106
Speaker 1: Three years after I was here, this church one block from here is Bethany Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio].  Their pulpit became vacant.  I had a friend down in Champaign, Illinois by the name of Dr. Albert T. Rowan.  I called him and said, "I have a church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] larger than your church, here in Cleveland [Ohio] and I would like for you to come up and preach at that church."  So I said, "I'll tell you what I'm going to do.  I'm going to have you to come and preach for me."  I had him to come preach for me that morning and he preached for me that afternoon.  And I invited the trustee and deacon board from this church this--to the block away.  And they came down and listened to him and history was made there because they subsequently called him and he stayed there thirty-four years before he passed away.  So we're passing on this corner after we had left Illinois and for thirty-four years with him and forty-three with myself.
Story_ID: 202107
Speaker 1: There's one question that I must ask before we launch into our long discussion about Cleveland [Ohio] and your history here.  But--and that's about East St. Louis, Illinois because when we study twentieth-century history we hear about the terrible race riots in 1917 in East St. Louis. Now we hear a lot about the poverty and unemployment among blacks in East St. Louis.  But you've described sort of a comfortable, middle-class existence right around 1960, at least for you and your wife [James Pitts Caviness].
Speaker 2: East St. Louis was a haven for black people.  We did not have any government officials that were African American.  When I came there, I think it was nineteen--in 1955, something like that.  When I went to East St. Louis, Illinois you had an all-white city council.  I be, I became president of the Baptist Conference and we at that time confronted this situation and I began, if you will look on my table here you will see articles that kind of depict the efforts that we made there to get an African American on the city council.  We got an African American integrated in that city council then.  Then of course we had white flight.  White flight then left the City of East St. Louis so that now it has deteriorated to almost another East Cleveland where 98 percent of the people are African American so that you don't have the jobs.  The jobs went with the white flight and so you have left almost a destitute city.  Prior to my leaving there it was about 40 percent welfare and moving up to 60 percent.  Now it's terrible.  They've got a little bit of salvation if you can think about it when they got the boat there.  That has saved and given them some municipal services that otherwise--because the tax base is so low because the people were so poor.  But in terms of freedom and in terms of having your--enjoying rights, East St. Louis was a, just a, a welcome place.
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: In the '50s.
Speaker 1: And it went down.  So these are recent problems that we hear about now in East St. Louis.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, these are recent problems.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the boat, is that casino gambling or--?
Speaker 2: That's casino gambling.
Speaker 1: Okay, on a boat.
Speaker 2: Illinois got casino gambling and it's right on the Mississippi River, right across the street from St. Louis, Missouri and that whether you believe it or not, it has been a great help for the tax base, the school base and those kinds of things in East St. Louis, Illinois.  But other than that, it's rather poverty struck.  Ironically, some of the best churches are amongst those poor people who support their churches and who keep the progress going in terms of decency and dignity and those things.
Speaker 1: I felt we needed to address that since this is--this interview is going to be housed in [Chicago] Illinois in The [HistoryMakers'] archive there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 202108
Speaker 1: --But I do want to talk about that move to Cleveland [Ohio].  So you accepted--
Speaker 2: Well Illinois was a great time for me because you got a chance to go to Chicago [Illinois].  When the [Baptist General] State Convention [of Illinois] met you went to Chicago and Chicago was a whole new ball game where you enjoyed things and you had so many opportunities that you did not have in southern Illinois.  Southern Illinois was kind of backward in terms of Illinois kinds of things.  When you moved to Chicago it was a whole new ball game, other freedoms and, and you got really sophisticated kinds of African American tradition.  It was much better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that Illinois was a great, great thing 'cause I, you know I started the voting there.  You didn't have those other kinds of things that prevented you from doing things, kept you from doing things.  So it was a marvelous time.
Story_ID: 202109
Speaker 1: But there must have been something about Cleveland [Ohio] that you found attractive as well?
Speaker 2: When I looked on the map I saw that Cleveland, Ohio was particularly and peculiarly situated.  It was right in the middle of about five or six great cities, 300 miles from Indianapolis [Indiana], three--or 190 miles from Chicago [Illinois], about 500 miles from New York City [New York], so many miles from Buffalo [New York].  So it was uniquely situated in the middle of all of these opportunistic situations.  And I just thought it was a (unclear) educational opportunities, great number of things.  So I was really fascinated and enchanted with Cleveland, Ohio and the progress that obviously you would be able to make if you knew how to stand together.
Speaker 1: And when you came here in 1961, what kind of community did you find here in Glenville?
Speaker 2: Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] here was what we called the Gold Close--Gold Coast.  It was the ending of what we called the Gold Coast.  The Jews, Jewish people really had this community and it was considered an idea community, Gold Coast.  And so many of the African Americans then began to move into here and then the Jewish people went, moved to a little farther, Cleveland Heights [Ohio] and those kinds of things.  But Glenville was a thriving community.  We had business, a business district, 105, was going fast.  You had all kinds of shops and what have you.  That has since deteriorated but it was a beautiful community and this church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] was situated right in the middle of it, possibly the largest in this particular Glenville area at the time.  And so we came right in here.  It was kind of in the middle of a community that did not have adequate parking, those kinds of things.  When I came here the church was just one massive building.  They had one parking space for the pastor and they had other buildings around here.  The Chrysler had a big building over across the street.  We ultimately had to buy that for $40,000.00 and little by little, we bought every contiguous property that we could get.  And so now we are three or four blocks.
Story_ID: 202110
Speaker 1: So coming to Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] then at the beginning of the 1960s where the neighborhood was strong and--
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was strong, right.
Speaker 1: --economically and that--
Speaker 2: Economically.
Speaker 1: And you're right here on 105th Street [Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --where all of the businesses are located as well.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And also interestingly enough, lots of other large churches.  You already mentioned Bethany [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  But there are huge churches surrounding Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  Did that worry you at all that you had that much competition?
Speaker 2: It didn't worry me because I tell you what happens in the African American communities, churches usually would locate on the main thoroughfare because of the bus route, that's key.  We you have a great number of people who don't have adequate transportation so they get on the bus. So they come to--ironically Cleveland [Ohio] began with African Americans near downtown so that at that particular time, Scovill Avenue [Cleveland, Ohio], Central Avenue [Cleveland, Ohio] was the main thoroughfare, 55th Street [Cleveland, Ohio] became the main thoroughfare.  First it was Cedar [Avenue] down near town, then it went to 55th, then it went, it was 79th [Street, Cleveland, Ohio].  Seventy-Ninth you had a lot of businesses.  Then after they moved out a lot of further, you got 105th Street.  Then that's how the thing moved.  It moved and moved and moved.  And it--at that particular time, 105th was the main thoroughfare for the African American Community so that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] on the Selma March left Selma, Alabama, came to Cleveland when we were in quest of trying to select the first African American mayor for a major metropolitan area, came here and walked those streets.  Left his shoes here for--with Councilman [John W.] Kellogg, came to this church and preached his first message.  Because Cory Methodist Church [later Cory Methodist United Church, Cleveland, Ohio] right down the street was packed to capacity.  He asked me, "[HistoryMaker Reverend Theophilus] Caviness, would you open your church?"  So I left Cory, came down here, opened our church.  Within three minutes, this was packed to capacity.  So he spoke to a large crowd here, left here, went back down to Cory and spoke to a massive crowd there.
Speaker 1: And this is 1965, about--
Speaker 2: Something--
Speaker 1: You said Selma--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967] when Carl [B.] Stokes was made mayor of this city, 'cause Martin came here to do a voter registration.  He brought SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] monies here, he brought himself, he brought Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], he bought many of his stalwart leaders to this town and, and just supported us.  And the community came together and we were the first--we had only about 33 percent of the population, maybe a little less than that and we elected the first African American mayor with a 33 percent margin.  Now we're about 55 percent of this and we have a Caucasian who is mayor.  But we've gone all the way from electing Carl Stokes to Michael White who served so admirably to Jane Campbell who's doing an adequate job.
Story_ID: 202111
Speaker 1: So can we talk about this idea of leadership--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --especially for the decade of--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the 1960s--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --'cause I know you said in thinking back on the early years of your life when you realized that things were not well, politically in Texas and it would take some kind of concerted action--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --to change that.  Did you feel at that point in your life that the church would be the vehicle that you would be able to work with?
Speaker 2: In Texas, the church was the only vehicle because that is where we were standing together and we had unity there and we had unity of conviction and those kinds of things.  And we knew we had to forge ahead.  So that's the kind of beginning education that I had in terms of how to motivate and how to move and, and to get action done is through unity, people coming together and standing together through thick and thin.  And so, that kind of upbringing and that kind of conditioning brought here to this town where I began the process.  I made the first motion for the churches around here to support Carl [B.] Stokes.  And they were not sophisticated in terms of political activity, they thought the church should be separate from government and the church is not supposed to get over there.  And I just dared to believe that the church could be an influence and mold society in terms of governmental activity and so I made that motion and became his supporter in terms of helping him for that.  And when he got in he named me the head of the zoning commission and from there I went from zoning commission to the [Cleveland] City Council with--President [HistoryMaker] George Forbes asked me to come to the City Council.  I left there and went to the mayor's office, spent six years in the city council, five years on the Board of Zoning of Appeals [of the City of Cleveland], ten years in the mayor's office as executive assistant and went on to Columbus [Ohio] nine years as chairman of the [Ohio] Civil Rights Commission.  So that has been a labor of love for me.  And always understanding that you got to shepherd the flock, you go to make absolutely sure you are accountable for the spiritual needs of your people.  But I just thought that there should be no separation between your spirit and your body and your soul, that they were all--when you start talking about a soul, I am a soul.  So I just thought my interests in terms of the spirit was essential, in terms of the social was important, education so the, that makes the massive man or woman.  And so I've dared to always keep the church in the forefront of activities that promote the general welfare, the health and welfare of an individual.
Story_ID: 202112
Speaker 1: Well can you tell me how you strike that delicate balance between the interest of the church and the interest of the state so that the state isn't imposing its will on the church and then the church as a moral authority isn't necessarily controlling the government?
Speaker 2: I think the Bible supports the idea that we are subservient to our leaders.  We are subservient to governmental affairs.  In other words, the church is not opposed to civil government.  In fact within our twenty Articles of Faith, we have one that talks about the civil government which means render unto Caesar things that are Caesar's, unto God the things that are God's so that when you do that you have a separation but at the same time you understand that beneath the Caesar and the God is the fact that all of what we have belongs to Him so the earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof.  The silver and gold of--Haggai says the silver and the gold belong to Him.  David said the camel on a thousand hills belong to Him and the hills also.  So, all of it belongs to Him.  We're just stewards here.  We just come here to do our little thing and to try to help and in the process of doing that you understand that you don't quite run amuck with what is true because when you're honest, truthful and you're trying to do the right thing, most things fall in line.
Story_ID: 202113
Speaker 1: --Were there any role models who helped you understand how you could combine your calling as a minister with your desire to make a difference in the society at large?
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. in New York City [New York] was my inspiration.  He was a fantastic, flamboyant guy.  In fact he came to my house and when--during the [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower years when he supported Eisenhower so that was just my inspiration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 202114
Speaker 1: You mentioned at the end of the last segment that your role model in the ministry and also in social activism or social gospel was the Reverend Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., New York City [New York], Pastor of Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  Ironically friends of this church were the first pastor of this church, Dr. John Rollin Plummer's wife [Thelma Plummer] was a good friend of Adam Clayton Powell's Assistant Minister Dr. [David N.] Licorice and so when they got ready to name this church, they wanted to name it Abyssinia Church in Cleveland [Ohio] but they had to differentiate so they named it Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] in Cleveland as over against Abyssinia in New York.  So there'd been a kind of a camaraderie between the Abyssinia in New York and here.  Adam Clayton Powell, I met him back in East St. Louis, Illinois.  In fact we were doing a rally there and (unclear)--I think that, that's the year that he broke with the Democratic Party and supported [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower and Eisenhower of course was elected.  But he was a major force politically around the country.  And I remember so vividly that he came there to speak to a great congregation--convocation of people that I pulled together and was, he was a magnanimous speaker, a proud man and did such a good job.  Came down in my basement and sat there as a humble guy and I got a chance to talk to him.  So he was really the guy who forged ahead and, and showed you that you did not have to take second best, not to stand back and just do it.  And so that was a great inspiration for me and quite independent and led a great life, made some mistakes but obviously was a major force in American history.
Story_ID: 202115
Speaker 1: May I ask a question?  Since you sort of alluded to this about partisan politics, you said [Adam Clayton] Powell [Jr.] broke with the Democratic Party and began to support the Republicans.  And I noticed too in just looking over your history in the City of Cleveland [Ohio] that you've won support and admiration from Republicans and Democrats.
Speaker 2: I call my--
Speaker 1: Well how do you do that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I call myself--many of people have laughed at me because I call myself a "Republicrat", which means that I find interest in the idea that I espouse not any particular party because there are some good Republicans and there are some good Democrats. And so I have found some of my best friends--I'm a born [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt Democrat, came out during his time and he was a great fantastic role model and the kind of guy that I liked because he did so much for the common people.  I said--[President] Abraham Lincoln said, "The Lord must have loved poor people because he made so many of them."  So I, I've always been fascinated by Abraham Lincoln trying to do for the great majority of people and, and Roosevelt being the titular leader at that particular time that brought this country together.  So I've been a Franklin Delano Roosevelt Democrat, came up steeped in it, in Illinois or where, where.  But when I got here, I understood that in Ohio politics, it's not always the Democrats who were forging ahead to do things, you had the Republicans also.  And I learned very early that you could not stay put whenever a president who was president, he was going to president for four year, be he Democrat or something, you got to work with him, the governor, the mayor, you got to work with him.  So you can't sit out, you got to work with people.  So I espoused the idea that it wasn't so much the party that I was affiliated with, but the individual who answered my call when I called to get jobs for people 'cause I've always been concerned about jobs for people because I think jobs bring you dignity.  I think job, jobs give you the kind of freedom that you can exercise your rights and be the kind of individual that you want to be.  Give me a decent job.  And so I fought for jobs, so jobs have to come from Democrats and Republicans.  So when they start labeling me, instead of saying he's a Democrat or he's a Republican, I say no, I'm a Republicrat because I embrace the totality of government and how you figure into it.  So, I work with Democrats and I work with Republicans because it's not the guy who has the party but it's the guy who answers the telephone when I call him to ask him about a job for my people.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Do we call that patronage or what do you call that?
Speaker 2: Whatever you want to call it, patronage--
Speaker 1: Well we call it whatever.
Speaker 2: Whatever it is, just so it--in the bottom line is that somebody gets helped.
Story_ID: 202116
Speaker 1: I want to focus again on the 1960s for just a minute because--
Speaker 2: Let me say a word about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] because--
Speaker 1: Oh sure.
Speaker 2: --there again I mentioned a political leader but Martin Luther King was a moral leader. Dr. J. H. [Joseph Harrison] Jackson was a spiritual leader and was a great inspiration on me because he worked with Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] and the like.  But Martin Luther King was the most humble man that I have ever known, a brilliant man steeped in character, just a giant in terms of resolution, putting your head to it, an eloquent speaker, dynamic leader and this man was just tops for me.  When I was in East St. Louis [Illinois], I also invited him to come.  He was not able to come but his vivacious, beautiful wife [Coretta Scott King] came and gave her a concert for the movement in East St. Louis.  Till this day she recognizes that she lived in my house with my wife [James Pitts Caviness] back in Illinois so that he has been a great leader.  In fact I told you when he first came to Cleveland [Ohio] after the Selma March, he came to this church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] and he was at Cory [Methodist Church, later Cory United Methodist Church, Cleveland, Ohio], he came down here and when got the Nobel Peace Prize, he took time to describe a note, "thanks to Greater Abyssinia Civil Rights Committee" because we gave him more money in this town when he came than any other church.  So I'm really proud of that and we espouse the movement.  Now I'm head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference Cleveland Chapter and so I've just carried on that kind of thing here for Martin Luther King.
Story_ID: 202117
Speaker 1: Now those great things are happening in the 1960s certainly, the record is clear on that.  But especially here in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], there were some troubling moments and I'm thinking now about the Glenville Riots.
Speaker 2: When Carl [B.] Stokes was mayor we had some black nationalists who were ill-informed and who took advantage of that election.  And Carl Stokes made available monies that could be used for promoting the general welfare, they took them and used them for violence.  And one of the greatest confrontations and conflagrations that we had in this town transpired within this environs around here when a gentleman [Fred Ahmed Evans] ill-lead and the like took up arms and began to shoot people.  That was the worst kind of thing.  And I remember so vividly that hostilities were here and loss of life was imminent and Carl Stokes had to go in a meeting and call all of us together and said, "What shall we do?"  And we thought that the [Cleveland] Police Department was so racist at the time that if we turned them loose they would shoot up a lot of people.  So Carl made a deliberate, calculated decision to pull the police out and let us police our own community.  And that was the difference between life and death at that time.
Speaker 1: So unarmed citizens--
Speaker 2: Unarmed citizens--
Speaker 1: --are keeping the peace?
Speaker 2: --patrolled the streets, kept the peace.  We lost property but the property wasn't as important as human lives and that was the difference.  The police department was totally infuriated, did not really understand that but Carl Stokes made the right decision.  It's been a blessing for us.
Speaker 1: Now what year was that for the Glenville Riot, was that '68 [1968] or--?
Speaker 2: It's something like, '68, '69 [1969], might have been '69.  Carl was elected I think in '67 [1967].  It was about two and half years, something after that, that the riots transpired.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now did Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] lose property during the rioting?
Speaker 2: They spared black businesses, they only hit white businesses, Jewish businesses.  And if you put a sign up saying this is a black business, they passed you over and went to the--there were some losses but by and large, these violent black nationalists were trying to send a message and they sent it the wrong kind of way through violent activity.
Story_ID: 202118
Speaker 1: --How long would you say it took for Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] to recover from that rioting of the late 1960s?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's ever recovered from it because we lost businesses and people who really had the money were the folks who moved out.  And it left us kind of devoid or void of business acumen.  Leaders, Jewish leaders who were committed to doing the right thing were driven out.  We lost their business and suffered great losses and I'm not sure we have ever recuperated from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was during the [Carl B.] Stokes era?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Who was a Democrat, an African American Democrat.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now on that--
Speaker 2: And the Democratic Party did not endorse, did not endorse him.  He went as--ran as an independent.  Finally he came into the Democratic fold because during that particular time, Hubert Humphrey and all of them came here.  The national Democratic Party was committed to this town but the local party was kind of led by other groups that were not friendly to us.
Speaker 1: And Stokes served until '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: I think he served four years.  Back then you did a two-year term, now it's a four-year term.  And Stokes did two years--I mean four years.  He did not run after that four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He bowed out--
Story_ID: 202119
Speaker 1: Now after he [Carl B. Stokes] left office [as mayor of Cleveland, Ohio] were you still involved in city governance or at least--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --or at least through commissions or other activities?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we were--because when he left then we had a magnanimous, marvelous, magnificent guy by the name of [HistoryMaker] George Forbes who was president of the [Cleveland City] Council.  And so when it went to a Caucasian male we had a presidential council who was very strong who is now president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], just asked me the other day to be his guest Saturday night for the Freedom Fund Dinner.  But he was strong.  He led council and so we continued to forge ahead because the mayor under our form of government here can't do much without city council and this guy was so brilliant and so informed and so cunning and crafty until he made absolutely sure that black people did not suffer.
Speaker 1: Okay, George Forbes.
Speaker 2: George Forbes.
Speaker 1: Corporate lawyer.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And president of the NAACP?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, right.  And could have stayed in council the rest of his life but chose to get out and do other things and he's--that's been a blessing to this city.
Story_ID: 202120
Speaker 1: Now in the 1970s and beyond that too when [HistoryMaker] George Forbes is a leader in city council, we had several other mayors [of Cleveland, Ohio] and I'm thinking especially about Mayor George Voinovich.
Speaker 2: George Voinovich was one of the most progressive Republicans who governed more like Democrats than anybody.  One of the things I've liked about this man, he's always called them like they were, not in terms of label but in terms of what is right.  And so he was the person as a Republican in a massive Democratic town, got elected and always did the right thing.  We didn't have fair housing.  He was the first guy to put forth fair housing 'cause Carl [B. Stokes] couldn't get it done.  But this man got it done.  Fair housing, police review board, those kind of innovative, opportunistic things that inure to the best interests of the, all of the people, George Voinovich presided over it and was fair.  Starting off with about 15 percent of the African American vote, ended up with 85 percent as a Republican in a predominantly Democratic area so you--it says a lot for him in terms of his fairness.  He's a senator now.  Went on from--he was auditor, commissioner, mayor, governor, now senator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how did you serve the city during his various terms in office?
Speaker 2: I, I was his executive assistant and for about ten years.  And when he left the City of Cleveland, he went to Columbus [Ohio] to become governor, I went down and I was--I chaired the Ohio Civil Rights Committee for about eight years of his tenure, one year of Senator--of Governor [Bob] Taft's (unclear) then I came out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so that's mostly the '80s [1980s] going into the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --decade of the '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then we had our second--
Speaker 2: Yes, the '80s, that was the end of the '80s.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And then the beginning of the '80s we went down to Columbus and that went into the '90s.
Speaker 1: Now in that, serving in that capacity as executive assistant to the mayor, what kinds of activities were involved?
Speaker 2: I was mainly concerned about and I was hired to do the liaison activity between the president of the council who was a strong black man and the mayor of the city of Cleveland who was a strong white man.  So my job as an executive assistant was to do the liaison, touch both of them, keep them on target, keep them together.  We were at the Fairfax Renaissance Development Corporation Dinner the other night and they gave a great, huge plaque to George Forbes and George Voinovich that worked during those times to forge this city ahead.  And Voinovich got up and he said, "Thank God for the time that this so tall black man and this short white man worked together that we had the Holy Spirit in the middle and that was [HistoryMaker] Reverend E. Theophilus Caviness who worked between us because sometimes there were some tough times."  But I was, he said, the Holy Spirit who kind of forged that thing and kept it together so that when Forbes was on the, out in left field and totally infuriated and angry with the governor--with the mayor, I would take what he said, take it back to the mayor, tell him, "Mayor, I don't think I want to quote Brother George Forbes what he said to you but you need to go over and talk to him."  And that forged a good kind of leadership that pushed this city ahead.  In fact, during the [Dennis] Kucinich years, he was mayor for about four years, they had about sixty or seventy vetoes of legislation.  Well in the Voinovich years they only had about two or three and those were just perfunctory things.  So you went from great dissention, hostility, acrimony to peace, harmony and the things--unity that promote a city.  So I felt keenly responsible for making sure that the two heads of those specific entities were on target with one another and kept peace.
Story_ID: 202121
Speaker 1: In fact it was an interesting thing because [HistoryMaker] George Forbes was a strong leader and you didn't tell him anything.  You asked him and so his water bill was not paid.  And so the mayor [George Voinovich] had to go to the public saying, "George got to pay his water bill just like everybody else."  And George said, "Don't tell me what I need to do."  I--we later found out that he had given it to somebody to pay and they didn't pay it.  But he was stalwart.  He--so they became divisive in terms of you're going to pay your bill, I ain't going to pay it, and that kind of thing.  And I saw the city [Cleveland, Ohio] just getting ready to inflame or coming up in flames.  And I said how do I resolve this situation?  The mayor said, "He got to do it, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Theo [Theophilus Caviness].  Go over there and tell him he got to pay his, his water bill."  I go over there and tell George--"You go back and tell that so-and-so I'm not going to pay the water bill," okay and that's the way it is.  So that--I ended up paying the water bill myself.  Nobody knew I paid it.  I think it was about eight or nine hundred dollars.  I went over there and paid it because it didn't make sense for me to let them go off into left field over a water bill that he should have paid, that this man said he was going to pay, but George was just adamant 'cause he wasn't going to be embarrassed.  So I paid the water bill.  Later on about five or six years later he asked somebody in the administration, "Who paid my water bill?"  He said, "Theo Caviness paid your water bill." (Laughter).
Story_ID: 202122
Speaker 1: I'm sure you're aware that there are a lot of people in Cleveland [Ohio] who didn't like the fact that [HistoryMaker] George Forbes and George Voinovich were working together.  And I remember reading in the papers unflattering editorials about Mayor "Forbesovich" and it was Forbes first, you know that nobody elected him mayor but he's really directing what's happening in [Cleveland] City Hall [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: George recalled an incident in--about that the other night.  He said the papers blew up the fact that George Forbes was running the city.  I knew who was running the city.  And George Voinovich was the quiet type that didn't mind doing things and--that were, should be done and never worry about who gets the credit.  He wanted the city to move forward.  That was his modus operandi.  But George was, because he was provocative, and talked and used some not Sunday school terms a great number of times, was the guy who was flamboyant so people construed the city to be run by George Forbes.  So George was talking about it the other night and so he said, I went to the mayor and I told him, "Mayor, don't pay any attention about all these folks talking about Big George and Little George and all like that."  And so he said, "I'm not the big guy and I'm the big in size."  So Voinovich looked at George and said, "You're only the big guy in size."  And the house just came down.  George looked at him and said, "That's what you said."  So they were able, in spite of all of the hoopla talking about Big George and Little George and George Forbes was running the city--they ran it together.  And that was one of the greatest things that ever happened to this city that a black man and a white man, a Republican and Democrat--as divergent as they might have been--came together and moved this city forward.  And it became the foundation that Mike [Michael] White used to take it farther and farther away.
Story_ID: 202123
Speaker 1: So you're working two full time jobs--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in that era.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: With the [Greater Abyssinia Baptist] Church [Cleveland, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: With the church--
Speaker 1: --and [Cleveland] City Hall [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: --and City Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the congregation was okay with that?
Speaker 2: Congregation was okay because I always, my bottom line was if I can help somebody as [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] said, "If I can help somebody as I pass along then my living shall not be in vain."  Martin said, "If you're around when my day come, don't worry about the accolades, the multitudinous number of accolades and awards that I've given--I've gotten, don't worry about the Nobel Peace Prize and all of those things.  Just worry about one thing and that is that I have dedicated my life trying to help people."  So he said if I can help somebody as I pass along then my living shall not be in vain.  So I, I've taken that as a life model to try to help somebody, not just help yourself but try to help somebody as I pass along.  So the bottom line was whether I was working in the church, whether I was working in government, make sure that you're helping people and people will remember that for years to come.  So that was my modus operandi.  If I can help somebody as I pass along then my living shall not be in vain.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's in the [George] Voinovich era?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 202124
Speaker 1: What about in the era of Mayor Michael White?
Speaker 2: In the era of Michael White was one of those beautiful times when a man just ran the city [Cleveland, Ohio] almost unilaterally, autocratically, just a brilliant young stalwart giant that put all the things together and lid--led this city for twelve long years.  The longest reigning mayor of the city of history cause I--City of Cleveland.  [George] Voinovich had done ten years and Mike did twelve.
Speaker 1: And our second African American mayor?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Prior to that [Anthony J.] Celebrezze had done eight, but then Voinovich did ten.  And ironically after he did ten years, he called us all together, said, "Let's get out of here.  We're tired."  And we were tired.  So you can really do a major city for just so long.  Mike White did twelve and he said we're getting out of here.
Speaker 1: Now during Michael White's years in office, in what capacity did you serve that admin--?
Speaker 2: I was out of there.  I was out--
Speaker 1: Completely?
Speaker 2: I went to Columbus [Ohio].  I went to Columbus to work with the governor [George Voinovich].  I did about one year on the Sewer Board.  Voinovich was going out.  He stayed--he was out of government one year between his mayorship and his governorship.  So during that year he appointed me to the Sewer Commission, some of the fantastic guys that I met on the Sewer Commission and I loved it.  It was a five year term.  It was the highest money you could make.  You made $8,500.00 and they sent you all around the country with the sewer movement and that kind of thing.  So I was there for about one year and then the governor called me and said, "I need you down in Columbus."  And that's when I left the Sewer Board under Michael White and went to Columbus and stayed there nine years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were all of those years were--with the [Ohio] Civil Rights Commission?
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am, all of it with the Civil Rights Commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As chairman of the Civil Rights Commission.  And we were able to do some fantastic things in terms of leveling the playing field for all of the people of the State of Ohio.  And we kept it together.  We did not have any riots and-'cause I would always number one to try to make sure we calm the raging seas and to make sure people lived together and appreciated each one's ethnicity and their culture.
Story_ID: 202125
Speaker 1: How do you accomplish something like that as the commissioner [of the Ohio Civil Rights Comission]?
Speaker 2: Work hard at it.  Work hard at it.  Stay on top of it.  Don't let little things--the little things that begin to accrue are the things that ultimately get things inflamed if you don't work on the little things.  So whenever you have hostility in the community, whenever you have something that transpires that might not seem big, you better get to it and get it straight because little things kind of come together.  And before you know it, you have a massive outburst of emotions that don't help anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there specific things that you recall the commission doing to sort of calm the raging seas as you suggested?
Speaker 2: One thing we did we went around to every city in the State of Ohio.  We went to every city.  We had the commission would meet in Steubenville [Ohio].  The Commission would meet in Warrensville Heights [Ohio].  It would meet in Dayton, Ohio.  During my tenure we went to Springfield [Ohio].  We exhibited ourselves.  We illustrated what we were doing.  We went out in the community and we went around letting people know that we were there so if you had any gripes, if you have anything transpiring, let us know and we were able to calm raging waters and keep things from amalgamating and getting larger and larger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And without being necessarily political about it--
Speaker 2: No, the--
Speaker 1: --so it's nonpartisan?
Speaker 2: --the Civil Rights Committee is off limits with regard to politics.  You do--you're governed by what the Constitution of the State of Ohio gives you and it is nonpartisan.  It does that.  It doesn't respect individual groups and what have you.  It talks about the about the good of the whole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you did that until 2000?
Speaker 2: That's right, I did it for about nine years, right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And was that easy for you, for someone who was so political?
Speaker 2: Wasn't easy because--that's right.  But it wasn't easy but [George] Voinovich was the governor and he supported it.  He gave our commission great support.  In fact during our tenure was the first time that the [Ohio State] Legislature had given us additional monies to do our job.  So we went around doing that job.  Those were glorious years because you had a governor that supported you.  You can't really function in city activity and governmental state activity unless you have the leader behind you.  They got to believe in what you're doing, they got to support it and they got to put the resources there for you to get it done.  So he did that.  That made it a great success.
Story_ID: 202126
Speaker 1: You know there were some interesting headlines that I saw in preparing for our conversation today.  One of them I think must of have been printed toward the end of your, the period that you were serving on the [Ohio] Civil Rights Commission.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) during the middle.  During the middle because what you--as head of the Civil Rights Committee, you're supposed to be a poster boy for doing certain things.  I crack jokes--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you still kept your name in the news.
Speaker 2: You're right.  They say I was flamboyant.  They said that, "He wears red suits," which I did.  He wears all kinds of this and the like.  And you know, "He has money."  They just gave me a whole works.  But I dared to stay the course.  In fact the governor [George Voinovich] called me once, "Why are you in the newspaper so much?"  I said, "I don't know.  I just keep trying to do what I have to do and try to stay the course."  But I made mistakes.  You always make mistakes.  Sometimes I would just tell a joke innocently and that would be blown out of proportion.  And they would say, "You ought not do it.  You, you're a poster guy for us."  Well I didn't know I--coming out of an African American church where if I see a beautiful young lady I say, "Honey, how are you today?"  That, that is unacceptable.  That is unacceptable when you get in the state government, that kind of thing.  And I might say, "Darling"--"I'm no, not no darling."  So you got to--I had to clear up my act.  Being friendly, nothing ulterior, nothing suggestive but just all the, the chatter, the talk that you have in the church you cannot do it in governmental activity.  So I got maligned by that.  I learned my lesson.  I stayed the course nine years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That--they never could say that I was dishonest.  They could say I cracked jokes and they could say whatever those jokes were.  They never said I stole anything, never said I did any malfeasance or misfeasance.  They were always able to just talk about my, whatever it is. You know he dresses flamboyantly and he talks, runs his mouth too much and all that good--which was all true.
Story_ID: 202127
Speaker 1: I'm thinking about the time when Congressman [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes, brother of Carl [B.] Stokes announced that he was about to retire from the [U.S.] House of Representatives and another Baptist minister, Reverend Marvin McMickle, announced his interest in running for political office and Stephanie Tubbs Jones, another native Clevelander [Cleveland, Ohio] talked about her interests in being a [U.S.] Congresswoman.
Speaker 2: Senator Jeff Johnson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and all three African Americans were seeking your blessings.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: So then what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well there again I stayed the course.  Jeff was a good guy I thought and he was a member of our church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] at the time.  Stephanie Tubbs Jones grew up right--one block from here, used to--was a Cub Scout so she started out right here.  Marvin McMickle was a contemporary of mine, a preacher and the like so I said look when it comes down to having the next congressman, either one of these guys would work.  Stephanie, a brilliant young woman, mother and father were just beautiful people.  I knew them all so when I--if you want to pick somebody, I'd pick either one of them.
Speaker 1: And they're members of the church down the street, Bethany [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Down the street.  Yeah, Bethany right down the street.  And--but she was, she's a marvelous leader.  And so when you--time to pick, who are you going to pick, you know?  Jeff Jones was a member of our church so I said obviously I'm there.  But Marvin McMickle was a fantastic guy.  Stephanie Tubbs Jones was obviously a great woman and that kind of thing so it didn't make any difference.  So all of them said yeah he's supporting me and I was really.  So if I could have voted for all three I would have done that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're coming to the end of this segment but I guess I just wanted to interject that point because it's difficult to be apolitical in Cleveland once you've been out there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Would you agree with me (laughter) on that point?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, totally.
Story_ID: 201054
Speaker 1: Okay.  We have made it now to about the beginning of the twenty-first century when we talk about the rise to prominence of Congresswoman--our current Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs Jones and the fact that you supported her and the other candidates and talked for a time about running against her.
Speaker 2: Yes, Stephanie who was--"Was [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Theophilus] Caviness supporting her?"  She said, "I know he's supporting me," because I was.  I told her I was supporting her and I told Jeff Johnson I was supporting him.  But obviously she was a person with massive talent and she had the brilliance and I, I'd seen her grow up.  I knew her great father and a beautiful mother and so I just leaned toward her but I was trying to be nice to everybody.  And of course Dr. [Marvin] McMickle has massive talent and--but she was the leader and no question about it, the person who should have had the job and got the job.
Story_ID: 201055
Speaker 1: Now we're in the twenty-first century now but I do want to talk for at least a few minutes about an organization that you've been affiliated with for a number of years beginning in the twentieth century and that's SCLC, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.  When did you become associated with them?
Speaker 2: Back in Illinois when I pastored in East St. Louis, Illinois, I led the Baptist Conference [Baptist General State Convention of Illinois? National Baptist Convention, later National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., Inc.? There's the Baptist Ministers Conference of Cleveland and Vicinity that he headed, but that wasn't in ESTL, IL?] and we were trying to integrate the downtown of East St. Louis.  At the time Collinsville Avenue was the main street in East St. Louis, Illinois and they did not hire one African American in any other position other than cleaning.  There was no African American on the city council.  So I led the movement to integrate Collinsville Avenue and I remember on Easter Sunday I selected, our group selected Easter Sunday morning to boycott the Walgreens drugstore downtown with all the Easter bunnies and what have you and we went down there and we broke that Collinsville Avenue situation where black people were able to do--be--do clerks.  They were--couldn't work the fountain behind Walgreens so we broke that.  We integrated that facility and that whole town.  We got our first African American council person who ultimately became all black.  But that was how I got my first initiation in the Southern Christian Leadership activity because [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was doing it in Alabama and Georgia and those kinds of things.  So I was inspired by it and I invited Martin to come and he said, "I'm not able to get there.  I (unclear) can you send [Ralph] Abernathy?"  Well Abernathy, we couldn't get.  So the best I could do then was go in his household and get his better half [Coretta Scott King] and she graciously came to East Saint Louis, thrilled our hearts with her beautiful singing ability because my wife [James Pitts Caviness] was a singer so they got along real well.  So that was my initiation into loving Martin Luther King, loving the movement [Civil Rights Movement] and trying to do the best I could to help it.
Story_ID: 201056
Speaker 1: Coming here, [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] came and became an inspiration to us.  I told you he left the Selma March, came here [Cleveland, Ohio], helped us elect Carl [B.] Stokes, was just a great instrument for good here and so I've admired that.  So later on when they wanted to organize a chapter [Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)] I was one of the board members.  Reverend C. J. Matthews was the president and I was one of the board members.  Somehow or another it didn't get off the ground.  It kind of went down and fluctuated, did not do too well.  So for years the SCLC molded--movement and the SCLC impetus was not en vogue here, it just died out.  A young man by the name of [HistoryMaker] Reverend Raleigh Trammell who was the vice president of the national part of SCLC came to me down in Tennessee and he said, "You know [HistoryMaker Reverend Theophilus] Caviness, you need to help us.  The SCLC could go well in Cleveland."  It's one--I said, "Well you're right, Cleveland is one of the most progressive areas of our whole movement, our whole nation and you ought to do that."  For three years he asked me to do it and I said, "Oh no, I've got too much to do and I don't want to do that."  Finally, it so helped that SCLC Board, national board met at the same time the National Baptist Convention [later the National Baptist Convention U.S.A., Inc.] met in Tennessee again, because our headquarters is basically--and I should have said that some time ago--headquarters is Nashville, Tennessee where we have the American Baptist School [American Baptist College, Nashville, Tennesssee] and the headquarter thing, but the guy who is president [Dr. William J. Shaw] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So he said, "Why don't you do that?"  So they pursued me about three years and Reverend Matthews was leading this here and it had died down.  They were not doing anything.  So the next president was not getting through to Cleveland.  So finally I told him, "All right, let me do that."  So it was then that I began to pull together people here in the area to reorganize and to restart the SCLC movement.  And within the three years that we have done it, we've gotten nearly a thousand members.  We've made great inroads, we have done so many good things.  The last speaker we had for the third annual--the first speaker we had was [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. [Fred] Shuttlesworth who was an institution in his own right.  He led the movement in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Is that Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth?
Speaker 1: Fred Shuttlesworth, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, just wanted to get that name on the record.
Speaker 1: Right.  He was "the" guy.  Then the next year we had--I can't recall the next time.  But anyway we got Michael White the third year and that was just an inspiration because he was out of [the Cleveland Mayor's] Office but he came back for the first time and thrilled that crowd of 500 people at the Intercontinental Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio].  Was gracious because he didn't leave with too many people necessarily rallying for him because they thought he was so autocratic and what have you.  But he came back and thrilled us, gave us the kind of rightful admonition that we needed for this city, did not criticize anybody, did not volunteer to try to tell the president or mayor [Jane L. Campbell] what she should do, but was very gracious and magnanimous in the process so that Mike led this city and came back as our SCLC leader.  And so--but SCLC has gotten a foothold so we do a radio broadcast once a week, 'Black Cleveland Today' [ph.].  We do efforts at voter registration.  I go up to Washington, D.C. and I deal with the People for the American Way [PFAW] and coordinate that with SCLC.  We've gotten labor involved and John Ryan and Marcia McCoy and the people down there have helped us tremendously.  Arnold Pinkney has been probably the one single, solitary forge that has led me and he ran for mayor after Carl Stokes day.  They just--he missed it but he's been a--he's a brilliant guy, a marvelous tactician and strategist and he just has a brilliant mind.  So he's kind of aided and assisted us in doing the SCLC so he has been the leader for the great progress that we have made in terms of the forge of progress here for the SCLC.  So the Cleveland Chapter is now one of the most prolific chapters in the nation.  We have had great success.  The national body has just leaned on us for a great number of things and so it's just been a great blessing for the City of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Along with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  [HistoryMaker] George Forbes does a good job.  We're trying to do a good--and all of us together are trying to make a better Cleveland for the totality of the Cleveland citizenry.
Story_ID: 201057
Speaker 1: Part of the history that we've discussed so far, we've talked a lot about the role of men in the [Civil Rights] Movement and also in the ministry.  But I know even in the history of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] I recall the name of Ella Baker and other women who had key roles in the organize--
Speaker 2: Fannie [Lou] Hamer, all of those people who really made the difference.  Carole Hoover was an icon in the movement.  Her father [Reverend Odie M. Hoover] was a pastor of Olivet [Institutional] Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio] when I came here and so we co-pastored for about eight or nine years.  But she came up to Cleveland [Ohio] and worked with [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] down in Atlanta [Georgia], Alabama and the like and she has done a tremendous job of making sure that Coretta [Scott King] and the interests of the King people have been integrated into this process.  She's been head of the chamber of commerce [Greater Cleveland Growth Association].  She's just done so many things so I think she is one key person that you have to lift up as having contributed to the greatness of our efforts here in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So women have assumed those leadership roles--
Speaker 2: No question about it, right.
Speaker 1: --alongside men?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: At least here in Cleveland we have the evidence for that.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  We couldn't have done it without them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's been working together we can get it done.
Speaker 1: Where is Carol Hoover now?
Speaker 2: Carol is--she's always here but I think she's situated in New York [New York]. And she's between New York and Cleveland and the like, but she's always here doing things to help Cleveland.
Story_ID: 201058
Speaker 1: May I ask about the Baptist church and the leadership in general?  It's--if I said that the Baptist church is perhaps one of the most conservative in the nation today, would you agree with me or would you ask for clarification?
Speaker 2: No, I would agree with you because when you talk about conservatism, you're talking about biblical theology and Bible theology and you're talking about the theology of God, you're talking about the basic tenets of the Bible.  So that I would say when we talk about Baptist churches and people who espouse the Baptist viewpoint, they're talking about what is authentically scriptural, what is authentically Bible.  And so we take our impetus right out of the Bible itself.  We don't consider ourselves liberal or conservative, we consider ourselves fundamental Baptist people who literally many times interpret those scriptures for what they are supposed to be.  We take great pride in never eisegeting the situation but also exegeting the essence of the truth that emanates out of the Bible itself.  So we consider ourselves Bible people, basically fundamentally Bible people and not necessarily liberals in terms of taking Baptist tenets and moving it around and not allowing it to speak to itself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this exegetical kind of reading of the Bible--
Speaker 2: Exegetical reading--
Speaker 1: I just want a definition so I make sure I understand it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before I ask another question.
Speaker 2: Exegetical renditions of the Bible means that you take what the Bible says and you exegete from that, you speak from that.  Eisegesis is when you read into the Bible what you think and you cease to do the truthful interpretations of the Bible and you insert your own individual whims and whelms.  The exegetical approach to reading the Bible is let the Bible speak to you and you don't speak to it and through it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we call that exegesis and eisegesis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I raise the issue because in this presidential election year [2004] we're hearing a lot about the religious right--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and now in recent weeks I'm starting to hear more in Cleveland [Ohio] about the religious left.  And I think if I'm not mistaken it was [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Dr.] Otis Moss [Jr.] who suggested that, especially in the African American community there have always been voices for change within the church, you know who are seeking social justice, you know even if they're trying to conserve certain traditions that have traditionally been associated with the Baptist movement among African Americans.  So what do you think of all this talk about religious right and religious left?
Speaker 2: Well you know that's for people who want to segregate ideas and the like.  We consider ourselves Baptists believers or Bible believers who interpret the scriptures as they are written, not in what we think that it ought to say and we are very strong.  If the Bible does not speak to it then we don't necessarily espouse it or speak to it.  But it's always trying to discern the truth as the Bible portrays it.  And this left and right business, I don't quite see.  If you are for the truth, the truth is not left or right, the truth is the truth.  And the truth makes you free.  So if that is what you espouse in terms of biblical solid scriptural background, it's not leading into something that says something other than what is written.  It's trying to be authentically Bible based, fundamentally Bible focused.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when you have that, you don't veer to the left or the right.  And so it's not about who are on the left and who's on the right, it's about who's straight down the middle and calling it what it says.
Speaker 1: Now for--when you say we, are you referring to the body here at Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] or--?
Speaker 2: I can only speak for the body here at Greater Abyssinia and the Baptist [Ministers] Conference [of Cleveland and Vicinity] of whom I presidented, have presidented for the last twenty-five years.  We kind of understand where we are when we're talking about the--a errancy of the scripture.  When you talk about the fundamental authority of the word of God being the truth of God and as it is written is what we espouse.  It's not what we think or what anybody else thinks, it's what you see scripturally authenticated in that Bible truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the organization that you just mentioned, the Baptist--
Speaker 2: Baptist Ministers Conference, I've been president of that for the last twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that a local body?
Speaker 2: It's a local, city body that the--we call the Baptist Ministers Council of Cleveland and Vicinity.  We have other preachers who come from environs around here but we kind of meet once a week on Tuesday and we speak authoritative into the scriptures and we talk about it, we do sermons, we do lectures and the like and we stay steeped in the word.
Story_ID: 201059
Speaker 1: There are a number of issues and maybe you can address some of these.  If you prefer not to, that's fine too.  But a number of issues especially that have challenged this role, that black people have been able to play, black leadership especially that really drew upon this relationship sometimes a very civil relationship between the church--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and the state and the relationships weren't necessarily strained especially in the 1980s and 90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I see, if I can believe what I read in the paper, I see the relationships being strained now because of some of the issues--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that are being debated, civil unions, same sex marriages, whether marriage can be between two people of the same sex or if it's only between a man as a woman and various religious leaders speaking out publicly, being quoted in the papers, being you know for or against those issues as they come to the fore.  Do you see organizations like SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the [Baptist] Ministers Conference [of Cleveland and Vicinity] being able to weather this storm or am I overreacting?  Is this a storm?
Speaker 2: The Baptist Ministers Conference espouses as I said the biblical truth of the Bible.  The Bible defines marriage is between a man as a woman, we stand on that.  In terms of respecting the integrity and the personhood of individuals and the freedom that everybody has, then we stand with the [U.S.] Constitution, that everybody has a right to their own privacies and their own idiosyncrasies, that's there.  But when it comes down to the Bible truth, it stands strong on marriage between a man and a woman as being formulating with the idea of marriage, not same sex marriage or any of that.  I respect people for their viewpoints and however they are but we are Bible based and Bible authenticated, that that is the truth of the Bible and the word of God.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is not a divisive issue for the Baptist Ministers Council that you belong to?
Speaker 2: If, if, if--
Speaker 1: Within your body?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if, if--no.  If, if divisiveness means that you espouse something than other than what we are saying then so be it, and I'm telling you there are a lot of people who might find themselves over there.  We do not find ourselves over there and we don't argue about it.  I respect you for what you believe, how you believe, but I do not espouse that because the Bible truth is that in terms of marriage, it is between a man a woman, it is between and Adam and Eve and not Adam and Steve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  If there then is a consensus, general consensus about what marriage is, you know among the Baptist ministers that you work with locally, what are the issues that--
Speaker 2: I mentioned that--
Speaker 1: --that you're grappling with?
Speaker 2: I mentioned that when you talk about the Baptists you're talking about individual, autonomous located bodies that might be this or that.  You might have a congregation over here that's--call themselves Baptists and they espouse certain things.  That's their prerogative, that's their privilege.  But the main traditional thrust of Baptists stands on the inerrancy of the word of God: it is the truth of God and that is the way it is.  And in terms of marriage, it's between a man and a woman and that is the beginning of the world and everything that's in it, that stands very strong there.
Story_ID: 201060
Speaker 1: I'm wondering also about the great issues of our day, of our time because this is a moment in our history.  I don't know if it's necessarily a crossroads but an important moment.  And if in the 1960s the major issues were civil rights and the progressive Baptists agreed that that should be high on the agenda for Baptist leadership, what do you see as the main issues today?
Speaker 2: The main issues today is seems to me to get back to the basics of the Bible.  If we are basically Bible people, the Bible does not waiver.  It does not move right or left.  The Bible goes right down the course.  And in terms of marriage as I said, it's between a man and a woman.  Whatever people want to read into that it's, it's not the Bible way.  It is not the biblical interpretation of exegetical theology.  It is something that somebody proposes to do themselves and to make it work.  I have utmost respect for people who are divergent and different in their views but for me I am right down the Bible center, that that is what it is and anything other than that becomes something of an abomination.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But for an action agenda, for the church community because you've always been an activist leader--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  (Shaking head yes.)
Speaker 1: --as far as I can tell--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: --in searching the written record and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all the evidence that's there.  What's on the agenda for the church of the early twenty-first century?  Is it still civil rights?
Speaker 2: I think, I think we have some areas of civil rights and SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] gets into a lot of that.  We work for people that are level playing field.  We work for an absence of racism and on both sides, black or white.  We try to come right down the middle in saying that we need now is authentic people who respect the rights of other people who understand that we've got to live as [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] used to say, we, we have come to that point where we're either going to live like brothers or die like fools.  Are we going to be--we're going to tear the whole thing up.  And the world is not so much now worldly as it is a neighborhood so that things are given right around one moment here Japan, the next, Europe the next.  So we are, we're a neighborhood and we have to respect one another's right.  And I've un--I've come to understand if I respect what you believe and what you say as your right to say it, I might not agree with you but I'll die for the right for you to be able to say it.  And I think that makes for, progress for all of us when we respect individual rights and we respect one another and understand that my views might be different from yours but no less respectful than yours.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if then we have an action agenda for the early twentieth century [sic. twenty-first century], maybe human rights--
Speaker 2: Um, I think--
Speaker 1: --are at the top or near the top in the global community?
Speaker 2: I think you're right.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --respect of human beings, respecting their individuality, understanding that we all you know came over on different boats but we're in the same boat now so that's where--what needs to be.  And I think basic truths, basic values like the family, basic values like the neighborhood working together and the church working, those are the things that the twenty-first century is going to force upon us to do and if we don't do it then our society is going to suffer as a consequence.
Story_ID: 201061
Speaker 1: Looking back over these last forty-three years that you've been here in Cleveland [Ohio] at Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio], if you check the balance sheet, you know the cost and the benefits in this whole struggle, in this activist ministry that you've led, do we come out with a positive balance or--?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I wonder can you, do you, what have you?  But I heard [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan say the other day and I don't think he was too revered in the black community.  But I heard him say when it's--the last words are written, you say Ronald Reagan tried to do his best and he tried and he did his best and the--whatever follows.  I, I've taken my cue from [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] who simply says you, "You are here to serve.  You came here to do a job.  You have an assignment to do and that is to promote the general welfare of people, regardless of race, color or creed.  And you strive to the best ability, your best to do that and when you do that, then the lord will chalk up how you've come out in terms of value and measurement."  And here again the bottom line is, if I can say at the end of the day that I've helped somebody to, to be able to develop to the fullest portent of their possibility, potential (unclear), some little kid, some little child that I've shown the way, someone that I've helped, somebody that I reached back and gotten them--I had it tough coming up.  I want to make sure that the next generation or the next young people do not have to have it like that.  So you work toward that end and I suppose as I said, my modus operandi is if I can really help somebody as I pass along then my living shall not be in vain.  You do the best you can while you can but so soon the night comes and no man can work.
Story_ID: 201062
Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about Jimmie [James Pitts] Caviness and her ministry of music here [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I told you she worked for, all of the years that we've been here went home to be with God about ten years ago, ten or eleven years ago.  But she was just a valued part of all the efforts that we have made here.  Her son [Theophilus James Caviness] whom she loved is the co-pastor now and stands to take over when I'm discarded or out of here.  But he's been a great source and one of the things I like is that I'm able to see him develop and I'm here to help him.  So while I'm senior minister now, I keep on telling him, "Why don't you move up to the senior position?"  But I don't know if he's quite ready to give it twenty-four hours or 24/7 kind of dedication and activity.  The young kids don't quite understand how you work hard for something and you appreciate it because so much has been given to them.  And having received so much that they didn't work for, they are not able to quite appreciate it.  So my great desire is to ingratiate within him the blessing that the Lord has given to him to be able to see what I've striven to do here and to try to become motivated to do likewise.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Theophilus--
Speaker 2: My daughter [Theodosia Jacqueline Caviness-Tucker] is just a--she's almost a ministry in herself.  She's--she works around the clock.  She does so many good things, Theodosia Jacqueline.  She has a beautiful little daughter, Chelsea Tucker, Caviness Tucker so they have just been a blessing to me so that, that's my inspiration.  I'm here in my seventies to be able to see them grow and nurture and contribute and that has just been a blessing.
Speaker 1: So your daughter is also on the staff?  Is she is a lay minister or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, she is.  She--no, she's not a lay minister.  She does the secretarial work here and she runs the office.  She works for the Turner Construction Company and one of my co-ministers here, Reverend Hilton Smith, valued man, in Europe today but a valued man, a great man.  He and his wonderful family joined our church and so he's a part of the ministerial staff and she has become his secretary and so that has been just a blessing for me and a blessing for him.  So she works there but she also works here at the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you mentioned one granddaughter.  Do you have other grandchildren?
Speaker 2: I have another little granddaughter Theana Alana Caviness [ph.].  That's my son's little daughter and I have two other grandkids, Steven Alexander [ph.] and Theophilus James, Jr. [ph.].  So they work together here at the church.
Speaker 1: So the whole family--
Speaker 2: Whole family, right.
Speaker 1: --is involved in the ministry?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wonder though with everyone working so diligently at the church, is there ever a time to relax or--?
Speaker 2: Very, very little time to relax, right.  We find our relaxation in trying to help people and trying to make sure that the church administers to the needs of people not just for one day but we try to make it seven days a week and how we can impact their living or we can do, whether it be economically, socially, educationally, intellectually, we try to do that.  In fact when my wife died we had a Jimmy Pitts Caviness Scholarship [ph.] committed that aided so many young people. One young lady [Danielle Glaster (ph.)] that's working on her Ph.D. today came out of that tradition.  She's up in [University of] Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  She'd done a great job.  Another minister of music, or organist [Finley A. Lanier, Jr.] here's daughter's [Robyn A. Lanier], she's the minister of music over a Calvary Presbyterian [Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  She's working on her Ph.D., and she's a beautiful color tourist--organist, brilliant young woman.  So we, we have just had great success here right down the line.  I could enumerate, I could number them one by one.  But it's always been trying to promote young people and to help them because I love young people and trying to do the best we can before them.  So that has been a labor of love here at Greater Abyssinia just to help young folks develop.  And we tell them to go on, learn and learn and learn.  Don't burn, burn, burn.
Story_ID: 201063
Speaker 1: The scholarship that you mentioned is that an endowed scholarship that you can, people can contribute to, or--?
Speaker 2: Right.  When my wife [James Pitts Caviness] passed away we began the Jimmy Pitts Scholarship Fund.  And our--and we had another young woman who was a great supporter here and a great leader, Ms. Bernice Love, we have a Bernice Love Scholarship Fund.  All of these funds are to help young people.  We gave funds down at Central State University [(CSU) Wilberforce, Ohio] so we have a fund down there named Jimmy Pitts Caviness Scholarship Fund that educates young musicians and that goes on.  And I want that to be a tradition here at our church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] to reach back and get some young person and bring them up and help them.
Story_ID: 200387
Speaker 1: All right, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Theophilus] Caviness, you said at the end of the last segment that one of the ways that the [Greater Abyssinia Baptist] Church [Cleveland, Ohio] decided to memorialize your wife Jimmy [James Pitts] Caviness was to start a scholarship fund and to help aspiring students, especially music students at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] finish out their degree program.  But I also understand that there is an SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Children's Choir.  Can you tell me about your work with that group?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can tell you that but my wife helped young people.  She loved to teach.  She taught music.  In fact, don't let me forget it but one of her students, the young man who is an organist for the SCLC choir, my wife taught his mother and--Wanda [ph.]--and this young man is the organist for the SCLC choir.  But she taught her.  And she has three beautiful little kids, she raised them as a single mother, the brilliant young man plays the organ, his beautiful another daughter and the like.  But my wife taught Wanda who has these three beautiful children.  And others she taught so that we just thought the best way to perpetuate and promulgate her memory was to help young people and so we put $10,000 in a beginner fund down at Central State University.  So every year when Dr. [William Henry] Caldwell brings the group here they--we bring them here every year.  We'll be--see one young person that that scholarship has helped and he promotes that, so they come and that has been a true blessing.  And all the kids around here, Danielle Glaster [ph.] is one of our sterling young leaders that she--got the first $1,000 scholarship.  And she, she's now working on a Ph.D., I said in--at the University of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], mother and family are here.  I can just--[Finley A.] Lanier [Jr.], our organist, his daughter [Robyn N. Lanier] is beautiful. She's working ultimately toward a Ph.D.  So these are the young kids who have really been for--and that's what the scholarship fund was about, to try to promote young people, elevate their aspirations and do the kinds of things that they must needs do.  So that was that thrust.
Story_ID: 200388
Speaker 1: Now when I began trying to help the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], the first thing I thought about, how do we pull these kids together?  So music becomes an instrument that we use.  So we pulled about fifty of those young people together from various churches around the community and we selected a young woman by the name of Paula Brewer [ph.] over at St. Margaret's Presbyterian [ph.], brilliant young woman, a dedicated young woman, came in, did not ask for remuneration or anything but just dedicated herself to helping those young kids.  We just had a concert here, fantastic concert, well attended.  People lifted her up.  She's a brilliant young woman.  Her mother was here, that, that's a music family and they're just some great people here.  And the people spoke eloquently to her intangibility saying this is how we want to thank you through some tangible gift.  So that has been a blessing.  Adam [ph.], the young man who plays the organ and my wife [James Pitts Caviness] taught his mother.  And so the perpetuation of, of people who are trying--doing good things, all of that comes out of scholarship effort, comes out of SCLC kind of motivation, so that these young kids come together.  Now we are trying to send them down to Jacksonville, Florida for the National Convention of Southern Christian Leadership Conference where they meet the Coretta [Scott] Kings and the Martin [Luther] King III and the new leader is going to be a judge from Detroit [Michigan].  I can't--his name escapes me right now, Judge Mathis, [HistoryMaker] Greg [Gregory] Mathis.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He spoke to us down in Florida the other week.  But he's going to ultimately I think be the next leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, National, and spoke to us strongly, vehemently on the needs of our day.  But we're going to send fifty of the kids along with their parents and the advisors and the like to Jacksonville where they are impacted by these great leaders that they never would have met.  I, I recall, I was twenty-five years old almost before I got out of Texas and was not able to meet these kind of--we're exposing these kids to celebrities, exposing them to dedicated contributors to African American culture.  We sent them to Memphis, Tennessee last year.  We sent three buses down there.  And we're going to send some other buses here.  We've got massive support here from, from corporations, banks and what have you, foundations and the like who've helped us.  So we're just trying to introduce these young kids to reality and the kinds of things that they need to go in order to for them to develop.
Story_ID: 200389
Speaker 1: So is this group [Southern Christian Leadership Conference Children's Choir] then generating scholarship dollars for the fund that you've established or are they self-supporting?
Speaker 2: No, the fund that we have for our church [Greater Abyssinia Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio] is a church thing that many people have contributed to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] thing is an ongoing thing that we, we're not only promoting these here but we're, we're working with them, we're sending them here, we're exposing them and all like that.  That's done by the generous donations of great properties of people around the City of Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all the (unclear) and I told you was instrumental in making sure--I think the last function we had went up to Intercontinental Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio] and out of that thing we raised about $30,000.00 which was massive for us, a little organization like us, that we put into the lives of these young people, trying to expose them, sending them up to Washington, D.C. at intervals, exposing them to certain things that they would never get individually that they get collectively and with oneness.
Story_ID: 200390
Speaker 1: Well [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Theophilus] Caviness, we've talked about a lot of things for over two hours now.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: And--but we didn't talk about retirement.  You seem to be enjoying your work and I don't see you walking away from it.
Speaker 2: I tell my people you know obviously I'm up there but I always tell them I'm fifty-nine years old and holding.  And when I hit sixty, like my--when--the day that I wake up and my age tells on me, that's when I'll get out of here.  But as long as it doesn't tell on me, I don't tell on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that day, when it tells, what would you hope that your legacy would be to the next generation?
Speaker 2: My legacy would be, do the best you can while you can because so soon the night comes and you can't do anything.
Story_ID: 200391
Speaker 1: This picture here is a picture of my darling wife [James Pitts Caviness] that's around there in the right-hand corner, myself and the first African American mayor of a major metropolitan city [Cleveland, Ohio] in the person of Mayor Carl Burton Stokes who was this city's first African American mayor.
Story_ID: 200392
Speaker 1: This is my wife [James Pitts Caviness] of forty-two years.  We got married down in Big Springs, Texas.  She was a contralto and she did albums and this is one of her albums entitled 'Our First Lady in Selected Hymns and Songs,' Jimmy Pitts Caviness, a graduate of Westminster Choir College [later Westminster Choir College of Rider University, Princeton, New Jersey], John Finley Williamson was her teacher and she just thrilled our hearts and she was the apple of our family's eye and she was my love of life.  You ready?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You'll see me there with my son [Theophilus James Caviness] and my daughter [Theodosia Jacqueline Caviness Tucker] and my grandkids.  To the right of, to the left of my son is his beautiful wife, Ms. Stefana Childs Caviness and underneath her is Steven Alexander Caviness [ph.], and little Theana Caviness [ph.] that was just a babe at this time.  She's about nine years old now.  Then Chelsea [Tucker] right to the right of her which is my left, Chelsea Caviness Tucker, that's the daughter of the young lady who is to the left of my--no, the right of my son.  Up at the top is Jacqueline Theodosia [ph.], that's her daughter and Steven [Alexander (ph.)] over here the little big fellow to the--my son's right and Jacqueline's right would be Theophilus James [Caviness], Jr. [ph.], so that that's the family.  That's the family as it's constituted today.  This young man is Senator Bob Dole.  You'll remember he ran for president once and I had did the invocation with him.  He invited me to do that.  He was a dear friend, a strong leader in the Senate of the United States of America, did a great number of wonderful things.  As a Republican he forged ahead with civil rights activity and was always on the right side of every question when related to people's rights and the rights of all mankind.  So he's a great man.  He's married to a senator now, his wife, but Bob Dole was a friend.  I knew him through George Voinovich and we forged a kind of a friendship and I think he's a fantastic man.  All right, this is [President] George W. Bush's [George Walker Bush] great father, [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush.  He was the, I think the 41st President of the United States and just a marvelous person.  To know those Bushes is just a great blessing.  And he sent me this photo after I shook his hand out at the airport and I met him twice.  He came in on Air Force One and he's just been a friend.  His son, George W. Bush is in the White House [Washington, D.C.] today but this is his father and his famous mother [Barbara Bush] and family, they're just some good people.  They all were affable people, they're kind, they are respectful and they treat everybody right and so I just loved him as a leader.  John [J.] Gilligan is--was the Governor of the State of Ohio, a democrat who ran and, and won and he became a friend that I associated with because I was here in Cleveland [Ohio] and so I just loved him.  He was a very brilliant man and we kind of got along together and, and so I lifted him up.  This is [U.S.] Senator Vice President Hubert Humphrey, a man whom I dearly loved.  That's at Lane Metropolitan CME Church, Christian Methodist [Episcopal] Church [Cleveland, Ohio] one night when he came here when he was running for president.  And I would just love this man.  He was a man who espoused human rights, civil rights and was always on the right side of every question in terms of fairness for all people.  He was a Minnesotan Democrat and all of us just loved him.  And he's--I'm sitting on the platform there. He's getting his speech together cause he's going to speak right after I introduced him.
Speaker 2: Was that here at Greater Abyssinia [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 1: That was here at Lane Metropolitan Church.
Speaker 2: Oh that's right, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, Lane Metropolitan CME Church over on 40th [Street] and Carnegie [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio].  Right off of 40th--it's really on Cedar [Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio].  But that night was a glorious night, the place was packed and I had the pleasure of introducing him.  I think I mastered the ceremonies.  Arnold Payton [ph.] is the man who basically introduced him.  And had this man been president of course all of our destinies would have been different.  I, I supported him and did everything I could to get him elected and he only lost by a few million votes.  But he was a fantastic human being, always for human rights, doing the right thing and just a great person.  All right, as I've told you before, so much of what I do is not democrat or republican but republic--"republicrat" because I find good people in all parties.  There are some good people in the Republican Party.  There are some good people in the Democrat Party so that this is a master leader [George Voinovich], I mean a tactician.  He's a marvelous human being.  He's a loving, warm individual and I worked for him for twenty years as his executive assistant and as his head of civil rights [Ohio Civil Rights Commission].  And I told you he called me the Holy Spirit because he always found me trying to do the right thing and promoting the right interest.  This man has done more for Head Start than probably any other governor in the history of this state [Ohio] and the young lady who is at the--right immediately above him runs the daycare center, Ministerial Daycare Association here in the City of Cleveland [Ohio].  George Voinovich as governor contributed more millions of dollars to young folks getting a head start than any other governor.  He was a--he, he started off as auditor, county commissioner, became mayor, excellent family.  His beautiful wife Janet [Voinovich] and I sat together the other Saturday night at the Fairfax Development Corporation dinner, we exchanged pleasantries.  I've been to their home in Columbus [Ohio], went to the Governor's Mansion.  I've been to their home here.  We've on, been on the seas together.  He's just a marvelous human being, always on the right side of every question of fairness, and a man of great integrity, character, devotion to his family, devotion to his country.  He's a [U.S.] Senator now, the junior senator here in the State of Ohio and has done just a massive job.  He's espousing things--he's helped the African American community in so many ways.  He's began fair housing in this city, police review board that kept us from having some of the catastrophic kind of incidents that transpired around the country, all because this man here was dedicated to human kind and to treating people right of every description, race, creed or color.  Okay, this is Mayor Michael R. White, the--he was the mayor of this, the longest standing mayor, black or white, of this city.  He reigned for 12 years, a brilliant leader, great leader, a provocative, ingenious kind of person who led this town for twelve years and did such a great job.  I think this is one of--a banquet occasion where he and I stood together and took pictures.  But he appointed me to the Sewer Board of the District and but for going to Columbus, I would have just stayed there about five years.  But obviously our last SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Third Annual Banquet, he was an eloquent speaker, spoke brilliantly, provocatively and just became an inspiration for mending people, bringing them together on that historic night.  And so he's just been a blessing to the City of Cleveland and a blessing to the environs of this particular community.
Story_ID: 200393
Speaker 1: This is the vivacious, beautiful and talented Mrs. [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.  Coretta Scott King is just a fantastic woman, beautiful singer, eloquent singer, devoted leader.  She's led African Americans as our First Lady through some tenuous times.  I had an opportunity to be with her and we took this picture together.  And I told you some--let's see, fifty years or more ago she was the--she came to East St. Louis, Illinois and sang for our movement there, SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] movement and our efforts at trying to integrate the lunch counters down on Collinsville Avenue in East St. Louis, Illinois, a very brilliant woman, a very beautiful woman, a very dedicated woman and a woman who has conducted herself in the highest manner possible as his widow and as a woman who had a led her family.  Her young son Martin Luther King III was here Sunday before last and spoke to us in a very dynamic way.  He was here for the Southern Convention.  We had the Southern Christian Leadership Convention, National Convention here a couple of years ago.  He was here in our church [Greater Abyssiania Baptist Church] that night and so we have just had a long love affair with the Kings.  I've always lifted them up and this young lady is probably the personification of all that is good, virtuous and great for the Kings as well as for each and every one of us.  Okay, this is the thirty-ninth President of the United States and the person of President Jimmy [James Earl] Carter.  He and Rosalind Carter came here many times and he's just the epitome of graciousness, a warm hearted man who had a great relationship with the Reverend Dr. Otis Moss [Jr.] here.  And I had an opportunity to be with him at Olivet [Institutional Baptist] Church [Cleveland, Ohio].  I think it--this was the time that [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.] was shot down in Indiana.  And Reverend Moss asked me to preside over the festivities over at Olivet Church and Jimmy Carter was there and it was a marvelous thing.  Bert Porter [ph.] to, to, to--in the back of me was the Democratic leader, Leo Jackson was a councilman here right to the left of Jimmy Carter and African American leader here Mr. Crosby [ph.], a furniture person who has a furniture store [Crosby Furniture Co., Inc., Cleveland, Ohio], that's Mr. Crosby.  He has an illustrious history here but to his right, immediate right is Councilman Leo Jackson who was a strong leader here.  He was a Judge, he was a councilman and he did so many good things.  He's passed away but that's a very historic picture with the 39th President in the center and myself right to his right.  At the top left is my beautiful wife [James Pitts Caviness].  I--love at first sight is--that's the first picture I saw of her.  She was a very beautiful woman.  She was a contralto, soloist and had a deep rich voice was in a beautiful woman.  And our years were just great, much too short, forty-two.  But the next picture underneath her is when we got married down in Big Spring, Texas and right when she gave me the cake right to the left of that and up top where we posed for pictures.  That's--we always said was the family togetherness and I always said it was love at first sight and went on and went on and on.  It will, never shall cease.  Okay, this fellow here, it is I, what's left of me when I first came to this church.  And to the right of that is the church as it was constituted then.  Since then we have added additional--as you see there in the rear and we've also gone north toward the lake with another million dollar facility so that--this is what we have tried to do here.  Okay, here I am to the left of the person in the center who is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Urban League of the City of Cleveland.  The chairman of the board to his immediate right is the Reverend Dr. Hilton O. Smith who is the co-pastor of ours here at Greater Abyssinia Church and the Vice President of Turner Construction working all over the world.  Brother Hilton right now is in France and is on his way to Italy.  And that was at the Urban League dinner about a couple of weeks ago.  Myron Robinson, the CEO, Hilton Smith the Chairman of the Board and myself to Myron Robinson's immediate left and to my right.
