Story_ID: 636038
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Theaoseus Clayton [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.].  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Eva McPherson Clayton [HistoryMaker Eva M. Clayton], spelled E-V-A, M-C capital P-H-E-R-S-O-N, Clayton, C-L-A-Y-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, mam, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September the 16th, 1934, Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm retired.  I'm a former member of [U.S.] Congress and a former assistant director general for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.  I've organized myself now as Eva Clayton Associates, International [Littleton, North Carolina].  I do some consulting work for part time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: February the 22nd, 2012.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in our office, our library, in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 636039
Speaker 1: We ask some warm up questions and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have favorite foods: corn, cabbages, okra and tomato, the vegetables, chicken, baked as well as fried, fish baked as well as fried.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: As I think about it, I think purple would probably be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The mountains or the sea coast.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That too shall come to pass.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  I guess those are two I can remember, yeah.
Story_ID: 636040
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Josephine Amelia Martin McPherson [Josephine Martin McPherson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, well, Josephine Amelia Martin is her maiden name.  And if you delete that it becomes Josephine Amelia McPherson as a married person.
Speaker 1: And, how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Josephine, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, Amelia, A-M-E-L-I-A, and her maiden name was Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.  And our family name was McPherson.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I knew it was September 11th, I was always a little confused about the date of birth and not sure.  She died in 1980 and she was seventy-eight or seventy-nine so you can kind of figure out the date.
Speaker 1: Nineteen o-two [1902], I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe or 1903 something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in a place called Blackshear, Georgia out from Brunswick.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, Blackshear, Georgia.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side, how far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I must confess I'm a little vague.  I know my grandmother was Eva Martin and my grandmother was unmarried, so I don't know the father, my grandfather on this side.  I know that my grandmother's parents, the father was a minister, and I gather the mother was a domestic or just worked at home at that time.  And there were several children I know that.  I'm told that my mother's father's father came from Africa but I'm not sure of that.  But beyond that I don't know the members of my mother's family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the tradition, that your, your great-great-grandfather came from Africa?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I'm told that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I haven't done the research but that someone who did shared that with me.  And, as far as I know they came from West Africa.  I need to confirm that, but--.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's interesting.  A lot of people--you'd be surprised at the people that never mention an African ancestor in these 'cause they've never--they don't really have that--that's not passed down even though we all know that we have African ancestors.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, I have to thank another member of my family who did research and shared it with me.  I didn't do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, what did the family do in Blackshear?  Did they, they farm?  Was this--or what?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was a domestic worker and, and, was very poor.  And washed and ironed for people.  My mother's--my grandmother's parents, as I understand it, were, he was, you know, a itinerate preacher and I gather, you know, went from one church to another in that area.  And the story is, when my mother--my grandmother became pregnant with my mother, they kind of moved out from the country home and moved to Brunswick, Georgia.  So, although my mother was born in Blackshear, she, she was reared in a place called Brunswick, Georgia.  And her mother was very attentive to her and wanted to make sure she went further in school than she did.  And she finished what they call a normal high school [Selden Normal and Industrial Institute, Brunswick, Georgia], which was a private school 'cause at that time the public school system was not educating blacks through high school.  You, you would go to tenth grade and, and that would be the end.  So, the normal school was a private school and those who could afford or someone paid their way went on to normal school and that's how my mother was able to finish that.  Yeah, my mother--my grandmother washed and ironed to make sure that her child had opportunity.
Story_ID: 636041
Speaker 1: So your mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] finished, finished high school [Selden Normal and Industrial Institute] in Brunswick [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I can't think of it, I really can't.  I should have, knowing I was going to have this interview, I should have asked somebody what that was but I can't think of the school.  I don't know if it was a Presbyterian school or a Methodist school but it was, it was a school that was, you know, there for blacks who could afford it, you know.  And, and my mother--my grandmother [Eva Martin] made the sacrifice to try and make sure that my, my mother had an--and also from that school they could go on and take the exam and become a teacher.  And that's what, my mother was a teacher for about five or six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she never finished college then, but the school allowed her to qualify for the exam.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know how parents want to make it harder--they want you to know that they came up a little harder than you had to come up.  And, so, the stories she ha- that I remember her sharing with me was how they had to work, you know, and she had to help her, her mother prepare clothes for people to pick up.  And stories of actually having to move to different places, you know.  Again, that's how I know, knew my grandmother and mother were poor is the fact that she had to move, you know, to places they could afford and, and how that was instructive to her that she would own property, because her mother never owned anything, you know, owned a home.  So, as a consequence, my mother started out working, one of the first achievements she wanted was to buy a home for her mother.  So, by the time my mother married she had at least three homes because she was determined as an adult not to be as impoverished as she was as a, as a child growing up.  So, those stories I surely remember 'cause she told it to us, you know.  And it, it was instructive to me is that it showed me how blessed I was as compared to my mother, but it was also instructive that she wanted to do better and for her mother than she grew up.  So, it, it was a very meaningful sharing that she had with me.
Story_ID: 636042
Speaker 1: Let me ask about your father's side of the family.  Can you give me his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Thomas McPherson, Sr. T-H-O-M-A-S, M-C-P-H-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Again, I don't know his exact birth either.  I do know his birthday was February the 11th, and don't know,
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Josephine Martin McPherson]?
Speaker 2: Yes, about twelve years older.
Speaker 1: Okay, twelve years older.  Okay, so that put him back in eighteen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He died in, he died in 1955 so, and I think he was sixty-four then.  I'm not sure--or sixty-five.  So, I'm, you know, wasn't exactly sure.  Parents didn't share their birthdays exact, you know, and I never looked at his certificate.  I should have, but they didn't share the exact birth year with me and I guess I didn't--maybe sure I didn't inquire that much either, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was born in the late 1880s I guess.
Speaker 2: Might have been.
Speaker 1: So, now, what do you know about--oh, where was he born?  I'm sorry I didn't ask you where.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  The little town, in Savannah, but it's not Savannah.  It's a little town in South Carolina that's near Savannah and I'm not sure, I'm not sure.  I know he was born in Savannah, I mean, South Carolina.  As an adult, he's mostly in Savannah.
Speaker 1: Okay, near Savannah but it's in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  What were they doing?
Speaker 2: Again, my father came from many brothers and sisters and I don't begin to know them all.  But his father was a minister and a farmer.  I knew they grew up on a farm.  He had one brother that was a barber, you know.  Three of them came to Savannah, Georgia and the story is that my father said he ran away from home 'cause the work was so hard as a farmer.  Now, if all that's true, we, but I'm sure he came to Savannah as an opportunity to do better than they were doing.  And, apparently, again, they were impoverished farmers.  I don't know if they were sharecroppers or not but they were not doing that well.  And my father, his brother came to Savannah.  And my brother, my father says that he and his brother had various jobs.  The story of my father is that he went from one job to another until he found what he could do well.  And my father never finished high school growing up.  In fact, he got a GED [General Educational Development] after he became an adult, but he tells us that he worked as a, an iceman where you delivered ice, he worked as a construction helper, and he finally got a job as a insurance agent.  My father had a lot of personality so he could sell things.  And he worked as an insurance agent and he and some other fellow insurance men and other business people organized a department store.  So, my daddy was a--really an entrepreneur, he tried several things.
Speaker 1: Now, what insurance company did he work for?
Speaker 2: He worked with the Guaranty Life Insurance [Guaranty Life Insurance Company] and did that almost forty-two years.
Speaker 1: Now is this a bla- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now again, in Savannah, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: That was the home office for it.  It, it later combined with the insurance company or merged with the insurance company called the Pilgrim Life [Pilgrim Health and Life Insurance Company] and that was out of Augusta, Georgia.  Several of the black companies merged into companies.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I was gonna ask you if it was a black--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --insurance company.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, back then it had to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, I think like North Carolina and Atlanta [Georgia] are the places that like pioneered these black insurance companies, I believe.
Speaker 2: Well, Atlanta for sure.  And I think North Carolina certainly and North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina] is certainly a pioneer and still is a leader.  Eventually, the Guaranty went to the Pilgrim and the Pilgrim went to Atlanta Life [Atlanta Life insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia] so all kind, of the insurance companies in Georgia, Atlanta Life was the strongest.  Now, but when my father worked it was the Guaranty Life Insurance.  They merged after he died in terms of the Atlanta Life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, this is now, so, is any--do you know much about his ancestors prior to, you know, his grandfather or before his grandfather, or any-?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: And no stories passed down, or, about it?
Speaker 2: If so, I've forgotten them (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I must confess.
Story_ID: 636043
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Josephine Martin McPherson and Thomas McPherson, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother used to teach school and in the summer--my mother was always a very industrious person.  My mother taught school in the winter and she usually went away in the summer to work.  And that's usually at some resort in the North.  In fact, in fact, while my mother was in the North attending she also went and took some courses at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They used to have summer courses.  And one summer she didn't do that, she decided to work in an insurance office in Brunswick [Georgia] instead of going away to work in a--as a waitress or work in a resort area. My (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, those, those kinds--now I've heard that story a number of times.
Speaker 2: Have you?  Okay.
Speaker 1: About people that would do that and there was a lot of money to be made up in the North in the summer, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, in fact, my mother shared with me, she made more money in the summer than she made teaching.  Yeah, no doubt about that.  That's why they went there, because you could make money in that area.  Absolutely.  Well, one summer she didn't do that.  She decided to work as a secretary in the, the local insurance office.  And it was the insurance office that my father had jurisdiction over.  He, he became what they call a agency director for the Guaranty Life Insurance [Guaranty Life Insurance Company].  So, Savannah [Georgia], Brunswick [Georgia], and Augusta [Georgia] were part of that.  And that's how they met. So--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, that's when they met and fell in love and got married and--
Speaker 2: Had a family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now about what year was it when they met do you think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what year was that?  Well, I was born in 1934 so I would guess--she told me it was two years before she had me so I guess in 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 636044
Speaker 1: When you think about your mother and your father's personalities and their mannerisms, their looks, their talents, their hobbies, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably a little bit from both.  I think I take after my mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] in terms of sheer determination and a little bit of her work.  She was just strong in working.  My father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] was a good people's person. I think I got a little bit of that talent but, you know.  I have the color of my father and (unclear) the features of my mother I think, you know.  We tease each other, my brother [Thomas McPherson, Jr.] and I, say we both have big heads like our father but anyhow he--and my father and mother were well loved but I think people gravitated more to my father, 'cause my mother was kind of, you know, she, she was a little opinionated.  You would know where she was coming from, she didn't, she didn't mince many words but she was really an achiever.  She did, you know, in her later life she became a director of an orphanage or what we call a children home really.  And how she could, you know, inspire those kids to do better or how she would defend those kids against other people was inspiring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know you always want to say you take after both of them and that's--and I think and that's true in my case.  I took a little bit after both of them, um-hm.
Story_ID: 636045
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one brother [Thomas McPherson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: One brother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right so, that's--
Speaker 2: There was a half brother [James A. McPherson, Sr.] I had because my father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] had been married before, didn't get to know him that well, but he--I'm told that I was the pet of his eye, you know, that--.  But I have one brother.  He died, my half brother died many, many, many years ago--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) over fifty years ago.
Story_ID: 636046
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory?  As old as I am, I'm not sure I have a earliest childhood memory.  Let me see can I remember my childhood is one thing.  But, I have a lot of good memories being a child, you know, playing.   I remember, you know, playing, playing what they call hopscotch in the, you know, (unclear) I remember that.  I remember riding and swinging in the tree with a tire, can remember those kind of things.  I remember playing hide and go seek.  And I also remember as a, as a young, you know, more of a junior high school kid the impression that my next door neighbor and good friend, she contracted polio and remember that having an impact that, you know I, I, I saw myself becoming a doctor, you know, and, and, and helping people.  Of course, I never became a doctor but I do think the whole idea of motivation of wanting to be a doctor the same motivation that becoming--not just becoming a congressperson but also becoming someone who helped other people.
Speaker 1: Okay, let me--now, we always ask this question.  Can you describe--now, you grew up in
Speaker 2: Augusta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Augusta, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, born in Savannah [Georgia] and grew up in Augusta.
Speaker 1: Okay, you grew up in Augusta.  Can you describe where you lived and--now, was it on a certain part of town that they called your neighborhood?  Did it have a name or anything?
Speaker 2: Not really, but it was, it was on the outskirts of town.  We didn't call it suburbs, okay, but it was very near the county line.  The community I lived in earlier before we moved, much earlier, had become--moved from white to black and the--it was basically a black community and those who lived there, who were white, either had a commercial interest, you know, in staying there, and I guess it was considered to be a, a working class community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, you know, we never thought of ourselves as, as well off but in, in the schemes of things we were in the working class, middle class.  Most people had parents had some jobs or worked the railroad company or something.  Both my mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] and father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] worked.  Most of, most I remember, although my mother taught school early in her life, she was a seamstress most of her life.  And then her later life she became a, a director of this children home.  My father, all my life was in the insurance business--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and very active as, as a community leader and, and a leader in his church.
Story_ID: 636047
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] and father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] attend the same church?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Bethel A.M.E. Methodist [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Augusta, Georgia], called Bethel A.M.E. Episcopal Church; African Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal] is what A.M.E. stands for.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bethel A.M.E. Church.  And, let's see, so was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went every Sunday, sometimes you go midday if they have a youth program.  We had the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] out of my church.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask what organizations, so you're telling me.  Okay, so that's good.  So, you, were you a Girl Scout?
Speaker 2: I was a Girl Scout.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Member of the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, was your father in any of the civil rights organizations?
Speaker 2: Well, he was active in what they would call civic organization.  I don't know if you would call it civil rights, he was a Mason.  He was--I've forgotten the other group what it was called.  He never went to the [U.S.] military but he was in a group that supported the military.  My mother, again, wouldn't be called civil rights, but she was active in the--what we call the Parent Teacher Association.
Speaker 1: PTA, um-hm.
Speaker 2: She was president of that. She petitioned the school board to start the first what they call lunchroom, but really lunchroom was just a--nothing like we have lunchrooms now but just a place to serve milk and sandwiches and fruit.  And when we went to elementary school, they didn't have that.  And she kind of organized the PTA to do that, so, I don't know if she would have called it civil rights but she certainly was a reformer.
Story_ID: 636048
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hm, sights and smells, and sounds.  Well, since we lived on the outskirts of town we al- I always remember the, the sounds of cars and trucks and things going by.  You know, we were very close--not that far from the first area where the military came by, so we remember that.
Speaker 1: Does Augusta [Georgia] have a major base, I mean, a military fort?
Speaker 2: Fort Gordon.
Speaker 1: Fort Gordon, Gordon.
Speaker 2: It's moved out, yeah, Fort Gordon.  Now, Fort Gordon has moved out considerably but early, early on you had, not too far from our house the, what they call a county prison and next over there was Fort Gordon, so there were a lot of transportation going back and forth.  I remember the buses, you know, going.  You know, remember, you know, riding segregated buses, you know, back and forth to town.  I'm trying to think of a smell.  I can't recall any unique smell.  I, I remember near our church was a--but not too far from our house but near a church that sometime we went to was a what we call Castleberry's Food [Castleberry's Food Company], and we walked and sh- and my next door neighbor went to that church and we walked going that way you would smell the food cooking in our community and it was enticing kind of like a barbeque.  You remember the, the smell of them preparing these canned foods and things.  Then further near my own church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Augusta, Georgia] was a bakery.  I remember smelling bread; that the Colonial bread company [Colonial Baking Company] was there.  I haven't been asked that question in so many years I'm trying to think of things that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Colonial bread, now that's a big--
Speaker 2: Bakery.
Speaker 1: --bakery, yeah, they supply bread all over the South, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All over, uh-huh.  They had one of their branches on 15th Street further up.  Trying to think, that's about all I can recall now, yeah.  I'm good, it's good I can recall that be honest with you.  I mean nobody's asked me in years and years.
Story_ID: 636049
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: My elementary school was called Steed Street [Steed Street School, Augusta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: S-T-E-E-D.
Speaker 1: Oh, Steed Street.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, elementary school.
Speaker 1: Was it on Steed Street?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Nothing imaginary about that, it was, Steed Street elementary school was on Steed Street, yeah.  Prior to that we came to Augusta [Georgia] on my, my first year, but prior to that I had gone to what they call kindergarten or something in Savannah [Georgia], you know, it was a--the local community or the church had a little kindergarten.  But my first formal school was Steed Street.
Story_ID: 636050
Speaker 1: Steed Street elementary school [Steed Street School, Augusta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, well, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Generally, yes, uh-huh.  I did, I did pretty well in school.  Yeah, wasn't the head of my class or anything but I liked school, you know, I, and my mother insisted [Josephine Martin McPherson] that we study but I also liked school because, you know, there was some reward for our studying in that area.
Speaker 1: Was there any particular subject matter that you gravitated towards?
Speaker 2: Early on?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can't recall.  I, I can tell you one I didn't think I was very good at was spelling.  I was better at history, better at math, and better at science.  And so, when I got in high school, I--in the high school I attended I started at the same high school all through time but the names changed.  And when I first started it was called Haines Institute [Haines Normal and Industrial Institute]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is no longer in existence, and my senior year it was changed for the name of a founder of Haines Institute.  And I was in classes normal for that time but also was in science clubs and biology clubs.  I was on the honor roll, I was active, you know, I, I had decided early that I wanted to be a doctor so, I was active in chemistry and biology and those kinds of things.  The high school name change was a matter of the Presbyterian church donating the facilities and the high school to the public.  And they in turn named the high school after the founder was who was Lucy Laney.  I think the school may still exist. Now she--
Speaker 1: Lucy Lane?
Speaker 2: Lucy C. Laney, Lucy Craft Laney (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Laney, oh, okay, Lucy Craft, oh yeah, Lucy C.--
Speaker 2: She was the founder of Haines Institute.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Lucy Craft Laney, yeah, I've heard her name, um-hm, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a famous name in this area.  The--I'm sure the, the school facilities changed but they still have a school called Lucy Craft Laney high or junior high I'm not sure what [Lucy Craft Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia].  But, so, you know, high school was, you know, pretty average or above average for me.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, was there a middle school at all?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have middle schools when I was going.
Speaker 1: So, so, Steed Street went to--
Speaker 2: To Haines Institute, I went--Steed Street went to seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I then went to eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh.
Speaker 1: Okay, eight through twelve?
Speaker 2: Eight through twelve.
Speaker 1: At Lucy Laney?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay.  So, you're involved with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess, whatever four years it was, you know, I may be wrong.
Story_ID: 636051
Speaker 1: Were there any doctors in your community [Augusta, Georgia] that you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that you could model yourself after?
Speaker 2: Well, doctors I knew and doctors I liked, and doctors who would encourage me.  Dr. Smith [ph.] was my doctor who lived in my community and actually was a friend of my parents [Josephine Martin McPherson and Thomas McPherson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Interesting, I wanted to model myself, and I was very impressed by Dr. Smith and he was very supportive, but I actually wanted to model myself after, 'cause I wanted to be a doctor missionary, so the model I selected was Albert Schweitzer in Africa.  He was both--now, that shows you either how much I thought of myself or either he was a philosopher.  You probably know that.  He was a doctor; he was a musician.
Speaker 1: He was world renowned.
Speaker 2: World renowned.  Now, I don't know why I thought I could do that but anyhow that's, that was a model I had.
Speaker 1: And he served in
Speaker 2: I forgot what part of Africa.
Speaker 1: I believe it was Congo [sic. Gabon].
Speaker 2: Was it Congo?
Speaker 1: Yeah, believe it was Congo and so he, he was someone who was well known through newsreels and--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's how I knew him.
Speaker 1: --newspaper, radio.
Speaker 2: That's how, 'cause I never met him.  It was because I heard him over the radio, because I read about him and there was a book I believe that I read, from Africa, but anyhow there was a book I read that he had supposedly written so that was my model.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was somebody that devoted their life to do good.  They--from what I remember, myself, was that he was almost like--he was revered like Mother Teresa or someone (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's exactly right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: During, during today's--well, you know, she's passed away for some years now, but had that kind of reputation, you know.  So, okay, so, did you have a--did your church kind of support that kind of thinking too, that Albert Schweitzer--'cause I know the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church had some missions in Africa.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Africa.  I can't remember me ever sharing with my church as a whole that Albert Schweitzer was my model.  But I did share with my church I wanted to be a doctor missionary.  And my church would offer support and I went to bible camps.  Then they used to have bible camps for the students in the summer.  I never went to a mission they had in Africa, but, you know, I was made aware of it that, that we had those kind of programs.  And, and actually my father wanted me to go to our church school, you know, kids always have an independent view of something, you know, 'cause my father was, at that time, a trustee of Morris Brown, but--
Speaker 1: Oh, your father was a trustee of Morris Brown?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  He was--well let me put it like that way, what they call is advisory board of Morris Brown.  He was on the higher education committee of the A.M.E. church, and the A.M.E. church had bishops who were appointed from each of their districts.  And he was appointed by either Bishop Fountain [William A. Fountain] or whoever the bishop was as to be on the advisory committee of Morris Brown College in Atlanta, Georgia.  And, so he wanted his kids to go to Morris Brown College.  My brother [Thomas McPherson, Jr.] did go; he, he went to Morris Brown.
Story_ID: 636052
Speaker 1: When you were in high school and, well, even in grade school, I don't think we've talked about this, who were your role models in high school and, amongst the teachers?  Was there any teacher that was a mentor to you or any group of teachers?
Speaker 2: There were some in high school and, and in elementary school [Steed Street School, Augusta, Georgia].  We had, had a teacher who was a mentor and a friend even after I became an adult.  Miss Ruth Crawford [Ruth B. Crawford] taught me fifth grade and was very supportive of me as a--just as a kid growing up.  There was a--trying to think of someone else--in high school [Haines Normal and Industrial Institute; Lucy Craft Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia], there was Revered Graves [ph.], there was Mr. Dupree [ph.], there was a Miss Graham [ph.] who taught literature.  There was a Mr. Tuck [ph.] who taught me math.  Oh, you're taxing my brains trying to think of all these people after all these years, but they do come to mind.  They were very, very supportive and encouraging.
Speaker 1: Who was the principal of your high school?
Speaker 2: Our Reverend McGrea [ph.], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the principal of the high school.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: I think it's M-C-G-R-E-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, Reverend McGrea.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, G-R-E-A-G, I believe.  McGreag [ph.], I think that's how you spell it.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, now when you were a senior, now, you say you were on the honor roll and you were, you know, you were involved in a lot of clubs and activities.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have a counselor in terms of high sch- college or someone that advised you?
Speaker 2: No, but Mr. Dupree who I was telling you was helpful to me was in biology and he had graduated from Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  He did tell me about the school.  Obviously, my father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] had people from Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] to talk to me and we had a, you know, committee in our church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Augusta, Georgia] who was encouraging kids to (unclear) about going to college.  I don't remember a counselor as counselor's sake. I think some teachers took it upon themselves to interact with me about going to college.  And I don't think it ever was, they doubted that I was going to college, I mean, it was just kind of, you know, they--I had expressed the desire to do something that required me to go to college.  And they knew my parents were very supportive of me going to college, but there were teachers individually who tried to encourage me whether they were counselors or not.
Story_ID: 636053
Speaker 1: How many schools did you apply to?  Was it--?
Speaker 2: I think I applied to, to three, I think, now.  I, I'm--you tax me.  I think I had to apply at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I applied to Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University] and applied to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I might have applied to one other one, I'm not sure.  I might have, I might have applied to Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], I'm not sure.  Fisk cost too much and, and Johnson C. Smith also offered me a, a sort of scholarship.  And so did Morris Brown but Johnson C. Smith offered me a nice scholarship, so I went to Johnson C. Smith.  All of them were good schools, I'm not suggesting any of them were not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a scholarship to Johnson C. Smith.  And what was your intended major?
Speaker 2: Biology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's seen as a pre-med track.
Speaker 2: That's what I thought, um-hm.  I think it was--it ended up being biology and general science but, you know, I didn't know about general science when I was in high school [Haines Normal and Industrial Institute; Lucy Craft Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia].  I did know about biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is Johnson C. Smith?
Speaker 2: Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Charlotte, okay.  All right, how did you like Johnson C. Smith?
Speaker 2: I loved it. That's where I met my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I loved it for a number of reasons; it was a good school, it was very supportive of, of the students.  It, you know, it's kind of where I grew up and kind of developed confidence in myself as well as meeting you know, my husband.
Story_ID: 636054
Speaker 1: So did you meet him right away?  Did you meet your husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Actually, I met him as I was a freshman--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was a senior.  So, I, you know, he was a big timer. I was a little one, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, what happened now?  Of course, he's sitting here watching you so what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, he went into the [U.S.] military.  He got recruited out of his senior year [at Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  He hadn't quite finished and went to the military, and came back and we kind of renewed our, our friendship and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, the year you graduated from high school [Lucy Craft Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia] was--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [sic. 1951].
Story_ID: 636055
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] that you remember that helped?
Speaker 2: Miss Buck [Annye C. Buck].  Who else?  Person by the name of Mrs. Malone [L.S. Malone] who wasn't a teacher but, worked in the bookstore, who got to be a lifelong friend and a counselor and advised me.  Miss Parker [ph.], Mr. Dupree [ph.], these are science--
Speaker 1: So, there was a Dupree at--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it a relative of Mr. Dupree [ph.]?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, no relationship, didn't even look alike.  No, not at all.  Mr. Dupree and, and at Johnson C. Smith, Mr., the name's coming, taught me chemistry.  Gave me a hard way to go, I can't think of his name but he, he believed in me.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: You wanna help me out?  Okay.  But, I had a number of teachers there who, who were very, very helpful.  I told you I did well in high school [Haines Normal and Industrial Institute; Lucy Craft Laney High School, Augusta, Georgia] and so I took tests and got placed in advanced courses, probably the biggest mistake in my life to take those advanced courses.  And, pretty soon I knew as I was competing kind of nationwide that I wasn't as smart as I thought I was.  And, you know, I got placed, rather than college math, into calculus and when I got to calculus after three weeks I knew I needed--you know, when they used to have something called drop cards, you could drop within (unclear) so I immediately talked to my teacher and said, you know, I needed to take college math.  And did take college math, and then I took advanced algebra and did pretty good.  But, you know, I had the awakening of my life to know I wasn't as smart as my record suggested or I thought I was, particularly, when I came up to other students.  So, my freshman year was kind of a rude awakening how I had to kind of struggle, you know, for mine.  When we went on to take zoology--in fact, I got placed in all of the advanced courses because of my tests and my grades from (unclear).  So, I, you know, the first year was kind of an awakening, the determination of whether you were really serious about studying or you wanted to change your course.  Now, I stayed with biology, I stayed with general science but it wasn't because I skipped or was advanced.  It was because I, I just had to buckle down and study a little harder.  You know, I did okay.  I didn't graduate val [valedictorian] or sal [salutatorian], but did okay.  And I, I was deficient in organic, advanced organic chemistry, meaning that I had not completed it when I graduated 'cause I got a double major, general science and biology.
Speaker 1: Now, okay--
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to med school.  And so, you needed to have four semesters in chemistry, general chemistry, organic and advanced, you know, organic chemistry.  And, because I had stepped back and taken general chemistry which I needed to do, because I wasn't doing that well, I needed to take organic chemistry after I graduated.  Although I graduated with a double major, I still didn't have the prerequisite for going to med school.  And that's the reason why, when I had the opportunity, I went to North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] to get a master's in biology, (unclear) where I took the organic chemistry and passed it and did well in it.  But, by that time, I was now married and--
Speaker 1: Well, now, I don't wanna gallop along too fast here.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We'll go, go ba- reel it back a little bit to--
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: Now what was--
Speaker 2: Taking this horse too fast.
Story_ID: 636056
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what was the social life like at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?  Did you join a sorority or anything?
Speaker 2: I did, I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I did.  I joined a sorority. I'm a Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was after that I joined the student council, was active in the student council.  I was in a club called the German club, can't speak a bit of German but then I could speak a little.  I was a part of what they call they called a Christian education committee or whatever they call it, Christian student committee [Student Christian Association] or something like that.  I was active in that.  I think I was in the choir, joined the band.  None of those things I can do much of now but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you play in the band?
Speaker 2: Played clarinet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, trying to think.  Okay, so, in--so, you're in Charlotte [North Carolina]. Who were some of the other students that were--that came out with you?  Do you remember any notable students that came out the same time you do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, oh, yeah, notable, oh, yeah.  Well, you know, all notable is all in your mind (laughter), but Charlie Curry [Charles L. Curry] who graduated head of his class.  And he was in biology with me.  He's now--he graduated and went on to marry (unclear) and is a doctor.  My best friend is Evelyn Blackwell [Evelyn J. Blackwell], who still is my best friend.  Both of us are still living.  I remember Essie Green, my roommate from Chicago [Illinois].  You know, as you recall names you, you find yourself not recalling as many names.  I remember a lot of them, just I can't recall them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And many of these classmates have--several of them I should say have been active with me in my life.  And later on, in my life have come to be helpful and be supportive of me as I went on in life.  So, yes, I remember my colleagues, they were helpful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 636057
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of the political climate in the United States when you were in college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?  I mean, what, what did you--were you--did you--were you aware of who was in [U.S.] Congress, for instance, or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.  I might have remembered the president who was--I'm trying to think of who that was, who that would have been in 1958.  But, I certainly wasn't aware of who was Congress or who was in the [U.S.] Senate.  My awareness politically was more who was running for student council or was running for that.  I might have been aware who was running for mayor of Charlotte [North Carolina], 'cause sometime they would come and get people to work.  I never worked in it but, that, but I was not politically motivated or politically informed outside my college or church or something of that sort.  That came later.
Speaker 1: The president when you started school in '51 [1951] would have been Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower].
Speaker 2: Eisenhower?  I started to say Eisenhower, I do remember speeches by him.
Speaker 1: Or Truman [President Harry S. Truman], yeah, 'cause '52 [1952] did Eisenhower get elected in '52 [1952] or--yeah, '52 [1952], right.  Yeah, 'cause he ran again in '56 [1956] and then--
Speaker 2: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  Truman graduated (unclear).
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Military, um-hm. Truman came before or after?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was Truman, yeah, Truman before Eisenhower.  Eisenhower in '52 [1952] and then Eisenhower again in '56 [1956] to '60 [1960] then it was Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] and Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] ran against each other.  That's what was going on.  Yeah, so, now, I believe William Dawson [William L. Dawson] from Chicago [Illinois] was in Congress. That was the only black in Congress, yeah.
Speaker 1: I must confess I didn't know that.  Yeah, my parents [Josephine Martin McPherson and Thomas McPherson, Sr.], however, were very active.  They didn't see themselves as civil rights activists, they saw themselves as civic leaders.  I can't ever remember my father not encouraging people to vote and my mother was active with, in calling people or announcing at PTA [Parent Teacher Association], or my father was announcing at a church, that we're going to have elections, you know, you know, their involvement was encouraging people to vote for whomever.  I'm not sure why (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now, in North Carolina was a place where the blacks could vote?
Speaker 1: I was in, you know, I was in Georgia then.
Speaker 2: In Georgia, okay, Georgia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, uh-huh, they were voting, yeah.
Speaker 2: Where you were, you could vote?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Augusta [Georgia] they were voting, yes.
Speaker 2: It's funny how it is when we look back at the time period where there are some places like in Memphis [Tennessee], you could vote in Memphis, you could vote in Atlanta [Georgia] but you couldn't vote in some other cities (laughter) for some reason.  Yeah, Mississippi you couldn't--
Speaker 1: But you could vote in Augusta.  And I gather it's where, where blacks were organized or civic leaders, you know, or they had--they were entrepreneurs or insurances or whatever.  You know, the presence of independence gave more of an access to people, not that I was personally involved during that time but my parents certainly voted.  And I saw in them the model of, as well as a responsibility of trying to be engaged, you know, when I became of age.
Speaker 2: Did--what kind of political clout, I mean, I know you weren't keenly aware of politics then but what's your impression of what the political clout of black people in, in Georgia when you grew up?
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought it was constrained and limited.  I mean, you know, the fact that we had, we had to ride segregated buses, the fact that we had to fight for decent jobs, the fact that the public schools I attended didn't have a regular, you know, lunchroom.  You had to fight for those.  Obviously, you might be engaged but you certainly have less in power to extract equal opportunities for sure.  Um-hm.  I was keenly aware that we had second class treatment and there was no sense of equality.
Story_ID: 636058
Speaker 1: Was there much attention given to the Brown vs. the Board of Education decision in '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] when you were in college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: When I was in college?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, a little bit.  In fact, part of--while I was in college in the summer I had the opportunity of working in the summer with a Quaker group called American Friends Service Committee, and it was a very much integrated arrangement.  In fact, this was the first--my first opportunity to living and working in integration was in 1954 as well as '55 [1955] but I worked in, in one of the, I worked in mental health both summers but one of, I think this came out in 1954, in 1955--let me correct myself. No, it came in--this is 1954 before my graduation.  And the, the decision for--when did Brown come?
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  May, 17, 1954.  The announcement came (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, well
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: That summer of '54 [1954], and there also had been a similar inter-transportation piece as well, you know riding interstate comes (unclear) were earlier.  And then the 1954 piece came down as well, and one of the ideas coming out of this integrated living and working together was that we were gonna test riding in an integrated way coming from Chicago [Illinois] back to, in my case to Georgia, and the case of my white colleague I forgot where, I think she was going to Atlanta [Georgia].  In my case Augusta [Georgia] and in her case going to Atlanta, and being stopped and warned that we would be, you know, put in jail.  And, I remember calling my mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] and telling her what I was doing.
Speaker 1: So, this is an attempt at a Freedom Ride I guess in a sense?
Speaker 2: Well in our case, we were attempting to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Simultaneous) So, you and a white colleague were going to ride together side by side on a bus from--
Speaker 2: Chicago.
Speaker 1: --Chicago to--
Speaker 2: Supposedly to Augusta.
Speaker 1: --Augusta.
Speaker 2: It lasted as far as we got to Indiana I believe it was.  What's the next (unclear) after, but anyhow I guess we'd been on their long enough to have a stop.  I think they used to stop every four hours.  I'm not sure but, you know, you would stop and you have a rest period.  And so, what we were told is that we couldn't do that, that we had to separate.  And, we did, we separated and she sat in one seat above me and I sat in the next seat.  And the bus wasn't crowed.  But, so we shared--she would lean back and we'd, and we shared lunch together.  And so, we got off the last time, I'm not sure where it was, but it wasn't far after the Indiana stop.  We were warned that we were now in the South and if we kept that--he, I think he called it shenanigans or whatever the bus driver called it, up, that he's reporting it to the next driver and we'd be put in jail.  Well, I had called my mother earlier and, before we put one seat back, and said to my mother what I was doing, and she said, "You ought to know where you are and you ought to act accordingly."  I know what that meant.  In other words, "I don't wanna have to get you out of jail."  I remember that very distinctly.  So, our, our attempt to move back with her sitting in one seat and me sitting in the other seat was an effort to obey the law but not obey the law if you understand what I'm saying, you know.  'Cause she occupied that whole seat and I occupied the back and, and we kind of shared the same brown bag of food and, so, that was my first attempt of, of trying to challenge or implement what we thought the law now permitted.  Now, the law was so brand new that these bus drivers didn't even know what the law was and they didn't care what the law was.  And, 'cause my mother cared about her daughter getting home safe and warned me to recognize where I was and to obey the law.  Well, the law as I understood it then was that we--and, what do you call it, interstate travel?
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  Interstate commerce.
Speaker 2: Interstate commerce as well as the 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education says that education as well as travel should be on equal basis.  And that was my interpretation as a college student, and actually the very first I guess real main effort I've--my introduction to kind of fighting the system in that era.
Story_ID: 636059
Speaker 1: All right, so, so we were getting you towards graduation.  We hadn't graduated you yet, had we?
Speaker 2: I hope you graduated me out of college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], I hope--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I was asking you about the political, your political activities--
Speaker 2: Well, I was sharing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in that age--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of civil rights.
Speaker 2: Well, I think my introduction to the civil rights and resistance to the system was--came out in two ways.  The personal experience I had during the summer with the bus ride, but also came with my realization that people of different races could live together.  And I was fortunate to learn that or have that experience with the group that was for peace and, and civil engagement.  That's what American Friends Service Committee (unclear)--
Speaker 1: How did, I'm sorry, how did you find out about American Friends?  Did they come to the school, or--
Speaker 2: They did, 'cause I knew nothing about them other than they came to the school.  And, to be honest, I knew very little about them before I signed up other than they had a good reputation and it'd be something I could convince my mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] that I could work with them.  'Cause I had tried to convince her if I could go north and, and work like she did, you know, when she was (unclear).  She said, absolutely no, so, I would have to go home, you know, and I wanted a summer experience.  And, so, the American Friends Service Committee was the--I also had applied for a [U.S.] Foreign Service experiment.  I did not get accepted, no one at my school got accepted but it was open to the students.  And then--
Speaker 1: Was it through the federal government or, or?
Speaker 2: I think it was, I wanna say it was USAID [United States Agency for International Development] but that may be because I know they have fellows now.  But, it was something very similar to that.  But the American Friends Service Committee gave those of us in the South or those of us who went to segregated schools a certain broadened experience to work with other college students throughout the nation.  'Cause none of these young people who I worked with did I know.  I was the only one from my school who went so.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there other black students from other black schools?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were two more with us.  We had about I guess fourteen students altogether, and there were one male and one female.  Herman [ph.] is a male, I can't even think of the other female black who was there.  And, neither Herman or the other black female were from southern black schools.  Well, yes, one.  Herman was from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], that's so, but the other one was either what we call one of the Ivy League schools.  The other female was.
Story_ID: 636060
Speaker 1: So when you graduate from Howard, now did you--
Speaker 2: No, I graduated from Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) so- I'm sorry, from Johnson C. Smith.
Speaker 2: Johnson C. Smith. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did you gra- did you have a role in the graduation ceremony as a--did you graduate high in the class or?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just graduated with honors.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I tell folks I'm glad, with honors and thank you Lordy.  You know, you've heard that.  I was glad to graduate, graduate on time and also graduate with honors, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, instead of summa cum laude, it was thank you, Lordy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Lordy, yeah, thank you, Lordy, yeah, right.  I didn't graduate summa cum laude.  It was oh, Lordy, yeah, yeah.  I did not, now, I wanna make sure, I did not graduate summa cum laude.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so, did you decide to go right into graduate school after?
Speaker 2: I got married that December and the first year--the first two years actually, my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] went to law school and my first two years I taught school.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you all live?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived in Georgia, he went to North Carolina Central law school [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina].  I taught in Georgia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, when we moved--when I moved with him here in North Carolina, we lived in Durham because North Carolina Central law school was in Durham, so, his last year I lived here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you taught school back in Augusta [Georgia], or?
Speaker 2: It was a small town out from Augusta--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Washington, Georgia.
Story_ID: 636061
Speaker 1: Before we leave Augusta [Georgia] I have to ask you if you, if you knew or knew of James Brown (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I knew of him.  Uh-huh, everybody asks me that because he was very famous in Augusta.
Speaker 1: His hometown--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where he used to say.
Speaker 2: They loved it, yes, they loved it (unclear).
Speaker 1: The name of the place is Augusta, GA.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Can't say I knew him personally but I certainly knew of his music and knew how much he was loved in Augusta, yeah, very proud of James Brown, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think it was about '56 [1956] or '57 [1957] he started, you know, making his climb in the entertainment business.
Speaker 2: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  As a matter of fact, the radio station was up not far from 9th Street near the church.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, all right.
Speaker 2: Mr. Clayton [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] was just saying that the radio station was near the church.  And I am repeating it because I have a mic and they probably can't hear him.  But, that's--but you didn't realize it then, are you saying didn't realize how close the radio station was when he got his start.
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't.  I knew he got started in Augusta but I didn't know it was at the radio station that he was referring to.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they said he used to shine shoes in front of it and then he said, "One day I'm gonna own it," and then he actually did at some point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Oh, yeah, I remember that part, I mean that, but that was after the fact I knew that part--
Speaker 2: Okay
Speaker 1: --and not while he was doing it.  I certainly didn't know that.
Story_ID: 636062
Speaker 1: So, you all got back together in, Carolina [North Carolina], I mean in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, after he was in law school [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in law school in Durham [North Carolina] and I moved to Durham--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in his last year, right.
Speaker 1: So this is, move to Durham--is this in 1957 or somewhere?
Speaker 2: I think it is, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  We were married in 1955.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but we moved back to--I moved back to Durham in '57 [1957], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so, what did you do next?  Did you teach school in Durham as well?
Speaker 2: I substituted more than I had a regular teaching but I certainly applied for it.  That was a way of supplementing my, you know, our income because when he's in law school, you know, you're on a very slim budget, so, yeah.  I did substitute teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you still on, on the track of becoming a doctor?  Did you think you would continue?
Speaker 2: Well, I still thought I would, I still thought that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, when I had an opportunity once he graduated, I did go back to--I went to North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and received a master's degree in biology and general science.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, did you apply for any la- medical schools at--later?
Speaker 2: Well, I had applied for the medical school early when I came out of college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  That's why I knew I had the deficiency, I didn't apply after I got my master's, no, 'cause I guess, one, I was married--wasn't too sure, you know, what my options were but the reason for going to get my master's was because when I applied for med school I knew I was deficient in an area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is like a--your husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] graduated in '61 [1961] it says here and then, then shortly after that you got your master's?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I think it was '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 636063
Speaker 1: How was the political climate in Durham [North Carolina]? 'Cause this is a time when there's so much going on in the South in terms of civil rights, was, was Durham experiencing the same kind of a shakeup as some of these other southern cities?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.  And, also in many ways Durham, as you just know, had a number of black leaders who were engaged in a--I think the North Carolina Mutual [North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina], the Mechanics and Farmers Bank, all was a platform for independent leaders and having North Carolina Central College [North Carolina Central College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] gave platform to, not only to the students to be engaged, but also for community leaders.  You had, I can't recall who was the first, first person on the city council--
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.): That'd be Mr. Harris [Rencher Nicholas Harris] (unclear).
Speaker 2: But you had a number of, a number of blacks who were running for the local elected officials and getting elected.  And you also had blacks in Durham like Mr. Wheeler [John Hervey Wheeler] and others who were involved, Spaulding [Charles Clinton Spaulding] (unclear), involved in, who were leaders of the state so they, they exerted both influence with the governor in pushing to make sure blacks--and I think Durham is and it was then perceived to be an area platform for civil engagement and, and involvement in that era.  And certainly where, where I learned, you know, a lot by observing them.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: We, interesting, when I registered, and I neglect to say that my father [Thomas McPherson, Sr.] was a Democrat and my mother [Josephine Martin McPherson] was a Republican.  When I registered, I registered as a Republican.  And we could register I think in Georgia at that time at eighteen.  The law may still be that, but we could register earlier than you could register in North Carolina.  And I remember registering as my mother, you know, as, as, as a Republican.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: Didn't take me long to change that though.
Speaker 1: But these are days--I just wanted to point out to anybody watching this, I mean, anybody watching this, in the future the parties may be flipped again, but there was a time when all blacks were Republicans.
Speaker 2: That's so true.  And that's what my mother remind, we were reminded.  That's so true.
Speaker 1: After the Civil War, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and through FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And I think FDR kind of changed it, you know, people got involved more because he was providing the resources to people who, who needed them and got engaged.  But, I think he came out of the, as you the say the civil rights, I mean, Civil War in particular because of the Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] era, you know, feeling that the Republican had kind of freed the slaves.
Speaker 1: And explain, describe for the listeners who the Democrats in the South were in those days?  What kind of people were they?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I can, I can describe--I can remember, I guess I can describe, (unclear) I can remember who was the governor and Democratic governor of my state, his name is Talmadge [Eugene Talmadge].  He was Mr. Anti-civil Rights, Mr. Segregationist, and he stood for Jim Crow in my mind and I think in many progressive minds.  So, you know, you had, you had similar governors and leaders in, in the South who, who were not seen as advocate for equal opportunity but the very opposite, the opposition to progress and they were Democrats.  And persons who, who, who wanted to be about progress certainly wouldn't align themselves with those kind of characters.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they called themselves the Dixiecrats.
Speaker 2: The Dixiecrats, absolutely.  You're right, that described the leaders of--and also very similar while we think of it, I don't think they had the same driving mission as the Tea Party but they, they were a segment of the Democrats who were gonna control the political life in the South.  And they were united by the mission of keeping blacks in their place.  That was--now, they may have had other objectives but their main mission was to keep blacks in their place.
Speaker 1: And so, Governor Talmadge would fit right in with Ross Barnett and George Wallace and others that--Orval Faubus and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 636064
Speaker 1: You were saying something that's important too.  I just wanted to make sure we didn't skip over this that you said, Durham [North Carolina] had black leaders, and you are so soft spoken when you said it that I want to make sure we emphasize it.
Speaker 2: Well, I was saying that Durham was--I was privileged to live in Durham where there was a platform for a number of black leaders statewide as well as local.  And I thought there were institutions that encouraged that, whether it's business institution or education institution.  There was a, a cadre, a supply of leaders who exerted influence and took leadership roles in that era.
Speaker 1: I thought that was very important to raise because the base, the business base and the institutional base allowed them to speak out, without (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would believe it.  Just as when I was growing up in Georgia, we thought of Atlanta, Georgia being that same kind of environment.  You had both the business institutions, there was (unclear) Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], or--forgotten the name of the bank there.  You had three or four colleges there, you had just a, a base of institutions and businesses that supported educational development of young blacks.  And many of the stayed there and became leaders.  And that's a big difference when you don't have that kind of infrastructure producing that, so in communities where you have those kind of organizations and institutions and businesses, obviously, you have a, a better cadre of business leaders' opportunity and development.  And they get to be a force in themselves to make sure that they have equal opportunity, and when they push that, they open the door for everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they can't be fired by--
Speaker 2: That's--and that's the important thing.  They have independence, that's the important thing.  That's very important and I, I've made comments more recently that then unlike now I don't see as many blacks being independent entrepreneurs.  Not that I'm suggesting segregation, but I am suggesting that there is the opportunity and the need for independence, whether it's integrated or not.  And people going into small business not being subject to big corporations so they can have a sense of independence.  And, also I think that just adds to democracy when there are small businesses as well as large businesses engaged.
Story_ID: 636065
Speaker 1: At some point you, you moved to Warrenton, North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, why was that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good question.  Why would I--why would one move to Warrenton from, from Durham [North Carolina] after I just described the opportunity in Durham.  Well, you, you've heard the wife following the husband?  Well, this is a good case of it.  My husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] had an opportunity though, my husband had an opportunity to form the first integrated law firm in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  In the South at that time, 1961.
Speaker 2: Well, certainly, in North Carolina and one of the things, how that came about is that there was a white attorney in Warrenton who inquired of the dean of the law school and the dean recommended my husband.  So, the opportunity came for, for him to respond to this and he did.  And, so, we went to Warrenton and so that became my home and is my home and kind of my mission field.  So, that's how we've been there since 1963.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  Let me click in if I may, and I don't want to interfere with her conversation with you but to give you a little background.  When I passed the bar exam in 1961.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, let me do this since we're (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you're gonna, take that off, yeah.
Speaker 2: Speak into this mic.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  This should be a different interview, but, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it should be a different interview.
Speaker 1: Well, if you could do it quickly, because this is a point, let's just do it real quickly.
Speaker 2: Okay, real quick.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  The point is I had Floyd B. McKissick from Durham, I had begun the practice of law with Floyd McKissick in Durham and the dean--the lawyer, James D. Gilliland from Warrenton came to, to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], to Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and Wake Forest [Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] where he had graduated from law school looking for a law partner.  And they said, no, that they don't wanna have anything to do with him 'cause he had represented some people that alleged to be Communists during the era of this senator that was--whoever he was, but, anyway, and then he came to North Carolina Central law school [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] and talked to the dean and then the dean wrote me a letter that he had talked to this lawyer from Warrenton and he was very impressed and he thought that I at least--he knew I was with Floyd McKissick and he didn't want to cause me to leave unless I had intended to do that but he thought it would be wise that I at least have an opportunity to talk to the man.  And I did, and we formed a law firm in November, 1961.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the firm?
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.): Gilliland and Clayton [Warrenton, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: So, maybe we will try to get back to North Carolina and interview your husband too at some point.  But this is--thank you for being patient, ma'am.
Speaker 1: No problem.
Story_ID: 636066
Speaker 1: You're in Warrenton, North Carolina.  So, what did you do in Warrenton?
Speaker 2: Oh, let me see, besides have children?  (Laughter) I, I'm trying to think what I did.  I did a number of, of community projects but, at first, being a wife and a mother, I had children right behind each other so for a while I didn't work.  And then I, I got engaged with community projects--first got engaged with helping or responding to a call that a Reverend Cheek [ph.] was in developing what they call a Mayflower Community.  This was a little community, there's (unclear) good ideas, so, I spent a good bit of my time after my kids grew up a little bit as, as working in community projects.  Helping, as I indicated, with Reverend Cheek.  And my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] referred to Floyd B. McKissick [Floyd McKissick], he, he later on in life saw Warren County [North Carolina] as an opportunity to establish a new town development and came to Warren County.  And he knew my husband, and about getting this big plot of land to develop this new town.  Now, the new town never developed but I was engaged in ge- and, and it made a significant difference in Warren County.  Prior to that, maybe two years before then I worked--I had the honor of working at the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and where I recruited minority students to the medical field, health field.  I served there for about three years, came back to Soul City [Soul City Foundation, Inc.], helped with that project.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, wait a minute now.  We don't wanna speed too fast over all this, but, okay, from what I understand now, from what you said, we--you know, when you moved to Warrenton, you had children basically.  And you worked with Reverend Cheek on some of his projects (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. I got engaged with community projects, I think that's what I wanted to emphasize.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Reverend Cheek was the first one I can recall I got involved with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The second one, my engagement--I think I--
Story_ID: 636067
Speaker 1: And you also went to law school for a period of time, in that (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I did.  I forgot about that, I did go to law school. Even after my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] was active --
Speaker 1: At the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, but, well, both.  I went both, I started at North Carolina Central [North Carolina College at Durham School of Law; North Carolina Central University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] and I also applied and got accepted and went to the University of North Carolina.  So, I wanna give both schools credit.  It came to a point where either having children or finishing law school, so I decided to try to be a halfway decent mother.  So, I don't have a law degree I just went to law school.  So, and that is part of my, my educational achievement and it's a part of my record that North Carolina--University of North Carolina is proud and boasts all the time.  North Carolina Central does too, but--so both of them do claim me so no doubt about that.  I'm trying to get it in chronological order.
Speaker 1: And, well, we have a--tell me if this fits in there.  We have like a--if anything happens prior to '68 [1968] that's significant, let me know but it says here in 1968 you began to be involved with the eastern North Carolina Economic Development Corporation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, I did, I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's something I organized, EDC, and it was to help communities in economic development.  And that was as a result of--I didn't share with you that I also ran for [U.S.] Congress before 1992, did I?
Speaker 1: Right, now, that's the same year.  Did that come before the Economic Development Corporation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That came before, yeah, yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And as a result of my engagement in knowing the condition of eastern North Carolina, and also becoming aware of opportunities and programs that communities could take advantage of, others and myself organized the EDC.
Story_ID: 636068
Speaker 1: Let's go back then to the first part of 1968 where it says here that Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] recruited you to run for [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: So, well, where did you meet Vernon Jordan and how did this happen?
Speaker 2: Well, Vernon Jordon used to be over Voter Education Project as you may know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here in--
Speaker 2: No, out of Atlanta [Georgia], southeast, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The Voter Education Project was a part of another program in Atlanta, it was a big project.  And the idea of that was to encourage greater voter participation and registration in voting.  He came to North Carolina for the express purpose of finding someone to run for both the--I don't know if it was the 1st [1st Congressional District] or 2nd [2nd Congressional District], but, but the congressional district--I think it was 2nd then.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  It was the 2nd.
Speaker 2: Okay. And, be honestly, I think he wanted my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] to run, to be honest with you.  And, 'cause, you know, women weren't running back then.  And I attended this program with my husband.  A lot of civic people there, I'm not sure how many were there.  And he was trying--he gave the qualification, he gave, he gave the challenge and he gave why we ought to do that and what the advantage would be.  I volunteered and he helped me in terms of strategy and other things.  But the express purpose was for voter registration.  Now, happened concurrently with that, which Vernon was also involved in, was a person by the name of Dr. Reginald Hawkins during that same period of time ran for governor, so we kind of ran as kind of a tag team.  But, obviously, separate election, but the fact that he was running for governor meant there was great push statewide to register more people 'cause you now had a black running.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had two black candidates?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had two black candidates, I was one of them.  One, was state and one was national, that's how I got involved in that.  I said, jokingly, to my husband coming back, asked him why he didn't volunteer and he accurately said, you know, who's, who's gonna take care of us and our four children, you know, so my husband was the breadwinner, you know.  Obviously, I had the luxury of doing it because he was taking care of us all and that was really my eye opener.  That's how I came to know the need for eastern North Carolina, and as a result we were encouraged and others helped me to form what we call the Economic Development Corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It grew out of that involvement.
Story_ID: 636069
Speaker 1: Now, in '71 [1971] you were appointed by the University of North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] to head up the health manpower program [Health Manpower Development Program].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, did your Economic Development Corporation continue to exist?
Speaker 2: It did, but someone else headed it up but it, it didn't, it kind of, it had, it lasted maybe two or three years after that.  But, I concentrated more on that (unclear) 'cause I didn't have the time to give towards that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the, the experience at the University of North Carolina was to encourage minorities to be more engaged in the various professions of health, as well as the school was trying to recruit more to the various schools.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so, how long did you work for University of North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I wanna say three years.  I wanna say, I hope that's about right, three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, in 1974, this is the--when Soul City Foundation [Soul City Foundation, Inc.] comes up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I left the university to come to Soul City.  Soul City had been going on maybe a year or two before then, but the foundation was a non-profit component of this new town development where they would look at what it would take in terms of schools, what it would take in terms of health facilities.  And the foundation concentrated on looking at opportunities or planning for those opportunities to happen there (unclear).  As a result, they did develop what they called HealthCo. [HealthCo., Inc.], which was community health facility, and which provided healthcare and recruited doctors and a dental program which provided care.
Speaker 1: So, Soul City [North Carolina] was germinated in a time when a lot of black people were going back to the South.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: And, I remember the era when a lot of my classmates from school were going to Houston [Texas], Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --cities in the Sun Belt for jobs.  There were opportunities in Charlotte [North Carolina] and other places where there had been none before, so a lot of people were going back south.  And, just to frame it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you're right
Speaker 1: --you know, and the idea, this big idea of Floyd McKissick's was to, you know, create I guess from the ground up another--an all-black town--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with these resources there.
Speaker 2: Right, it was.
Story_ID: 636070
Speaker 1: I just wanted to kind of expand on the Soul City [North Carolina] idea and to agree that it was within the framework where people were taking more opportunities and saw more opportunities in taking the advantage of those opportunities in the South.  So, the opportunity for growth and economic development and moving for not only economic reasons and quality of life to their--the idea of Soul City was a very big idea even within that context, because it was the idea that you could develop a city from the ground.  It took its model out of Columbia, Maryland where they had grown as similar.  But, unlike Columbia, Maryland, this was not adjacent to an urban area, this is adjacent--this is in the middle of a cow patch, you know, in rural, rural North Carolina.  So, you had to build everything.  There was no infrastructure, very little roads, no structure to build on or to extend from.  So, everything had to--but it was a bold idea and even that bold idea recruited a number of people to Warren County [North Carolina].  A radio station was recruited.  As a result, the community health program funded HealthCo. [HealthCo., Inc.] and a number of doctors and dentists were, were recruited.  So, there were tangible benefits from this bold idea creating the imagination that you could do something different and that it could happen at this place.  Now, the new town never occurred but--
Speaker 2: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  But it's still there.
Speaker 1: The cow patch is still there and a few tenants, you know, and actually there was one industry did locate there and went for about ten or twelve years and is in transition now as something else.  And some (unclear) went there and they had a number of houses built there, and the community facilities there.  And--but the new town never realized itself as that.
Speaker 2: Is there really a Soul City in North Carolina now?
Speaker 1: No, there is a place called Soul City, there is not a Soul City, North Carolina.  There is not an incorporated town. There is a location where people refer to as a community but that's--it never incorporated as a town itself.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, this was an era when the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration had launched this initiative called black capitalism, right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it was--it grew out of that.  And, Floyd [Floyd McKissick] was a Republican too and had that connection.  And, and, and used it to the advantage of the people in Warren County, his idea, um-hm.
Story_ID: 636071
Speaker 1: Well, the year he lost it was a bad year for Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: That's because of--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You said, what, now?
Speaker 1: That's because of--?
Speaker 2: You're giving me credit for that?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Because of the Watergate, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I mean that's the downfall, absolutely.  Oh, no doubt about that.  Oh, Watergate tumbled a lot of things.  I mean, not just Soul City [North Carolina], I mean, for the nation I mean, that was a, that was a tragedy that impacted the whole country and it should have impacted his presidency, surely.
Speaker 1: Just explain what Watergate was for people that--
Speaker 2: Hm?  Well, it was an act of corruption.  It was--you're gonna have to help me out.  I've forgotten, the exchange of documents and the fraudulent use of documents.  I've forgotten the nature of the documents.  You help me out on that.
Speaker 1: Well, no, just, just a--some operatives of the Republican National Committee working for them broke into the Democratic national headquarters and--
Speaker 2: Oh, and took the documents, right.
Speaker 1: --took some documents, and I don't know what was in them but just the idea that they took 'em was a--
Speaker 2: It was a crime.
Speaker 1: And broke in, you know, was a--and President Nixon was--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --basically lied about what happened and was caught in all that during the hearings and had to leave office.  So, everything that he had started kind of tumbled, as you said, tumbled down, you know.
Speaker 2: It should have, unfortunately, even though some projects that he started were good.  But, when you make such a fraudulent act or criminal act, there are consequences for that even when you're doing good, even if you did good, you know.
Speaker 1: So, did you see a direct correlation between the two things when you were working on Soul City?
Speaker 2: Well, I saw, I saw some difficulty even before then, you know, in terms of getting resources.  But, obviously, it was no doubt in mind if you thought you were relying on that administration (unclear) because he had violated the trust and, and had created a crime that, that avenue was no longer available.  Now, there were some effort and some continuation of programs even when the Democrats came in, in that era.  But, if you were thinking of using the original means of having success, that wasn't gonna happen.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think some people forget that affirmative action actually started under Nixon.
Speaker 2: That's what I mean, and some things--when you make a mistake even your good things get forgotten, right?
Speaker 1: So, well, how long did it take Soul City to finally just give up, I mean, for the idea to actually just become hopeless?
Speaker 2: When did Floyd [Floyd McKissick] finally give up?  He became ill, but, I guess there was a sincere effort about ten years, really.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  I guess you could say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm guessing at that before they finally decided--
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  I don't want to intervene (unclear) left out, but you probably don't want to get off--
Speaker 2: No, we'll just--we'll save yours for another time (laughter). I know it's, I know if you know something, I know it's difficult but if you can help out with a date or something that--every now and then that's fine.  But, okay.
Story_ID: 636072
Speaker 1: You worked--in '76 [1976] you worked on the successful gov- gubernatorial campaign of Jim Hunt.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, can you explain who Jim Hunt is and--?
Speaker 2: Well, Jim Hunt was the, the governor of North Carolina and he served for two consecutive terms.  And he's considered to be one of the most progressive--
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.): (Unclear) four terms (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  He served two terms and then came off and two more terms.
Speaker 1: Okay, so has a long--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had long tenures and he's probably one of the most beloved governors in addition to Sanford [Terry Sanford].  And he's now retired and very active on a number of issues.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, the black community--
Speaker 2: By and large supported him, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, okay, so, in '77 [1977] you were appointed by Governor Hunt as the assistant secretary of the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources and Community Development.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do in that capacity?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an administrative job but it had responsibility for housing.  At that time, we still had programs called community assistance and that would be known as what we call the OEO [Office of Economic Opportunity].  You remember there were programs that helped the poor, programs that helped in assistance and nutrition, programs that helped mothers.  We also had the Housing Finance Agency [North Carolina Housing Finance Agency] which was responsible for providing--working with banks and providing home ownership.  So, those were natural resources that included the extension of water and sewage in those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you worked on that--what was the highlight of working on that project as, as the assistant, as the?
Speaker 2: Well, the highlight for me was seeing people get new water and sewage or getting community facilities, or seeing community groups be able to respond to the need of hungry people in the area, or young mothers be able to get assistance for their children, to see new owners--new citizens become owners of their home.  And they had some small programs for entrepreneurs and seeing the startup of small businesses.
Speaker 1: And who, who was the secretary, 'cause you were the assistant, so who was the secretary?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Howard Lee [Howard N. Lee] was, was the secretary.  Howard Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, Howard Lee is the first mayor of Chapel Hill [North Carolina], and he was my boss.
Speaker 1: He was the first, he was the first--
Speaker 2: He had become, prior to this, he was the first mayor, black mayor of Chapel Hill.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  Which was being considered a major city in North Carolina at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, all right now, you left in 1981.  So, why did you leave that position?
Speaker 1: Trying to figure it out.  What'd I say?
Speaker 2: Okay, let's see here it says, oh, you founded your own firm.  That's what it said, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that's true.  Yes, EDC [Economic Development Corporation].  Yes, I did a development firm.  I did work for that, my own development firm.  And then later, I think you would see that--
Speaker 2: Now this is--what I'm thinking about is this Technical Resources International [Technical Resources International, Ltd.], right?
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  Eva [HistoryMaker Eva M. Clayton] be forgetting (unclear).  This the time you helped a lot of cities (unclear) get funds.
Speaker 2: Through Technical Resources, yeah.  But, during that time I also decided to run for county commissioner I think you said that, right?  Okay.  The--my own firm was called Technical Resources International and we used that to help local governments to get community development funds and other resources both from the federal level as well as state and try to show them how they can leverage their bond capacity so they could borrow money to extend the infrastructure.  And a number of our clients were small cities and rural counties and communities.  And, during that time also, I decided to run for the county commissioner of the Warren County [North Carolina], and I served there for eight years.
Story_ID: 636073
Speaker 1: So this is your first elected office, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First elected office, right.
Speaker 1: This in 1982.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, how did you, did, since this is your first elected position, did you enjoy, I mean how did you--?
Speaker 2: I found it, I found it rewarding.  I really did.  It was frustrating too, but sometime some rewards come out of frustration.  One of my first, well, not the first act, but one of my first major act was I had to confront the reality that our local hospital was in real trouble.  And, you don't win a lot of friends by having to announce that your favorite hospital needs to close because it doesn't have any funds and all the doctors have just about left.  So, that was frustrating.  But, you know, as you look back sometime the truth kind of strengthen you to do other things, so that's one of the reasons why we got expansion of community services to help.  And we developed partnerships with the University of North Carolina medical school [University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] to help.  But, out of that frustration, pushed us to find other partnerships to kind of compensate for not having a hospital here.  We were very successful in getting a number of infrastructure.  We got a number of initiatives to expand infrastructure for businesses.  We got engaged with education for me, you know, learning.  I became active in the state as a whole through the--what they call the North Carolina county commissioner association [North Carolina Association of County Commissioners].  My state fellow county commissioners selected me as the Commissioner of the Year one of those years.  I became chair of my county commission board [Warren County Board of Commissioners].  I became active nationally.  Interesting, couple of the persons that I--later went on to serve in [U.S.] Congress were members of the county commissioners association who I met.  One in Arizona, one in Mississippi and myself in that era, so.  It was a good stepping stone or a good training ground for knowing the needs of local people, so when I, you know, that--I think that helped me to speak with some not only integrity but some experience, some successful experience what it takes to respond.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it about this time that you became aware of the plight of the black farmers?
Speaker 2: I must say, it was later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a little later.  I knew many of the individuals of the black farms but I never knew the extent of black farmers.  I knew the condition of black farmers in my county but I never knew that what was happening to my black farmers was happening in eastern North Carolina, was happening in Mississippi, was happening in Georgia.  I didn't know it then.
Speaker 1: Now, what was happening to your farmers here in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: They were--in Warren County [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Warren County.
Speaker 2: They were losing, they were--they couldn't get farm loans.  They were losing the opportunity to continue in farming.  It was getting to be more expensive than they could afford.  Small farmers didn't have the where in all to have the equipments, their children were leaving so you had to have equipments other than have manpower.  So, they were no longer competitive to making decent livings.  Certainly, I knew that from talking with them and observing them in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, obviously, this--and, and they went more to the federal government than they came to us in the county commission, but if you were engaged with your citizens, you couldn't help but know that.
Speaker 1: Okay, says here then in 1982, African Americans received only 1 percent of all farm ownership loans.  Only 2.5 percent of all farm operating loans, only 1 percent of all soil and water conservation loans.  This is a pretty sad state of affairs.
Speaker 2: It is, um-hm.  I found that out, obviously, doing my research (unclear) but that would be true also for Warren County and Halifax County [North Carolina] when I was county commissioner.  But that was true nationwide.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, and as--over the years, now how long did you serve on the county commission?
Speaker 2: Eight years.  Eight years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eight?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 636074
Speaker 1: In, '92 [1992] now, now what happens?  Is there anything that happens between the county commission, I mean, on the county commission [Warren County Board of Commissioners] between the time that you started and 1992 that pushes you towards running for [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the inci- two incidents.  One, you had the census and redistricting, two, you had the death of Representative Jones [Walter B. Jones, Sr.], who was my congressman then.  And--
Speaker 1: So, how did redistricting change the--
Speaker 2: I think redistricting emphasized the opportunity and the new census gave more of a stark reality that the 2nd Congressional District had a slight majority, blacks, where it didn't have, it had not, those who registered, didn't have in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  (Unclear) this became the 1st Congressional District.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but more importantly, well, not important but significant to me geting engaged is my congressman died in office at that time.  So, that gave--and he had announced that he wasn't running for the next term.  And you had redistricting occurring at the same time.  He died prior to his completion of his current term, so too I, I was--I and others became aware of the opportunity because of redistricting and because of the awareness of the new census.  They were--they had new census, you have redistricting.  As you have redistricting, you begin to know which of the districts have the majority voting.  And there was a slight majority of Afro American voters in the--what was then the 1st Congressional District became known as 1st Congressional, but it's the old 2nd [2nd Congressional District].  We now call it the 1st.  So, that's the framework in which I ran and that's the environment in which I and others ran, entering knowing that this now new 1st will, will be an opportunity for minorities to possibly win, not that minorities will all vote for you but, in fact, that it was the first chance that minorities they had a possible opportunity.  Now the same thing was happening over in, in the 12th district [12th Congressional District] then.
Speaker 1: Now this is Charlotte [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: This is Charlotte.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The same redistricting was occurring, the same reality was appeared that where you had a best chance--it was a little slightly less than minority--a majority in Charlotte I think was like 49 percent but in our area it's 50 point something, 50.2 at that time, percent.  So, that's the context and that's why we saw that as a opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, now who was your opposition?
Speaker 2: Oh, almost who wasn't the opposition?  We had, we had six very good people.  And my, my slogan was that you have six good candidates, but you vote for Eva Clayton [HistoryMaker Eva M. Clayton] you vote the best for the 1st.  So, I had six good--five good opponents, I was the sixth.
Speaker 1: (THEAOSEUS T. CLAYTON, SR.):  You had six, the son--
Speaker 2: I had six, okay, I had seven.  Yeah, including the son of the former person, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, the former person was a white guy, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And his son ran as well, yeah.  Can I stop a minute?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I need a pause here.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the opposition.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had seven with--including myself.  I had said six but I think we had two whites and there were five Afro Americans.  We ha- I won the, the unexpired term which came later after the election, I mean, after the primary.  Then during the primary actually the son of, of the deceased congressman won more votes.  I had the next highest number and had enough to call--he didn't win a majority of the votes.  He just won the highest number, maybe two hundred more or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we could point out I guess that it was the black vote that split, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, among, among five of us, yes.  Among five of us, absolutely.  And, so, I had the right to call for the--a runoff and I did.  And then it became one on one and I won that.  And, as I indicated the, the congressman also who was then ill actually died, and there was an unexpired term as well, so I won that one.  So, I went to Congress I guess, oh, a month or so, about a month--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --ahead of time.
Story_ID: 636075
Speaker 1: Well, this must have been exciting, going to [U.S.] Congress?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was exciting.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It was a brand new--as you say you live several lives.  There was a--it was a brand new life, a brand new opening, brand new awareness.  And, also a very new opportunity to serve, share, and, and to give back.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you come in with the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration, right?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Same time, so, so, just explain what was--how did you--well, what was your first day like in Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't even remember, but exciting.  So, you know, it was full of--well, the first day of my inauguration, you know, when everybody else came, was full of excitement and people giving briefings, and you getting to know new people.  As I said, I met three of the people who had served as county commissioners so that started as a basis.  There were a number of Afro Americans who were elected, more then than before so that was the highest number coming in at one time in 1993.  Also significant, it was the largest number of women coming at one time to Congress in 1993.  And, I think as a result of a combination of that, I was elected president of my class both with the women vote and I guess the black.  I didn't go there to--in fact I didn't even know there was such a, an office as being president of the freshman class, but, anyhow, the freshman class was large freshman class.  And, with a number of newcomers, and I was honored to serve as the president in--as co-president along with--now, Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] ran for it.  I didn't, but both of us served as co- (unclear), we worked a compromised since I had the most votes, that we would serve as co-presidents of the freshman class.  He's gone on now to be the whip, you know, Jim Clyburn is now the whip of the Democratic Party, Democratic congresspersons and is doing an exceedingly good job.
Speaker 1: That's true.  Now, also, elected--was this Mel Watt's [HistoryMaker Melvin L. Watt] first term too?
Speaker 2: It was, two of us came from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Mel Watt comes from Charlotte [North Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was very supportive of me and I supportive of him.  We kind of were a tag team.  I adopted him as my older, oldest son.  You know, not that I'm that much older than he was.  He, he's, he's doing a good job and we both came at the same time, both went through what we call redistricting here where our district (unclear) started off having about twenty-eight counties partial, you know, counties.  He was gerrymandered obviously.  And then they reduced it down to twenty-four, now it has twenty-two and, by the way, it's being redistricted again this year.  It's going more urban now, it's moving more to Durham [North Carolina].  Before it came to Granville County [North Carolina] back to the coast and down.  And the current congressman stops westward at Granville County and goes to (unclear).  Now, he's losing the coastal counties and he's gaining 40 percent of his new congressional district will be in Durham, which would change the dynamics of the district.  'Cause, basically, when I went to Congress it was a rural area and I served on the agriculture committee [U.S. House Committee on Agriculture].  One, because we were a rural area and, of course, that served me well 'cause most of our people were in rural areas and we, we were able to do some things through agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, one of the things--now, this is the 103rd Congress?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, one of the things that you did was you voted against the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And, now, why did you vote against that?  I know there were big demonstrations against it in Seattle [Washington] I think.  Wasn't that in Seattle?
Speaker 2: Could've been.  There were also demonstrations, smaller ones throughout, you know, the United States.  Basically, I saw it as kind of a giveaway (unclear) the presidency away where it was, and, also the unions and the workers here were being put at a disadvantage I thought.  And, the, and working with them I, I thought we should find ways of not outsourcing the jobs.  And that's the real reason I voted for, 'cause I saw it as losing jobs here in the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay, did it adversely affect North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought it did.  I mean, I saw there were a number of textile industries, a number of the manufacturer in furniture, others now find its way into foreign countries that could be produced there far less expensive.  The workers cost less and they can ship it here.  So, if you look through rural eastern North Carolina, you will find cotton mills, you will find textile industries no longer there because these jobs are now somewhere else.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you're a, you're a member of the House agricultural committee like I said before and you were a member of the Congressional Black Caucus, right?
Speaker 2: I was, right.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the condition of Congressional Black Caucus when you arrived in Congress?
Speaker 2: Well, it became very strong because you had so many new ones come on at that time as, as one.  And, the--I think they were not only a force but they also expanded their power in terms of exerting it.  Obviously, it worked within the Democratic framework and to the extent that they were, you know, influencing change, they're more of the progressive arm of the Democratic Party, so I think that made a big, big difference in terms of the number of the bills they had.
Story_ID: 636076
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about the Republican Revolution led by Newt Gingrich--
Speaker 2: It was known (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back in '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: He proudly characteristically described it as Contract with America.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: There were others of us who described it as a contract on America because it was, from all indications, he was willing to slice and destroy any of the infrastructure that aided inner city communities or volunteer who's working, or food stamp [Food Stamp Program; Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program]--even now he's renewed that food stamps, you know.  Anything that seemed to go with the poor or helping the underclass, now.  Now I'm sure he would say he's not against the underclass, he just thinks they ought to earn their way, right.  But, at the same time there were breaks given to big governments and breaks given to others at the same time.  And it became very difficult to, to see how, you know, even with the caucus there, you know, being strong.  And when you have--you don't have the voting numbers; you have to have 218 people to elect and when you have the majority of them being Republicans it's hard to find that.  And in, in some instances there were a few Democrats who voted with them too.  So, it was hard to extract those kind of programs that would enable communities to develop or provide service to the underserved or to the poor.  Those programs weren't expanded; those programs were contracted during this time.
Speaker 1: How, let me ask you, how do you since you were in [U.S.] Congress during that time, how do you explain how this happened?  I mean, how did from your perspective as sitting in Congress at that time, how do you explain how Newt Gingrich took over Congress, 'cause here we have a popular Democratic president, Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] in office, Congress is Democratic, you know, so is the [U.S.] Senate.  He's got a majority to do whatever he wants to do and then all of a sudden everything is flipped and, you know, so, how did it take place, I mean, in retrospect?
Speaker 2: Well in retrospect I can respond but there I must confess I was as confounded as anyone else.  I mean, how did this happen to us, you know, I was confused and, and actually a little frustrated.  How, how would Americans allow this to happen?  In retrospect, sometime we let our guards down and sometime we're unaware that to be in the majority you always have to be always organizing and, and explaining and making sure the citizens are aware.  You can't take for granted that people understand what you are doing for people.  They don't--you understand that but you can't take it for granted for that.  So, you have to be ever vigilant and ever, almost ever, always campaigning, always sharing why you took this position and how this action, these actions affected you.  I think we might have lost some engagement with people and as a result you had, now, in my district [1st Congressional District] or in much of North Carolina, Democrats pretty much stayed the same.  We didn't lose, we lost maybe one or two but in those areas where Democrats were on the margin of winning and/or in a independent area, that's where it became more critical where Democrats did lose.  So, in those areas where we know we don't have that majority, we ought to concentrate making sure we are explaining.  We owe it to people who don't naturally understand or who, who are not in the same communication network to make sure the Independents or the moderate Republicans who could be with you are in fact informed.  I don't think these things happen by themself.  Now, I think Newt Gingrich took advantage of it, but he didn't go out and elect these people, they got elected.  So when he became speaker, he became speaker of a majority of Republicans that had been elected from various areas.  He wasn't influent- he was from Georgia, he wasn't that influential, you know, to go out and help elect these people.  And he was whip in a minority, so he got elevated.  But, when he became speaker [of the U.S. House of Representatives], now, the second time he had power to go out and help people.  But I think we failed to recognize the undercurrent or the doubt or the lack of information that needed to be addressed in these marginal districts as to how independents were.  And, in fact, I think that is the case today.  When you begin to know the polarization or know where, we've become more polarized now then we were then even as bad as we were then by I mean the nation as a whole.  But even now the difference between winning and losing is not between Democrat and Republican, it's between the--those people who consider themselves Independents who are not affiliated with either party although there may be some moderate Republicans who will vote with us or the same thing is true with Republicans.  There may be some very, very conservative Democrats who vote with them.  So, you know, you, you, you have to really realize you have to work towards the middle and make sure that you're moving, that people understand that their interest is being addressed.  If, indeed, they can make the case that the Independents or the unaffiliated are being messed over by whatever party is in there, they will make the case that you ought to vote against someone in spite of whoever the president is.  That's what happened in 2010.  And, certainly, that's what happened with Clinton.
Story_ID: 636077
Speaker 1: How would you compare wha- the situation today with another popular Democratic president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who had control of both houses of [U.S.] Congress when he was elected, now, you know, with the same or similar kind of Republican revolution in his first term?
Speaker 2: Same rationale, those same reasons.  Only difference is that what's happening in the House [U.S. House of Representatives], if you can believe it, it's far more extreme than it was with Gingrich [Newt Gingrich] there.  I don't have a whole lot of accolades for Gingrich but it wasn't as bad as it is here.  And I actually believe in Boehner's [John Boehner] case, who is a little more moderate than Gingrich ever would be, he has lost control.  But, still, it, it's how that minority comes in control and to what extent that minority holds a, a strangling effect on you.  And then you're no longer free 'cause you move out of the range of being with the majority.  Because that strong minority group is now controlling the whole.  And, it's very little room for compromise even between conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans.  Now, before, there was a little compromise whether I voted with them or not, there was still an opportunity.  Some things I voted Republican, some things I didn't, but there was far more compromise between Democrats and Republicans even under the Contract with America, on America, than there is right now.
Story_ID: 636078
Speaker 1: Says here that in '96 [1996] you played a key part in fighting the GOP [Republican Party] efforts to cut youth summer job programs.  Now I remember that was a big deal in those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, I did.  In fact, not only the summer youth programs but also the programs that would aid community workers.  The summer youth program [Summer Youth Employment Program] was a program that you, you had available to community organizations that they could hire young people when they came out of school, which made a difference between kids staying in the street or the kids having work.  And a number of us got involved in that, and I was given the honor and, to participate in the final drafting of that.  But it was an opportunity to make sure that the program that was in existence would continue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  During your freshman term, now, you, you were elected president so I guess you didn't have freshman jitters I guess I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not saying I didn't have freshman jitters, I mean, I had to learn.  The learning curve is still for everybody.  I think being elected president gave me a sense of boost in confidence.  You're absolutely right.  It gave me access to the White House, you know, getting freshmans together and because that large freshman class not only with minority but also the class itself, that was a, a significant body of votes that the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] needed.  Now, I'm not foolish enough to say I controlled that, I was part of that.  But, I think the freshman class itself had a great entree that normally freshman class don't have if they're not that large.  When, you know, he wanted to enact a (unclear) bills, he wanted to make sure that the class that came in with him, indeed, was with him, understood that.  Even with some of the things we wanted to vote for didn't get through, and, you know, it was Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] who put in the healthcare and certainly we were with that effort and the freshman class were there but still there were enough people to kill that you know, in terms of, being the president freshman class gave me certainly a boost in confidence but also gave me access to programs and with leaders who I probably wouldn't have if I was just a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '95 [1995] you were appointed to the Democratic Advisory Committee to formulate party strategy.  Now, what was that experience like?  Who did you work with in terms of that and what was it like?
Speaker 2: Hm, well, you had so many from the House [U.S. House of Representatives] and so many from the Senate [U.S. Senate] and I'm trying to figure what our strategy was to see how we could be more effective and to be engaging in terms of members of [U.S.] Congress who were in, and as I said, those, those areas that were teetering on Republican.  And also there were a number of issues that related to social security and healthcare, and they wanted to see about formulating positions on those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '96 [1996] the [U.S.] Supreme Court invalidated various state redistricting maps, including North Carolina's map of '92 [1992].  And so, what they did, they, they went back, they had to go back to a map that existed before that would only--would, would shrink your district [1st Congressional District] from--your support from 57 to 50 percent.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.  That's right, but lucky for me at that time, you know, whether I had forty-nine or forty-eight I was pretty well known.  But, advantage for me beyond experience was I only have now to campaign in twenty-four counties where I had twenty-eight counties.  Now it gave me less of a minority part, you know, edge of voting but it certainly gave me a more--if you can call twenty-four more compact than twenty-eight.  I didn't have to go all the way to Wilmington [North Carolina] now only, you know, go to Greenville [North Carolina] that's probably the southern and go up the coast and come this way.  So, the--and the, and the redistricting was as a effort of the lawsuit that had been placed by several persons to try to find more equitable way than they had before.  So, it turned out to work to our advantage.
Story_ID: 636079
Speaker 1: Tell us about the agriculture committee [U.S. House Committee on Agriculture] and the--now the black farmers.  Now, you're actually working now with the black farmers on this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I understand those issues. Much better, yes.
Speaker 1: --lawsuit, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's a lawsuit [Pigford v. Glickman, 1999] that's filed against the USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  Okay.
Speaker 2: A number of the black farmers organizations both in the South and some individual states joined together and filed a lawsuit against the USDA.  And, of course, that went on for a number of years.  But, even prior to the resolution of the lawsuit, we had hearings on, in various committees.  We asked the president to sit with them and hear the case and once, you know, once the black farmers got off you couldn't talk to the president but they laid it all out there for him whether you wanted to hear it or not.  So, I think that was an eye opening for him.  He's a southerner so he had to know some of them, he obviously.  But, I can assure you President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was--he could listen well.  The--and the success in the lawsuit I think is, is given to the farmers themselves not only in making the legal case but they made a public case.  Not only talking to the president or having hearings but just staying with members of their own congressional delegation of, saying, we have been injured, we have a problem, the government has a right to correct that.  That's outside of going to court.  They made their case known to their representatives, they made their case known to the public.  They took a campaign and developed that outside of the court, so when the court came, now, obviously, the courts will be independent of that but it wasn't in, outside of a context of these farmers being very engaged.  I had the opportunity of learning from them and being engaged and also had the opportunity of writing the money into the Farm Bill [Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996] in order to respond to the court action.  So, you know, I'm very pleased and proud that I had that opportunity.  But, it was the farmers who created that environment where that opportunity could be taken.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so the USDA settled this lawsuit with a, with a promise, right, to do what?
Speaker 2: With a promise to try to make them whole.  Which tries--I think there was a limit I've forgotten the financial limit it was but it was to make them whole up to a certain limit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think fifty thousand dollars.
Speaker 2: Fifty thousand dollars per farmer.  And the amount of money had to be raised at some budgetary point.  It is that total amount--I've forgotten the total amount that I was able to put into the Farm Bill myself.  And, also, and that wasn't enough because the lawsuit went on and then the next appropriation we also added.  But the Farm Bill, as you probably know, is like a ten year projection but they appropriate it each year.  You project what the amount should be for either the settlement of the Farm Bill of for commodity crop, what you think that amount would be for ten years.  Then you have the obligation of appropriating that each and e- the end of each year.  And, so, my--I sat on the agricultural committee but I also sat on the, on the final Farm Bill negotiation.  So, there were five Democrats and five Republicans, and also five senators.  And I was a part of that final negotiation in that era.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I believe it was just last year that the farmers actually got their, some of their money.
Speaker 2: The second round.
Speaker 1: Okay, second round.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they did one round and they sued them again, and they go in a second round.  And I don't know if all that's been funded but the first Farm Bill they got so much and each year they had to get some.  And now, a second round of the lawsuit they're still getting something.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so they are--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --being compensated?
Speaker 2: Not sufficiently, but they are being compensated, you know; not fully I should say but they are, they are being compensated.
Story_ID: 636080
Speaker 1: There are a number of other African American women in [U.S.] Congress when you were in Congress.  And Essence wrote a article about you all at one point called 'Sisters in the House' [ph.].  And so, you had like Barbara-Rose [Barbara-Rose Collins] from Michigan, Sheila Jackson Lee from Texas, Cynthia McKinney from Georgia, Eleanor Holmes Norton who was the shadow congressman from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins and yourself, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, did, did (simultaneous--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What did it say?
Speaker 1: --you all ever meet together?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: The, the sisters in Congress, the black women.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  It's a natural.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. Not all at the same time.  Some at the same time, some with some of the black women with the bla- white.  We had a women's caucus [Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues].  We had a Congressional Black Caucus, and sometime in the Black Caucus we met together, you know.  Us sisters had to get together to kind of keep the men straight, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) well, what were the specific concerns of (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, you know better than that.  Well, I'll tell you what they, they were concerned about equality, they were concerned about their own participation, they were concerned that women had as much right to be in a certain democratic position as anyone else whether they were black or--so, we had the same concern that we have for society for ourselves in our participation.  And, you know, women naturally I think are concerned about families but they're also concerned about their leadership role and their participation in Congress, whether it's in the CBC or whether it was in the Democratic Party.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, was there any legislation proposed in any of those meetings, or--
Speaker 2: Probably not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or ideas for legislation hatched?
Speaker 2: Well, many--I can say many of those had pet projects and obviously would bring their pet project I think.  Congressman Waters had always had housing as a need.  I mean, she would bring it to us, she would bring it to others.  There was Representative Lee always had a concern about AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and internat- she would bring it to us as caucus but she'd bring it to others.  I had concern about nutrition and farming, you know, I would share with them, but I would share with others.  Obviously, we used every platform to push legislation that we had interest in.
Story_ID: 636081
Speaker 1: Now if I skip over something let me know, something that's important.  But, I have here in '99 [1999] Hurricane Floyd dumped rain all over your state, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So what kind of a crisis was that?
Speaker 2: Much of eastern North Carolina was devastated.  In particular, eastern North Carolina in a little town called Princeville was certainly devastated more than most.  And we tried to--we did organize many of the members of [U.S.] Congress, many of them being CBC [Congressional Black Caucus] members but some others who were not CBC members came.  We, later on--I forgot what year, I don't know if it was then--had the president [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] come down to be engaged with that.  So, it was, it was a time of, of, of great concern but also it was a time of rallying our connections and resources to try to help eastern North Carolina, and particularly Edgecombe County and the little small town called Princeville.  And we had some advantage in rallying the CBC.  I don't know if it was 1998, I became the chair of a Congressional Black Caucus Foundation and engaged in that, so the foundation used their non-profit to be engaged in support forums down here in that area, so.
Story_ID: 636082
Speaker 1: Two-thousand one, now this is, I guess this is after the, a year after I guess the election of George Bush as, George W. Bush as president [President George Walker Bush], you declined to seek re-nomination for a sixth term.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what, what was the--what went into your thinking about--
Speaker 2: In 2002 when I declined?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, when I ran for congressman initially, I think I said publicly and privately that I did not run to serve a life term.  I was gonna probably serve eight or ten years.  Well, eight years came--oh, I think I might have paraphrased said I was gonna serve eight or ten years or as long as I was making a contribution and and enjoying it.  Well, 2002 came I was still enjoying it and I was still making a contribution.  But, if I was gonna kind of keep my word to myself and publicly, I thought it would be a--ten year made a good period of time that I would just step away and see what else the good Lord had for me to do.
Speaker 1: Now, this attitude is different from the attitude of a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: And, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm Eva Clayton [HistoryMaker Eva M. Clayton]. I'm not everybody else.
Speaker 1: That's right, yes ma'am, but you know, you look at African countries, the presidents are elected and they stay until there is a coup d'etat, you know--
Speaker 2: That is so true.
Speaker 1: --so many times, you know, not everybody, Nyerere [Julius Kambarage Nyerere] stepped away, you know, other people have stepped away but, but--
Speaker 2: It's hard, you know, I empathize that it's, it's--it wasn't easy and it would be harder for me now to step away if I'd been there now eighteen years.  I think that's what it would have been, eighteen.  It's harder at eighteen years or twenty years than it is ten, you know, so I, I understand when people stay there longer.  You, you see so much happening and you are engaged in and then you wanna, you wanna keep serving.  But I do think there is something both for the individual and for the office.  Both for me as the individual I think I've grown, having stepped away I miss it sometime but not much.  And I, and I--it was a wonderful experience.  I made a--and I made a significant contribution, you know.  History would bear that out, but, and, also it was--it helped me.  I grew in many ways.  But, taking on a different challenge, I also found that I've had opportunities to new growth in a much broader way, honestly, than I could have done in [U.S.] Congress.  Or, or put it another way because I had the experience of being a congressperson, I now had other opportunities to grow in a different way and, and to make a contribution.  And, also for my district [1st Congressional District] I think people say they you know miss me and I believe they are sincere but they also have been benefitted by having people to follow me, that we do have other good people.  And part of democracy is not that we just have one person who can serve but we have several people who are good.  That doesn't diminish my value because you now have value, you know, and, and what we need to do is create a variety of places to serve, a variety of platforms to make a contribution, not just the elected positions, if that makes any sense, you know.  At least it makes sense to me, may not make sense to anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay, it makes sense to me.
Speaker 2: And especially someone who's had many lives, right?  Like you have, I got you.
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, so, what did you do after not--well who took your place first of all?  Who took your place in--
Speaker 2: Frank Ballance, oh yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) did, did you endorse them?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Story_ID: 636083
Speaker 1: So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: What did I do next?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had the opportunity to serve as assistant director general for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Rome, Italy for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--you took an appointment from the United Nations?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually served in Rome?
Speaker 2: I served in Rome, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How many years?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.  So, was it difficult to live in Rome for three years?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  It was very easy.  In fact, it was a pleasure.  The difficulty I miss home, you know, and stuff like this but honestly it was not a difficult assignment.  It was very pleasurable and enjoyable, both for the beauty and the location, but also for the purpose which I was serving.  I served as assistant director general and I had responsibility for implementing the International Alliance Against Hunger [Alliance Against Hunger and Malnutrition], which was an international--they call it alliance--it was an international partnership between the four United Nation agencies which included FAO, which I worked for, World Food Programme, the International Finance for Agricultural Development [sic. International Fund for Agricultural Development] we call it IFAD, and the fourth one was biodiversity which is a research arm.  Those four agencies are located in Rome.  In addition to that, apparently, in 2002 they--180 countries came together and, trying to foster great acceleration on reducing hunger in half by 2015, demanded that or call for the creation of the International Alliance Against Hunger.  I was appointed to the position which included the implementation of that.  So, along with others I had the responsibility, or had the secretary and the staff, that had the responsibility of trying to expand that.  So, we had a number of international--other international agencies.  They were your non-profits, there were church groups, there--(unclear) which is a island in the country of Ireland, (unclear) hungry.  Another organization called international Caritas [Caritas Internationalis], which is the international arm of the Catholic church.  The Girl Scouts of America [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], but also international Girl Scouts [World Association of Girl Guides and Girl Scouts].  The international Boy Scouts but also--and you had a number of national organizations to join them and then we were encouraged to try to create partnerships throughout the world that would be organized with governments as well as private sector.  Private sector being businesses, civic as well as faith based organizations to fight hunger.
Story_ID: 636084
Speaker 1: In 2005 you worked with Mel Watt [HistoryMaker Melvin L. Watt] when he was chair of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to organize a campaign to help 1 million African Americans buy homes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us, now, how did you come across that ideas?  Sounds like a big idea.
Speaker 2: Well, it was really Mel Watt's idea but I wanted to work with him on that.  And, he's on the housing finance agency [Federal Housing Finance Agency] and he was on also commerce [sic. U.S. House of Representatives Financial Services Committee].  And the idea was then with I guess Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation], and to make sure that these funds would be used to help minorities well around the country.  So, the idea is to use the foundation arm, that's why I said the non-profit arm of that was with his idea would, became a creative idea encouraging more home ownership throughout America.  And there were a number of black Americans here and North Carolina who also took advantage of that.  I don't know if we ever got the 1 million but you have to have a goal and it was a goal, and I think we, we created, I don't remember the exact number but the first year we were in a significant number of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, so, so what did you do in terms of how you helped him?  I mean
Speaker 2: Well, part of it was to use the foundation to have quorums, the other was to encourage foundations to write editorials, to, in my case, to make sure we had a comparable piece in the agricultural committee [U.S. House Committee on Agriculture].  He was on the urban part of financing but we didn't have comparable piece in the rural areas.  So, my area was to emphasize the rural areas, but we had forums in rural America as well as in urban America.  We had legislation in agriculture as well as in the housing finance agency.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2008 you appeared before a House committee on finance to speak on the global food crisis.  What was, what was that about?
Speaker 2: Well, I was invited back to--this time I was--I had been at the UN [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations] and they were interested in the, you know, the prices of food went up and you had a, the number of people who were without food in the world.  They estimated there was 1 billion people, that was almost one out of six people on the earth, without food.  So, we spoke to the issue.  We also spoke to the issue that there was, you know, there was nothing, there was no rationale for that, because we actually produce enough food.  It was just a lack of commitment.  So, the idea was to corral [U.S.] Congress to be more engaged in responding to the needs of hungry people around the world.  And this was--I had just retired of my, my term from--with the UN.  The UN occasionally asked me to still be engaged with them, and this was one of the opportunities where I was still engaged with them.
Story_ID: 636085
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Eva M. Clayton Fellows Program Act at the--?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you what I know about it.  And they have sent me the legislation.  This is not being pushed by me but I certainly am enjoying every bit of it I must say.  I mean, I mean, I appreciate it and, and I'm honored to be there.  The Thurgood Marshall education fund [Thurgood Marshall College Fund] is pushing it, and it will grow out of the historical public minority colleges, HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  And it will create an opportunity for young professors who are trying to aspire to do their doctorate.  If they are doing their doctorate in food or agriculture that would impact the agriculture of, nutrition of food, that they can spend one year in a developing country, they can spend the second year that they've worked it out they can be at UN in, in Rome [Italy], and their third year they would come back as I understand it and write their final dissertation.  My understanding that it has maybe sixty or more cosponsors.  Now, I don't know what the chances of, in this environment, getting it passed, but the Thurgood Marshall seems to be encouraged.  They think that, that indeed there would be an opportunity through the farm bill, we'll see.  We will see.  And, I, I'm very honored about that.  Part of what I have kind of given a lot of attention to and something that is very dear to my heart is about hunger.  I'm very active in that.  I've just come back from Africa two weeks ago, less than two weeks ago earlier this month where I was invited to come to a consultation of developing, what they call a regional alliance, West Africa.  It was FAO [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations], the organization I used to be with who, who, with the national alliance in Ghana kind of co-sponsored this and invited other international leaders and members from various countries in Africa and the United States, and, actually there was someone from Brazil, there was someone from the United States, from Ireland, from South America and from eight countries in Africa.  And, what they're trying to do, the consultation was to see if there was any value in bringing national alliances in various countries together to develop this kind of network.  If there was value in, in incorporating across states and regions to fight it.  Because sometimes, you know, just as we have in North America we have a North American pact.  Not necessarily for hunger but for economic development 'cause things pass, you know, over borderlines.  Economic development don't just stop at your border, neither does disaster stop at your border.  So, there's some commonality in hav- and some advantage in having collaboration and partnership that cross over nations.  So, that was the idea.  It was successful.  And they did agree to do that, so, you know, we, we're very pleased that it helped them.  And, as I say, I'm engaged with hunger issues and I'll speak in Washington [D.C.] this weekend again on hunger, more about the U.S., about hunger free communities here in the U.S.  So, a good bit of what I'm happily to be engaged in or either boards or related to health or related to agriculture or related to hunger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You just had an article published in the Huntington--The Huffington Post just recently, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: About hunger, so, now, you have the right to be retired now, but, but you still--
Speaker 2: Sure, age wise, I surely have.  You say, I've earned my right to get my social security check, right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I got you, okay.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Well, we, we are pleased to be semi-retired.  We also are pleased that we still have energy and interests, and the will to do.  We hope we don't exert that too far but I think we are blessed to be able to still be engaged.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and not just be engaged but to know that I'm making a difference.  It's not just engagement to keep me busy, hopefully, this all has a purpose and the purpose obviously is to make a difference in what I do.
Story_ID: 636086
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, in North Carolina and the world?
Speaker 2: Well, in North Carolina as well as my rural community, I would obviously want to encourage more young people to stay in school because I think there are opportunities not only for leadership in their skills and their talents, so I'm hoping for the continuous and increased development of young people so they can use their talent to make America or North Carolina or rural America better.  And, also, as I visit the various African countries, I--or countries in general, I think Afro Americans can make a contribution worldwide.  Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] certainly demonstrates that can happen.  Now, sometimes even with an achievement like Barack Obama there is a tendency to think everything is okay.  But it's not.  I'm not saying that his election wasn't significant for America or even more significant for Afro Americans, but it in of itself is a great motivation factor that we can achieve if we aspire and prepare ourselves and are able to persuade people to our position.  But, that is not to suggest that America has overcome all its disadvantages or discrimination.  It is to suggest and demonstrate that, indeed, you can make it as an Afro American as Barack has made it or as I have made it in spite of those difficulties.  So, we have to work on removing those barriers, but at the same time we have to work on creating the flow of young peoples who are leaders and are prepared to take that leadership role.
Story_ID: 636087
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over your career, did--is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could, if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I don't know, because what I am is because I did all I did.  I can say if I'd became a doctor I would never have been a congressperson, right.  That's a fact.  I probably would have been a little more aggressive in pushing for some things early, you know, either for my own advantage or for others, early in my career.  Not that I was--never been timid but I, you know, sometime I think you have to develop a sense of urgency.  And I just think, you know, I guess as you come to the, kind of, not the twilight end of your life, but the sense of resting or reflective part, you, you know that things happen when, when a situation help creates it for you or you collectively help to create it.  So, have I, I think I've responded to the situation forcefully that were created for me and, and blessed with that assurance that I haven't missed those opportunities.  I don't have the same assurance that I have created the, the, the urgency or people to act collectively as I have acted, I think.  I don't know if that makes sense, but, anyhow that's my own--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) reflective.  Should've got more people involved in pushing.
Story_ID: 636088
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: It's hard to separate what you want to be your legacy and what will be your legacy.  And that's for the people to say what will be.  I think, obviously, is that, that I, I cared but I acted, that I was a person of action as well as words.  I had the ability to work with a lot of people, both parties, both race, many countries and many people.  So, you know, I, I'm not saying I, I'm a person of the world but I think I certainly have had experience and therefore a legacy shows that I was, I was not one-dimensional, that I saw the connection of people in Warren County [North Carolina], people in Ghana.  I saw the connection of people in Warren County and people in Rome [Italy].  I saw the connection between Washington [D.C.] and Rome, you know, how we are, how we all are connected.  So, I think part of my legacy is that I can do that, I see that connection better than, than most.  And, not only see it but acted on that.
Story_ID: 636089
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family. You have children, and?
Speaker 2: I have children and six grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Four adults, in fact, in fact, all--my two sons have left.  I went back there and I see my two sons have left.  We are preparing for our oldest daughter's birthday dinner tonight, so, we are preparing.  I have four adult children or we have four adult children.  You've heard my husband [Theaoseus T. Clayton, Sr.] who, who doesn't mind interjecting himself when he's not supposed to but that's, (laughter) that's who he is, but, anyhow, and we have six grandchildren, four grandsons and two granddaughters.  Two of our grandsons now are just beginning their freshman year in college.  Our oldest grandson is in his second year of law school.  And, we have one granddaughter who is in junior high and one who is now in third grade.  So, I think we have them from eight to twenty-three.  So, we enjoy--they say grandkids are the, the, the gift you get for having children, right.  Well, we, we, we are very proud of our children but we even I guess, you know, show more demonstrated love for our grandkids and then that's the gift of being a grandparent.  You unabashedly love your grandchildren.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you and your husband seem to have a, a, almost a very close relationship in terms of working on the same projects at different phases in getting involved in the politics of the community, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true, that's true, that's true.  We've been partners now for fifty-six years.  Too many years.  He married me when I was very, very young, but, yeah, we have, we have supported him in the many--and he, he deserves the--you ought a visit him.  I'm not gonna get involved.  He, he was trying to interject his history in my history, but he, he's, he's made history himself.  He really has.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And proud, proud of what's he's done, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, well, is there anything I need to ask before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I hope not (laughter).  I can't even think of, of many of the questions you asked me.  I had forgotten about them quite honestly.  Thank you for bringing them to mind.  And I've been delighted to have the opportunity to be with you.
Story_ID: 636090
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, it is a little different.  One, a person who listened carefully, one who could differ with you but respectfully.  And, one who didn't mind sharing her opinion or working out her commitment, you know.  It's a little different but it's a different set of nuances.  I think those are the (unclear).  You know, I, I, I would hope people see me as someone who listened to them, respected them, who had opinions herself but respected other people's opinions, and who didn't mind working out on her own w- standing up, if alone, on her own beliefs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
